Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Friday , 13 March 1998 .
Statement by the President
Ladies and gentlemen , ten years have passed since the Iraqi air force attacked a village of 50 000 inhabitants , most of whom were refugees from the surrounding area and civilians , located in Labja in Iraqi Kurdistan .
The massacre of civilians is always despicable and a heinous crime against international law .
However in this case , it is particularly reprehensible .
The chemical weapons used resulted in over 5 000 deaths and tens of thousands of injuries .
Ten years down the line the effects are still being felt , and children born in the region are still the innocent victims of that attack .
On various occasions Parliament has expressed its abhorrence of these barbarous acts , notably by its resolution last month , on 19 February 1998 .
It is our duty to remember the facts now and always .
We owe this to the victims , so that we do no protect the perpetrators by forgetting .
We must recall and implement the values upon which the construction of Europe is formed : peace , respect for others and the peaceful resolution of conflicts .
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of the sitting of March 13 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , could I ask you please to take up once again with Air France the problem of travel , particularly from the United Kingdom to Strasbourg .
All direct flights from London to Strasbourg have been cancelled for today , tomorrow and Wednesday .
It is completely unacceptable that there is no way for us to get here directly from the United Kingdom , a Member State of this Union .
I would be very grateful if you could check with Air France whether it is only the United Kingdom and our services to and from Strasbourg that are so affected or whether this is general .
I think it is time we looked at the position overall of travel to Strasbourg for these plenary sessions .
Mrs Green , no doubt you will realize that as soon as the Presidency was informed of this unacceptable situation , naturally we proceeded to an inquiry , and I am now in a position to tell you what the situation is .
It is true that three flights departing from London were cancelled today , the reason being apparently that the charter company abandoned them at the last minute .
I sincerely regret this situation and we will protest in the strongest terms to the company concerned .
Moreover , I am happy to be able to tell you that the flights have been reinstated for tomorrow .
At least this is what we have been told .
Madam President , I wish to intervene to support Mrs Green in this .
I regret to say that the information you have been given is simply incorrect .
The point I made to Mrs Green is that if we humble back benchers had not been travelling with the leader of a political group , for example , we could have found ourselves stranded .
What particularly concerns me in a year in which France is hosting the World Cup is that there has only been one Member State affected in this way .
The information we have been given , which was confirmed to me by Air France on my arrival in this building , is that all flights this week have been cancelled .
We are in a very difficult situation because Air France operates a complete monopoly to the United Kingdom and it would be a very regrettable situation if British MEPs were prevented from voting and representing their constituencies here through an administrative hiccup with an airline .
I urge you to check and verify the information you have been given because I am told there will be no direct flight to London this week .
Miss McIntosh , one thing is certain , either our information is correct , or yours is . Of course we will check this as quickly as possible .
As we all know , the situation is already unacceptable today ; if the disruption continues throughout this week it would be even more unacceptable .
We will continue to monitor the situation very closely .
I have already been doing so and therefore received up-to-date information earlier which I was able to pass on to the Members of the House .
Madam President , I understand that part of the difficulty arises because Air France contract out the London-toStrasbourg flight to another airline , which has now withdrawn from the contract .
That might well explain why there are to be no flights directly from London to Strasbourg this week .
We happen to have the Commissioner for Transport here .
I do not know whether he would care to comment but , certainly , we could do with his support .
Mr Kinnock , you are welcome to clarify the situation , if you wish .
Madam President , as you might anticipate , I have some experience of the difficulties of Members of the European Parliament and others in obtaining reliable flights from the United Kingdom directly to Strasbourg and back again .
On previous occasions I have had to enter into correspondence with Air France and I must say that I have yet to receive a satisfactory reply to any of the inquiries I have made . Indeed , I would go so far as to say that the attitude towards providing regular , dependable services during Parliament 's session weeks from and to the United Kingdom is a model of European disintegration .
Given the insistence by a number of interests on maintaining Parliament in Strasbourg - quite properly in keeping with the parliamentary tradition and in order to promote the spirit of integration - I sincerely hope that Air France or indeed other airlines will take advantage of the opportunities offered and maintain regular , dependable and affordable services between the United Kingdom and other parts of the European Union and Strasbourg .
Thank you , Mr Kinnock .
I agree entirely with your sentiments .
I warmly welcomed your account of the misery caused by that bombing but I must press this point on you again , because the misery of the Second World War was much worse and the Council has not answered my question about hanging flags out on 15 August , the day the war ended .
And about Japan 's admission of guilt for the misery it caused in those days , with a view to ASEM .
I will leave it at that so as not to take up the time of this House , but I would very much appreciate it if the Council could finally start to answer questions of a year ago .
Mr Janssen van Raay , we will take note of your statement .
Madam President , we in this House are all aware of the dangers of smoking , particularly passive smoking .
I am aware , as others must be , that there are now no areas in this House at all - even those that are declared non-smoking areas - which are free of smoking .
I would , therefore , make an urgent request that the opportunity should be given to Members to find , at least , non-smoking recreational areas in these premises .
By mid-week even this area in which we are sitting is frequently percolated by tobacco smoke .
Some of us react badly to that .
Another issue is : are we covered by insurance should someone who contracts lung cancer try to make a case ?
That is a matter we should certainly investigate .
Mr Morris , if it is true that someone has smoked in the Hemicycle , this is totally unacceptable .
As far as we are aware , this has never happened .
Of course we will notify the ushers to be particularly vigilant to ensure that , even in our absence , no-one smokes at least within this Hemicycle .
Madam President , the previous Minutes noted that the rejected request for an urgent debate on criminality would be referred to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
Has this since happened ?
Mr Rübig , I have already replied to you on this very serious and important issue , and you are wrong to think that the Presidency of Parliament is not giving it the attention it merits .
President Gil-Robles has written to the Belgian authorities and remains in contact with them , pending their response .
We really have done what is necessary and will continue to do so , since it is clear that ongoing action is required .
In any case , I can assure you , Mr Rübig , that you can count on the President and on the Bureau to do everything required to ensure that these completely inadmissible incidents do not reoccur .
Madam President , on a point of order .
The matter of unacceptable conditions for travelling here has been raised .
I witnessed the situation when Mrs Green , Miss McIntosh and two other colleagues were not accepted on the flight from Paris to Strasbourg due to mismanagement by Air France .
When the Commission and Parliament look into this , I ask them to note that we have no direct flights from Sweden or Finland .
Today it took me eight hours to get here , so , in a way , I have already done my work .
I almost did not get on the flight because it was overbooked .
We need to look into this situation as it affects all countries , and the management of connecting flights to this otherwise beautiful town .
Mrs Thors , what you say is right .
We are well aware of the difficulties encountered by many of our colleagues in travelling to Strasbourg .
However , as you know - I will take this opportunity since the question has been raised - in December 1997 , the French government published a new invitation to tender in the Official Journal which will lead to regular flights at least from certain cities to Strasbourg , in principle from this week on , if all goes according to plan .
In other words , special flights will be replaced by regular flights , and these will be priced much more attractively and will enable direct links with certain capital cities .
At present , the invitation to tender concerning Dublin and Lisbon has not received any response .
A new invitation to tender has been launched and we hope that it will provoke responses as soon as possible , allowing flights to cover a certain number of capital cities .
In other capital cities special flights are functioning effectively and this arrangement will be maintained .
We will see how things work following these important changes , and if certain destinations continue to experience difficulties , the Presidency will refer it to the companies concerned to enable all of us to be transported to Strasbourg in the most suitable and comfortable way .
I have nothing further to say on this today , but there is in any case the hope of an improvement in the near future , at least for some of our colleagues .
Madam President , I have not had a reply to my question concerning two Dutch procurators general involved in the international arrest of an ex-dictator in Surinam who have been dismissed .
That cannot be a coincidence , but it any case it is a serious blow for the international fight against crime .
I hope you will call upon the Council to give me an answer .
The best replies I have had up to now have been from Commissioner Van den Broek .
Those replies have not been empty but have had some content .
I hope that is also possible in this case .
Mrs van Bladel , we will check and we hope that this is the case .
( The Minutes were approved )
Interpretation of the Rules of Procedure
I would like to provide an interpretation which was requested from the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , concerning paragraph 3 of Rule 162 of the Rules of Procedure and the explanations of vote .
The committee found that : ' Explanations of vote should be provided for the final vote for every subject submitted to Parliament .
The expression ' final vote ' does not determine the type of vote , but indicates the last vote on a subject . '
This , therefore , is the interpretation of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
If this is not opposed by any political group or by 29 Members prior to the adoption of the Minutes of the current sitting , this interpretation will be deemed to have been adopted .
If this is not the case , it will , of course be put to the vote in Parliament .
Order of business
Madam President , there were more discussions on this issue only recently , in regard to both the Miller report and the Langen report , where it might be possible to reach an agreement in discussion with the Council .
So as not to jeopardize this , I would propose , as Chairman of the committee and in agreement with the groups , that we postpone dealing with both these reports until the next sitting .
Madam President , I am not sure whether we are talking about one report or both reports .
It was a joint debate .
In interpretation I was told it was the Langen report on excise duties .
In fact , the Langen report is on VAT and the Miller report is on excise duties .
My group feels that if the Langen report is removed , they should both be .
Mrs Green , the request which was put to us concerns the two reports , and Mr von Wogau has just confirmed that .
So I think that clarifies things .
Madam President , I would like to advocate that we withdraw both reports .
The question at issue here is whether a regulatory committee can be set up at Commission level for excise duties - that is the Miller report - and for VAT - that is my report .
This regulatory committee , which is meant to bring progress in tax harmonization , can only be set up , however , if the Council gives its unanimous approval , and Professor Monti still needs time to negotiate .
He still does not have the Council 's opinion on this .
When we conclude our deliberations , the Council can reject the whole issue at the next Ecofin meeting on 22 April .
We want to make the most of the opportunity presented to us and to the Commission by an adjournment .
That is the background .
( Parliament gave its assent )

Madam President , now that Mr Langen 's and Mr Miller 's reports have been withdrawn , it seems appropriate to us that this gap be filled .
We would like to propose that in any case the Adam report , which is now tabled for Friday morning , take their place .
Mrs Aelvoet , this amendment has not been presented in the correct way .
You are presenting it orally . This is not at all in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .
Madam President , when faced with a new situation , would it not be helpful to try to find an appropriate response ?
I agree , however we cannot simply improvise in this way in the Chamber .
It is not possible .
We will see what we can do , but I do not think that we can decide to replace one report with another at will .
Madam President , if you do this , I would like my report , which comes after the Murphy , Miller and Langen reports , to be brought forward .
It will almost be midnight and if the reports by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs take less time owing to the Miller and Langen reports being withdrawn from the agenda , I think my report should be slotted into their place .
Mrs Lulling 's words have reinforced my belief that it would not be wise to start a debate on this issue at the moment .
The agenda for Wednesday remains unchanged .
As far as Thursday goes , I have received a request from the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations to reinstate the report ( A4-0117 / 98 ) by Mr Herman , on behalf of the Committee on Institutional Affairs , in its initial place at the start .
The report deals with improvements which could be made to the functioning of EU institutions without modifying the Treaty .
Madam President , the Herman report on improving the democratic functioning of EU institutions is missing from the final version of the draft agenda .
For reasons which are not clear , this report was removed from the draft agenda by the Conference of Presidents last Thursday .
The rapporteur , my colleague Mr Herman , writes in the explanation on page 9 that the debate in plenary sitting is urgent and must in any case take place before the decisions are taken on EMU from 1 to 3 May .
May I ask him whether he still holds that opinion ?
And if not , why not ?
This Parliament makes a great song and dance about democratic control of European institutions .
It therefore damages its own credibility if it removes crucial reports from the agenda for reasons which are kept secret .
Is it not our job to represent the citizens of the Member States , rather than to pull the wool over their eyes ?
My group now proposes that the Herman Report be debated this week .
We cannot think of a good reason to postpone it .
Thank you for presenting the request by your group , Mr van Dam .
I am tempted to turn to the rapporteur , Mr Herman , and ask him for his opinion .
Madam President , Mr Herman has no opinion on the matter !
Well then , let us say that we will leave it up to the wisdom of the House .
Madam President , I would like to voice my support for the call to reinstate the Herman report on the agenda . This report is important because it presents the grave and urgent problem of the weakness , or rather non-existence , of democratic control procedures for economic and monetary union in its broad sense , and not just for the European Central Bank , which is the subject of the Randzio-Plath report .
The Herman report notably includes the excellent amendments by Mr Gallagher adopted by the Committee on Institutional Affairs which considered it unacceptable that democratic control could elude national parliaments without being replaced by an equivalent control at a European level .
Clearly , we do not arrive at the same conclusions as Mr Herman , since we believe that it is impossible to organize control at a European level when there is no European state .
So once more , this report is worthwhile since it poses a very urgent problem , according to the terms used in the ' avant-première ' of the Parliamentary sitting , which is an official document of the European Parliament .
Madam President , there was broad consensus in the Conference of Presidents that the Randzio-Plath Report on democratic accountability in the third stage of EMU should be debated in this part-session of Parliament .
I believe that there is also very broad consensus on this in Parliament .
Mr Herman 's report on the consequences in the institutional framework of the European Union can , we think , best be debated after the historic decision which will be taken on 2 May .
There is thus no reason why Parliament should not debate the basis of democratic accountability in the third stage of EMU .
That is going to take place this week .
We think it would be better to debate Mr Herman 's report on the institutional consequences after the European Council has taken its decision on 2 May .
It goes without saying , if I have heard the interventions correctly , that the Europe of Nations Group is going to create a bit of a fuss before that .
It seems to me to be an argument for not tabling the Herman Report in this part-session but after the decision on 2 May .
That is the reason we gave in the Conference of Presidents for debating the Herman Report in May .
Madam President , there was a late request last week to take the Herman report off the agenda and there is a late request to put it back on again .
My group is agnostic on this issue .
We have no reason to keep it on or take it off .
There was a strong request from the Group of the European People 's Party last week that it should come off .
For us the essential issue is to be discussed in the Randzio-Plath report .
However , I repeat that my group is agnostic and will have a free vote on the matter .
( Parliament withheld its assent )
I have a second request from the Group of the European People 's Party , asking for the insertion as the last item on Thursday 's agenda of the oral question to the Commission , document 0073 / 98 , on the social and regional consequences of the abolition of duty free .
Madam President , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party I would like to make it clear that this oral question is not a matter of reopening the whole duty free dossier .
We would , however , like to point out that there are peripheral regions where the abolition of duty free will have a considerable impact on employment and that these regions might be equally affected by the loss of assistance provided by the future Structural Funds .
That is why we would like to ensure with this oral question that the economic and social effects of the abolition of duty free in the peripheral regions is talked about and that these talks are linked to the demand for the Commission to initiate the long overdue social study on this issue .
I would also like to make it clear that we do not wish to encroach on the Garosci report here , but rather believe that the Garosci report , which is to be on the agenda in May or June , can lead to a much better discussion if we receive objective data from the Commission , as we have been requesting from the Commission for years now .
Madam President , I can only agree with Mr Böge .
It is time we had data so that rational discussion might take place and so that we do not have to rely on the data from the associations .
That is why we need rational discussion and a study on the social impact , to which this House must of course be able to give its backing .
Otherwise , I believe , it will not do justice to the situation that will face us in 1999 .
Madam President , it is the weight of office !
I ask that Parliament go against the request from the Group of the European People 's Party at this juncture .
I would make it clear that my group is not against the social study regarding the abolition of duty free .
In fact , we are very much in favour of instituting that kind of study but I do not believe that this is the right time to do it .
Also , there is a flaw in the oral question , namely that the study would have to be completed by June of this year .
That would be impossible .
I would suggest that we go back to our respective groups and come back at a future date with an agreed position .
We can then make progress with the idea that I think everyone is in favour of with regard to the social study , rather than rushing into something which will be impossible to achieve .
Madam President , it is good practice in this House not to ask questions while a report is in preparation .
The Garosci Report is in preparation at the moment .
Madam President , we cannot prepare a report in committee and debate that issue in the full House at the same time .
That would be against all the practices and customs set out in the Rules of Procedure .

Thank you , Mr Wijsenbeek , your speech was at the limit of the procedural motion .
Madam President , I simply wish to confirm the intentions of Mr Simpson and Mr Wijsenbeek , which I clearly share .
I can , however , reassure the party asking for the study because I have included in my report the request to make an in-depth study .
So I fail to see why we need to anticipate Parliament 's normal practice .
( Parliament gave its assent )
Madam President , I just wish to point out one mistake in the Italian version : with all due respect to Mr Crowley , I wish to clarify that the second report , on amending Rule 141 , was prepared by me and not by Mr Crowley .
I think this small printing error only relates to the Italian version .
We will ensure that your authorship is acknowledged in each of the languages .
( The order of business was adopted )
Madam President , I asked for the floor since we were going to talk about Thursday 's agenda .
On Thursday we are going to discuss and vote on something which I believe all of us consider very important , i.e. freedom of movement in the Union .
I am referring to Mrs Schaffner 's report on the report from the High-Level Panel on the freedom of movement of persons .
I would like to point out that I think that this is very important , and I hope that everyone else thinks so too .
The problem is just that the report to which Mrs Schaffner 's report refers is apparently only available in French .
When I try to read it , which I want to do and I hope many others want to do too , it is impossible .
I think we ought to know what we are thinking and voting about on such an important issue .
In the current situation , I do not believe we can vote on Mrs Schaffner 's report unless we get the documents in all languages .
They are currently only in French .
Mrs Lindholm , firstly , I am sorry that I did not see you earlier .
I did not see Mr Evans either ; please forgive me .
However , your speech is just as important at this stage since we cannot vote on Mrs Schaffner 's report if it is not available in all languages .
We will check the situation .
Madam President , Mrs Schaffner 's report is not the problem .
Her report is , I believe , available in all languages , but what the report is about , i.e. the High-Level Panel 's report , on which Parliament is to give an opinion , is only available in French .
That is the problem .
Yes , I see the problem now . I must admit that I was rather concerned by the idea that a Member 's report was only available in one language .
I fully understand .
We will look into this and ensure that this report on the report can be provided in other languages .
Tourism
The next item is the report ( A4-0071 / 98 ) by Mr Aparicio Sánchez , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on improving safety , consumers ' rights and trading standards in the tourism sector .
Madam President , Commissioner , this Parliamentary initiative report calls on the other institutions , particularly the Commission , to close the gap which currently exists in our single market from the point of view of consumer protection and tourism policies . Namely , it calls for new guidelines for the protection of tourists and their rights as consumers - guidelines which are clearer , better developed and more widely disseminated than the current ones .
Those people who are protective of subsidiarity and are always afraid that national policies will be " Community-ized ' need not worry , because we members of the Committee on Transport and Tourism have taken good care that our requests do not infringe upon any national competences .
On the other hand , other people might possibly wish we were asking for reception practices to be harmonized .
For example , is it acceptable to have different hotel check-in and check-out times in the various EU Member States , as is currently the case ?
I repeat , however , that a lot of our requests have been sacrificed because of our absolute respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
Why did I say there is a gap in this area ?
From the point of view of consumer protection , it is hard to understand why it is that while there are many measures in place to protect people buying food , medicines , cars and so on , there are only a few measures designed to protect tourists , and most of them are not compulsory . This is despite the fact that the tourist has always been the prototype of the cross-border consumer .
Furthermore , tourists are the most vulnerable of all consumers , and the ones most at risk in matters of commerce , because they are usually ignorant of the laws , language and consumer associations of the country they are visiting .
Neither the Commission 's priorities for consumer policy for 1996-1998 nor its working programme for 1998 so much as mention the question of protecting the tourist as a consumer .
Nevertheless , I must admit that the Commission has developed touristprotection measures , as the report recognizes .
It has been said that the EU 's problem in this respect is not a lack of legislation but a lack of information . Some of the requests contained in this report address this aspect , and call for better information .
However , the report does not just address consumer protection , but also considers how to strengthen European tourism .
In our opinion , anything which improves the safety of holidays and tourist travel in general represents an improvement in the quality of tourism and makes the European Union more competitive as a tourist destination in the eyes of consumers from third countries .
It must be said that at the moment tourism in EU countries is extremely safe , but the extraordinary increase predicted for the next few years could result in more errors and travel-related incidents .
In fact , we started this part-session with a very timely discussion of an unexpected flight cancellation .
Anything that can be done at Community level to improve tourist safety will make us more competitive in the future . So we are sure that the most dynamic businessmen within the sector will see anything we do in this area as a means of improving the quality of tourism within the European Union .
Holiday safety and security is becoming increasingly important and will gradually overtake the other major factor in choosing a tourist destination - namely price .
So the report contains a series of requests relating to airline and hotel overbooking , the requisites which should be offered by travel agents , passenger flights , slot allocations , Community arbitration arrangements for tourists involved in conflicts , and so on .
It has been said that the relative importance of tourism in the Europe of the Fifteen is greater than that of coal and steel in the Europe of the Six .
Despite that , the Council seems reluctant to develop a tourism policy .
Let us hope things improve in the future , but in the meantime , based on everything I have just said , we cannot put off protecting tourists as consumers .
Madam President , firstly , as a general comment , I should like to say that Mr Aparicio 's report is good in that it stirs up waters which had been stagnant for a long time .
But since I want to contribute solutions and not just praise , I would like to point out that although this report 's premises are clear and precise , its conclusions probably do not go far enough .
Firstly , when introducing the theme of tourism , the rapporteur stresses its social , political and economic importance , and the analysis ends there .
He then goes on to accuse the Community institutions of having done little work in this area , but in his conclusions he does not dare to question whether we actually want the European Union to be competent in matters of tourism or not .
I am not talking about how or when , but about the principle : whether we want to establish the principle that the Union has to intervene .
Secondly , the rapporteur states quite rightly that the protection of tourism is a central aspect of any policy of this type if we also want to compete against other tourism in terms of quality and safety .
He then goes on to state , as a secondary premise , that the 1996-1998 consumer policy says nothing about tourism , although this protection aspect is probably the weakest part of the legal context within which the development of the tourism phenomenon takes place .
The conclusion should be to question whether or not we want a precise , concrete , compulsory , general framework to protect tourism ; a policy of clear information ; a code of conduct to bind all the agents involved in tourism policy ; a statement to tourists about operators and service providers .
As far as fiscal matters are concerned , I would like to add something which the report does not consider . It does not call for services provided to tourists from outside the Union to be considered as export services , with the right to tax repayment .
And it says nothing , Madam President , about something we have discussed before : if the end of duty-free was linked to the transformation of VAT from a destination tax to an origin tax , which has been postponed indefinitely , why are we bringing forward the abolition of duty-free , when the phenomenon which would justify that abolition has not happened ?
Madam President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Aparicio Sánchez for a well-written report on the protection of tourists .
It establishes an important point , namely that tourism is an industry of the single European market despite the failure of the Council of Ministers to recognize that .
Without prejudice to the notion of subsidiarity , there are times when we need to act on a Union-wide basis where action at a Member State level will not suffice to protect tourists .
For instance , in one of my own amendments to the report accepted by the committee I recognize there may be a danger to tourists from economic and monetary union .
I could tell you of the vast advantages of EMU but we should recognize some of the problems : fraud practised , say , on older citizens who will be unfamiliar with the euro when it comes into effect .
Also , the Commission should round up those entrepreneurs tempted to cheat tourists and consumers by unfairly rounding up the euro exchange rate .
I am sorry that a further amendment of mine was not accepted .
It concerns single travellers , who are often women .
They are affected in two particular ways .
First of all , they often have to pay higher room supplements than those tourists who travel as couples .
Secondly , their personal protection is sometimes in question .
For instance , some enlightened hotels allocate hotel rooms near lifts to avoid single women having to walk along unfamiliar corridors where they may be subject to uninvited approaches - a very wise idea which perhaps we ought to replicate elsewhere .
I also support the rapporteur 's excellent idea of having a single emergency number - 112 - operating throughout the whole of Europe .
That will bring a real benefit .
He mentioned , too , a separate problem of overbooking hotel rooms and plane seats , which has been highlighted tonight by the problems of MEPs coming to Strasbourg .
We need a balanced approach to this problem which afflicts 0.04 % of tourists .
The no-shows and the late cancellations suffered by hotels and airlines should also be taken into account in considering this matter .
Regarding children and safety , we ought to do something , for instance , about invoking high standards of safety and protection required at swimming pools in order to avoid the tragic deaths by drowning of children , that too often cast a pall over family holidays .
In my own constituency there is a five-year-old child who has suffered severe cuts whilst on holiday in an unfamiliar European Union country .
He slipped on a rug on tiles and crashed through a patio door which did not have strengthened glass .
( The President urged the speaker to conclude ) Madam President , you allowed an extra 47 seconds for the last speaker .
I have been given three minutes .
I should like to finish .
Mr Harrison , I should explain .
I am very concerned because you have only two minutes .
However , as you genuinely believed that you had three minutes , I allowed you three minutes as I know it is hard to reduce a speech of three minutes to two .
However , I will have some difficulty if you exceed three minutes .
We have thus checked , and unfortunately your group only allocated you two minutes .
I will have to ask you to round off .
Madam President , the citizens of Europe have the right to proper safety as they go about their business as tourism consumers .
This is something we should defend .
I congratulate the rapporteur on his fine report in helping achieve that aim .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , tourist activity is business activity .
Beside the economic dimension , however , we should never neglect the human aspect , that is to say the needs and wishes of the people .
If we only talk about consumer rights in this context , then we should not forget to mention that rights also involve duties .
This aspect has been neglected in the motion for the resolution .
In addition , I should also like to express my reservations about the respect shown for the subsidiarity principle in one or two paragraphs .
The large number of proposals leaves you feeling that tourism is something uncertain today , as if neither the Member States nor the EU had really done anything essential or decisive in this area .
That is not the case , however .
The apparent best is also the enemy of the good for us as consumers .
To this extent , I recognize great parallels with the draft directive on consumer goods guarantees .
Now , as then , we need to guard against destroying the balance between egalitarianism , justice and freedom , hence also between the legitimate interests , rights and duties of consumers and business operators .
Employing and emphasizing undeniably positive concepts such as environmental protection , consumer rights and human rights should not lead to blind overregulation , resulting in the hampering of initiatives in the tourism trade too and a risk to the independence of small and medium-sized enterprises !
We will not achieve our strategic objective of increased competition and improved quality through a contrived comprehensive cover approach , but rather through the key concept of ' partnership ' .
Let us prove to the Member States that responsibility for tourism at European level does not mean an increase in bureaucracy , but will on the contrary help bring about deregulation and a reduction in bureaucracy .
Madam President , it is truly disconcerting that we are discussing tourism when there are absolutely no laws on this sector laid down by the EU .
Not only are there no laws , but there is no attention and no legislative and financial commitments ; it is almost as if we were brandishing a whip without realizing there was no horse ahead .
The rapporteur also has to deal with a mistake , which is forgivable but significant nonetheless , in the second paragraph of the motion for a resolution , where it says " regrets the Commission 's failure to operate an action programme for tourism ' .
In fact , there was a programme called PHILOXENIA ; it was born and then died , it was aborted , or rather killed . We were not even aware of its existence .
It was later revived by the Commissioner , with a small budget increase , but seems to have disappeared once again .
It is right to confirm the importance of tourism as an economic activity , and the tourist as a consumer , like all other consumers .
It should be said that , between 1995 and 1996 , there was a promising flourish of initiatives and undertakings by this Parliament as well .
Then everything disappeared , killed by one word : subsidiarity - clearly a word that has been badly interpreted and badly applied .
Subsidiarity is invoked stating that the promotion of tourism in Europe cannot be generalized : in some cases , that is true , but in others it is not .
Just think that Europe lost 3 % in 1996 and a further 5 % in 1997 to the United States and Japan , as if to say that our customers have moved elsewhere : they are harming us and stealing an activity which , as has been highlighted , is very valuable .
I agree too : a common action will help us catch up on lost time .
For many areas , tourism is not a hobby , it is not an additional activity , but an activity of vital importance .
Madam President , what we lack is a separate Article on tourism in the Treaty .
Not because we urgently need a new European policy for tourism as such , but to create an opportunity for greater consistency in policies on tourism .
Because at the moment tourism is debated under the heading of consumer protection , or transport , or other policy areas , and one disadvantage of that is that tourism has been a bit like a child foisted on DG XXIII , which has led to all kinds of other undesirable consequences .
It would be good if we could pursue a consistent policy on tourism in the European Union , which means we would have to start with harmonisation .
That protects the consumer when he knows what he can and may expect in each of the Member States ; it gives the tourist a measure of security which I think we should be promoting .
Mr Harrison 's complaint about EMU and the use of the euro within EMU is , of course , completely unjust .
The United Kingdom does not want to join the euro , but once the euro exists tourists will be doubly protected , of course , because then services will be offered to them in exactly the same currency unit as they are used to at home .
That means it will be very easy for them to make comparisons .
I hope that the Commission will take the report to heart and begin with a clean slate to pursue a good and consistent policy on tourism in the future in DG XXIII .
Mr President , I would first of all like to congratulate both the rapporteur and the Committee on Transport and Tourism on their initiative in encouraging the European Parliament to deal with tourism . This approach has been quite different to the tactic used by the Commission which , by totally downplaying this extremely important sector , has not deigned to deal with an action plan essentially rejecting the PHILOXENIA programme .
The effective protection of the safety and rights of consumers in the tourism sector can only come about , Mr President , through the reorientation of the overall tourism policies of the European Union and of the Member States .
We must hit out at the current monopoly of the sector by a minority of large tour operators who are overrunning the market and leading tourism in a direction which will bring them greater profit , blackmailing small and medium-sized enterprises and controlling tourist infrastructures alike .
Consumers are rarely informed of their rights and , more importantly , they are often misled about the services provided by inaccurate advertising and conditions of participation in package holidays .
This unacceptable situation affects a significant number of European citizens who travel within the European Union .
However , it also affects those small and medium-sized enterprises which are suffocating under the pressure of the tour operators , who , by creating informal cartels with large hotel chains , airline companies and other businesses providing services to tourists , are squeezing the services provided , especially the quality of these services , for the sake of profit . This has negative repercussions both for consumers and for those working in the sector who are employed under very often appalling conditions , divorced from any regulation of the labour market and collective agreements .
The proposed transparency of the services provided and of prices , which must be offered to travellers , is of course vital , as well as the total reimbursement of costs should the organizer become insolvent or bankrupt .
However , this safeguard should not come about at the expense of the traveller through increased consumer prices and dwindling services and for the benefit of large tour operators , who may see this as a fresh opportunity for profiteering .
Madam President , yes of course we must offer tourists protection and security , and assistance must be available in an emergency .
But tourism is also about adventure , which is why tourists now go to Turkey , Eastern Europe , California and I do not know where else in the world .
I would like to make a couple of observations .
First on subsidiarity .
Look for a moment at paragraphs 13 and 31 .
In paragraph 13 we are asking for a guarantee fund at European level .
Have we gone completely mad ?
We book the trip in our own town or village and if the guarantee funds operate at national level that is fine .
In paragraph 31 we are asking for compensation in the event of crimes of violence to be harmonised .
Now , that really is going well beyond subsidiarity .
I do not call so readily for subsidiarity , but this is really going too far .
My second point .
This report wants to wrap tourists in cotton wool , especially tourists who fly .
Now , I do not really support that .
Look at paragraph 8 .
It says there should be compensation whenever there is a delay or change of routing .
I can see what would happen .
Tourists who are delayed for an hour would get a present of a hundred guilders !
Paragraph 10 states that the slots for tourists must be improved .
I have heard MEPs complaining here about not being able to fly to Strasbourg .
If we improve slots for tourists , then you will have to be prepared for the fact that your slot may be at five o 'clock in the morning .
Finally , I do not need to repeat what Mr Wijsenbeek has said already about the euro .
Paragraph 33 is completely absurd and so I have requested a split vote on a number of these paragraphs .
Mr President , I would like to offer Mr Aparicio Sánchez my warmest congratulations on his report .
This is not merely a formality ; his report is thorough and well-drafted , going beyond the concept of European citizenship to encompass the right to engage in safe , high quality tourism within the Union and outside it .
A new dimension is added to the quality of European tourism , whereby the services provided to tourists should conform with the commitments entered into between the operator as supplier and the tourist as consumer .
But , beware !
This advance , which is reflected in enhanced credibility and quality , simultaneously requires European tourism operators and government bodies to assume new responsibilities .
The number and substance of proposals submitted is so considerable that it has already given rise to two movements which will , I hope , have major repercussions in the future .
Firstly , it has become apparent that the absence of a legal foundation in the Treaty - and in the revised Treaty of Amsterdam - for the tourism industry totally rules out or seriously hampers the execution of any programme that seeks to promote or enhance the competitiveness of the sector .
Meanwhile , however , tourists will be increasingly protected and supported through the Community 's consumer protection policy .
As stated in the report , it is necessary only to verify compliance with existing legislation , to update it , and to make it more thorough .
The responsibility for this situation lies , to a large extent , with the sector 's associations which , contrary to the position of the European Parliament , encourage their respective governments to exclude the tourist industry from the review of the Union 's treaties .
The second particularly interesting aspect of this report is that , no sooner was it approved by the Committee on Transport and Tourism , than the associations connected with the industry themselves approached me , in my capacity as president of the Intergroup on Tourism , to engage on 2 April in a joint debate on this subject with Mr Aparicio Sánchez .
May I take this opportunity to invite the committee in question and Members of Parliament who would like to contribute to this debate to attend , and I congratulate Mr Aparicio Sánchez for the expectation he has generated in connection with his report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , tourism has a long tradition in Austria and has become the economic mainstay of many regions .
For this reason I very much welcome the fact that the European Parliament is becoming increasingly interested in it as a topic of concern .
When I say what a considerable influence the tourist trade has on the Austrian economy , then I wish to point out its significance in this regard for the rural region .
The rural region includes much more than its agriculture : its business enterprises , service industries and especially the tourist trade all form a part of it .
Additional sources of income and an improvement in infrastructure are the result , and a depopulation of these rural areas is thereby prevented .
Tourism can boost the fortunes of less developed regions .
However , cross-border regions can also profit from it .
For a long time now , Austria has been having a rethink , particularly in the area of environmental awareness and consideration for the environment .
I think safeguarding natural resources is essential .
I should finally like to state most categorically that we should unite to combat sex tourism .
Mr President , this is the second consecutive part-session during which tourism has occupied an important place .
During the previous part-session , the subject was tourism and the euro , and today we are discussing the protection of tourists as consumers in Mr Aparicio Sánchez ' interesting report , on which I would like to congratulate him .
First and foremost , I consider it important to emphasize that such protection involves familiarity with and respect for contracts entered into by tourists with tourism agencies and agents and with transporters .
In this regard , unacceptable situations exist - which should be prevented - such as those connected with the need for transparent information on prices , validity , alterations and compensation , luggage allowance , etcetera .
Also , for air transporters there is the matter of using aircraft owned by other companies since this is a mode of transport in which safety considerations are extremely sensitive , and such changes therefore deserve particular attention , as I sought to emphasize in my opinion on air transport and company agreements .
Furthermore , as the rapporteur states , measures are required in connection with the practise of overbooking , both for transport and in the hotel sector .
I would like briefly to touch on two points that are also mentioned by the rapporteur and which I consider to be important . The first relates to the attention that should be given to rural tourism , particularly in the light of its potential positive impact on peripheral and ultra-peripheral regions .
In this respect , I consider it extremely important to draw attention to the matter of cultural information that should go hand in hand with this tourism .
My second point relates to the type of tourism that generates considerable seasonal and / or periodic influxes , of the kind that are considerably in excess of that occasioned by normal flows of tourists which are already irregular by nature : I refer to religious tourism which can attract an annual population of over 5 million to a town intended for a few thousand inhabitants .
Fatima is a case in point , with all the attendant repercussions as regards development planning and basic amenities .
This type of tourism calls for special attention and appropriate protective measures .
Finally , in discussing the subject of tourist protection , thought must also be given to eradicating the types of tourism which threaten society .
I am talking about paedophile tourism which cannot be justified in any light , nor a blind eye turned when foreign currency is being earned .
Mr President , this summer it will be two years since disaster struck the campsite at Biescas in Spain , which sadly led to the death of eighty-six people and many injured .
Last week the President of the Alliance Internationale de Tourisme presented a report to the European Commission with recommendations to improve safety on campsites by developing common safety standards for the location and lay-out of sites , warning systems , emergency lighting and evacuation plans .
My question is : when is the Commission going to respond and come up with proposals for guaranteeing an appropriate level of safety on European campsites .
My second question is : when will we get the results of the study carried out into overbooking in hotels ?
Can the Commission also provide an evaluation of the code of conduct in relation to overbooking agreed a few years ago between a group of tour operators and the European Hotel and Restaurant Federation ?
Mr President , tourism is one of the Union 's major economic sectors .
While I defend the advantages of self regulation between professional sectors , I am aware that the competitive position of Europe 's tourism sector cannot be guaranteed without intervention by the Union in certain cases .
The anticipated rapid expansion of the sector in the coming years will necessarily exacerbate existing problems , with the result that the Union will be required to intervene on several fronts , for instance , in ascertaining that existing directives and regulations are enforced .
We should dovetail measures in the tourism sphere with those for protection of the consumer , by promoting cooperation between DG XXIII and DG XXIV , and we should guarantee prompt access for tourists and tourism professionals to justice and create modes of arbitration in intra-Community conflicts .
We should also compile existing Community legislation and disseminate it broadly to all potential users and provide back-up for staff training , including the aspect of tourist safety , ensuring that such workers are mobile and thoroughly qualified .
We should support and lend substance to a " European tourism award ' which renders tribute to sustainable tourism , while encouraging the study of measures to promote intra-Community tourism .
Finally , we should formulate measures to increase tourism in the Union 's inland and ultra-peripheral regions , such as the Atlantic islands , where tourism accounts for 75 % of economic activity .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Airport charges
The next item is the report ( A4-0088 / 98 ) by Mr Väyrynen , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Directive on airport charges ( COM ( 97 ) 0154 - C4-0362 / 97-97 / 0127 ( SYN ) ) .
Mr President , the proposal for a directive on airport charges is not an attempt to harmonize them .
It aims instead to comply with the three principles of transparency , cost-relatedness and non-discrimination .
The directive aims to create a framework for negotiation , in which those who are responsible for the upkeep of airports and those who use airports can negotiate charges and services available .
While I was drafting the report I considered carefully whether the proposal for a directive was useful and necessary .
I think the European Parliament should always remain sceptical when it comes to new Community legislation .
I have reached the conclusion that the directive on airport charges is not essential but , carefully weighing its proposals , it could be useful .
The proposal for a directive is based on a compromise between the airports and airlines , on the one hand , and the Member States , on the other .
Only by achieving this kind of balance will agreement be reached concerning this directive .
This idea is basic in my proposals .
The committee rejected by a narrow majority certain proposals for compromise as negotiated under the stewardship of the draftsman .
As a result the report is now in a form that I consider unacceptable .
In the final vote only a slim majority approved the report .
Almost half the committee members abstained .
What is worse , the conciliation proposal for Article 4 on national airport networks and local airport systems was rejected in a tied vote .
On the other hand , the proposal for a directive was approved by a one-vote majority , meaning that higher charges could be levied at large airports for domestic flights in countries having remote communities in order to subsidize smaller airports .
This goes against one of the principles of the directive , which is that of non-discrimination , which holds that charges must be the same for domestic and inter-EU services .
I think it is vital that the directive acknowledges the system in operation in countries like Spain , Portugal , Greece , Ireland , Finland and Sweden , where the nation 's airports form a national network whereby cross subsidy systems operate for reasons concerning regional policy , with the result that costs seem fairer for smaller airports .
I also consider it unfortunate that the majority on the committee should wish to include a penalty system in the directive , given that it will simply be ignored .
Nor do I think it a good idea that the directive should contain provision for charges to be settled , in cases of dispute , through conciliation or even through the courts .
These do not become the nature of the proposal for a directive , in my opinion , and they are unlikely to get unanimous support with the Council of Ministers .
I appeal to you all , ladies and gentlemen : the report should be improved upon in the part-session .
As many important issues were decided on the committee either by a tied vote or a narrow majority , I imagine the report might take on a more acceptable shape through voting in the part-session .
Finally , I should like to thank the Committee on Transport and Tourism for a constructive job in the handling of the report , but as I have said , I hope the report , through voting , can be changed and improved on .
Mr President , the draft directive on airport charges has proved to be a difficult and complicated report for the Committee on Transport and Tourism , which involved the rapporteur trying to incorporate the different needs and various systems which exist in the 15 Member States .
His solution , as presented to the committee , was a good one .
Unfortunately , as he has said , several key factors were lost in narrow votes in committee .
The final compromise report we have ended up with is in danger of satisfying no-one .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists will , therefore , seek to restore many of the points in the rapporteur 's original text .
There are a number of main issues which I would comment on .
Article 1 considers the minimum size of airports to be affected .
There has been a whole range of figures suggested , ranging from five million passenger movements to the Commission 's 25 000 .
In committee , the Socialist group supported the figure of at least two million passenger movements or 50 000 tonnes of freight .
We felt that as this directive is part of a body of legislation aimed at dealing with various aspects of airports there ought to be some degree of consistency , and the figure we have chosen would fit in with those appropriate to the groundhandling directive .
In the same article , we support the decision of the rapporteur to introduce the concept of national airport networks .
I have considerable sympathy for those who oppose the introduction of such networks .
Nevertheless , as the rapporteur has made clear , we have to accept that the system of cross-subsidy for smaller airports in order to support social cohesion is widely present in both the extreme north and the extreme south of the Union .
The way to some agreement is to support national airport networks being included whilst , at the same time , building on and strengthening the conditions which would apply to their use .
Cash subsidies should be allowed in circumstances where either the major airport was congested and the state wished to develop an alternative regional airport or the regional airport is reliant on feeding the national hub for the majority of its business .
I am opposed , however , to attempts by the EPP Group to restrict national airport systems to peripheral areas or to domestic flights .
I shall support the original compromise Amendment No 3 , which related to changes in Article 4 ( 1 ) .
It is important in airports which are run as commercial entities that they retain the flexibility to apply non-aeronautical income to subsidise aeronautical charges at their own discretion .
Article 4 ( 1 ) should therefore include the words ' the managing body of an airport may take account of all or part of the airport 's income that is not derived from airport charges when establishing the total level of its charges ' .
It is even more important that the other changes between compromise Amendment No 3 and Amendment No 9 are reinstated , specifically that allowing the cost of financing facilities which have the express consent of the majority of users and of their representative bodies through consultation arrangements under Article 7 .
Reliance on this original wording , put forward by the Commission , is ambiguous and would effectively lead to substantial delays to development .
For example , in the United Kingdom , BAA is having to fund advance works for the cost of its Terminal 5 inquiry .
The users accept that these can be recovered from charges , whether or not the development goes ahead , because they support the project .
If such costs could not be recovered , there would be a positive disincentive for airports to invest in new development .
Finally , I support the proposals for consultation , as laid down by the rapporteur .
I oppose penalties , and our group will be voting against the idea of penalties , which would only have to be paid by the airports anyway , and on the dates for implementation we support the original Commission proposal .
Mr President , let me begin by saying thank you to the rapporteur , Mr Väyrynen , for the very constructive work he has done on this report .
Airports play an increasingly important role in a world where the number of journeys is constantly rising .
This is a development which is just going to continue .
Today we see a development which means that the number of airline passengers is growing in the order of 4-5 per cent per year .
This means a doubling from the current level until the years immediately after the year 2010 .
Airport taxes play an important role in this context .
An airport provides airport facilities and airport services .
The tax paid by airlines includes amounts relating to the facilities and services provided by the airport .
The current draft directive includes an ambition on the part of the Commission to find common solutions for the whole of the Union , which is of course a good thing .
There are big differences between the various tax systems in the Union .
There are differences both between the Member States and , in some cases , even between airports in one and the same country .
Because a large proportion of air transport takes place between the Member States , it is natural to try to achieve a common and unified system as far as possible .
There are a lot of things in this report which I think are very urgent .
In different contexts , different countries can have very different conditions .
There are , for example , differences between conditions in a densely populated country and in a country which largely consists of sparsely populated areas .
There is also a decisive difference between a country which is in the middle of the EU and a country on the EU 's periphery .
There is reason to take both these different sets of conditions into consideration .
Finland and Sweden are two of the countries which in this respect have different conditions to the majority of other Member States .
The Commission has also provided for this to a certain extent , but in the view of my group and the Group of the European People 's Party , it has done so in an unnecessary way . It should only apply to the peripheral Member States and only for domestic traffic .
The latter is seen as very important in principle .
It is reasonable that matters concerning domestic traffic should be something each country can decide for itself .
As far as I am concerned it is quite different when someone starts his journey at Heathrow in London and flies to Arlanda in Stockholm .
If that person never sets foot in another Swedish airport , why should he have to help finance it ?
That makes the limitation we have proposed with regard to Article 4 seem very important .
Mr President , the principles at work in the proposal for a directive by the Commission are nondiscrimination , relationship to costs and transparency .
We have still to agree on the content of these rules and on their application .
Transparency cannot work in one direction only .
The exchange of information between airlines and airport administrations must be based on genuine reciprocity .
It cannot come only from the airport administration .
Airlines and airport administrations have everything to gain by seeking to work in tandem .
On this point , Mr Väyrynen 's report contains risks by wishing to go further than the Commission 's proposals , particularly in paragraphs 6 and 7 which provide airlines with the means to exert pressure on the administration and the investments of airports .
The airlines must be able to retain control of taxes , since for many airlines taxes represent a significant part of turnover .
Further to this subject , the abolition of duty free would deprive airports of essential resources , not to mention the serious consequences it would have for employment .
Duty free should be retained , and I am delighted that the Transport Ministers have called for a study on the economic and social consequences of the measure .
Airports must also make considerable investments spread out over several years and a coherent approach will require greater flexibility and respect for the principle of subsidiarity .
Member States must take seriously their responsibilities towards joint national and regional development and respect for the environment .
In this respect , they must have real power to set taxes in order to guarantee the necessary tax harmonization .
The same step should be taken for all transport infrastructures : rail , ports , motorways .
The same applies to consultation ; consultation is necessary , however if disagreements arise between the airport users and the administration , the regulatory role falls to the national public authority .
For this reason we are opposed to the amendments to paragraph 7 which destabilize it in this field .
Mr President , I would like to make a couple of comments .
The first is about Article 1 , where the Committee on Transport and Tourism has limited the scope of the directive somewhat by increasing the number of passengers from 250 000 to a million .
I have to say that I cannot see the point of that .
I even think it is counterproductive .
The second is that the Committee on Transport and Tourism has not succeeded in incorporating a stronger environmental component into these airport charges , although Article 5 provides a small opening to do that .
I have tabled an amendment to that end again , because I still think that nuisance really must play a role in the airport charges .
Finally , it has to be said that one airport causes far more nuisance than another because it is located in an area with a far higher concentration of people , so that should play a role .
That is why I hope this amendment will be accepted after all .
Mr President , I am hoping to touch the heart of Commissioner Kinnock .
Sometimes in this kind of debate I feel a sense of unreality come over me .
How many of you have been to the airports of Campbeltown , Islay , Tiree , Wick , Lerwick , Kirkwall , Inverness , Barra , Benbecula , Stornoway , not to mention the feeder airlines on Shetland from many islands that feed into Lerwick , the feeder airlines on Orkney that feed into Kirkwall ?
Very few of these feed to a major airport like Glasgow . Many of them feed to Inverness .
So when I read the discussion of cross-subsidization , I am perplexed at Article 4 ( 2 ) which talks about the peripheral states .
I do not suppose anyone would argue that the UK is a peripheral state but no one would disagree with me that the north of Scotland is a peripheral region of a state .
I beg you to pay attention to the problem of these very small airlines .
I applaud France , Spain , Portugal and other countries that accept the need for social cohesion and have the networking .
I agree with Mr Megahy 's remarks in this regard .
I would ask the Commissioner to tell us what he thinks of the UK 's opting out of this attempt to produce social cohesion .
I support Amendment No 20 which restores the Commissioner 's wording , partly because it adds a new paragraph encouraging the use of smaller , less congested airports .
I am adding a new dimension to this problem .
There are not just regional airports that feed major airports but regional airports that feed other regional airports and this produces an enormous amount of difficulties .
So I would also ask Commissioner Kinnock about subsidies .
Can a local authority legitimately decide to assist with a subsidy in special cases ?
I understand that an analysis of airport charging systems in the EU reveals that airport charges often do not reflect the real costs of providing facilities .
I would give the Commissioner the following example .
Inverness apparently charges the same as Aberdeen but Inverness in no way offers the many facilities to users that Aberdeen does .
At the beginning of the sitting , when Mr Kinnock was present , we heard many examples of people 's difficulties of coping with their lives as politicians here .
But their difficulties - with the one exception of the Finnish lady - were as nothing compared to my difficulties .
British Airways cancelled flights from Inverness and to Heathrow and Stansted .
The last flight from Inverness to Amsterdam was on Saturday .
It was overbooked .
The last time I attempted to get back to Aberdeen because I could not get to Inverness , it was also overbooked .
In fact , they blatantly said to about ten of us who had paid full fare that it was the airline 's policy to overbook , that all airlines did it .
They said it openly in front of these very angry , delayed passengers .
Perhaps Mr Kinnock could tell us if anything further can be done on this matter where airlines almost boast about it and make no apology .
It takes me two days to get to this Parliament .
To hear of all these Air France direct flights from London being cancelled has no relevance to someone who dares to live in the north of Scotland and to be a politician in this Parliament .
So I ask Mr Kinnock to let his heartstrings be stirred by my problem and to try to do something .
Mr President , an enquiry conducted by the European Commission has shown that airport charges in the Community are too high relative to the cost of the services provided .
What is more , they are discriminatory and lack transparency .
This Commission enquiry confirms the independent study carried out by Cranfield University , which concluded that airport charges in the European Union are 40 % higher than in the United States .
So there are definitely good reasons for the proposal to base airport charges within the Union on equal treatment for the same level of service , to relate charges to costs and to make them transparent .
I do have a problem with the way the Commission has developed these principles .
The wording ' in reasonable proportion to costs incurred ' is too vague , and also it is the Member States themselves which determine what a reasonable proportion is .
This way is not going to quickly lead to airport charges which reflect real costs .
I am even less happy about the differentiation based on external costs which the Commission allows .
I heartily endorse the principle of passing environmental costs on to the user , but then the Commission first needs to create a framework for this method of calculation to prevent unfairness .
I look forward to a Green Paper with the title : ' Toward fair and appropriate pricing in air transport ' .
While some blame falls on the Commission as far as the development of the principles is concerned , the Committee on Transport and Tourism does not seem to take them seriously .
The national airport network , which the Committee on Transport and Tourism is asking for , makes it impossible for the user to pay for the use of installations and services .
The system proposed amounts to cross-subsidisation between airports .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy writes with justification in its opinion that this would distort competition between airports even more .
The Committee on Transport and Tourism is also violating the principle of equal treatment for the same level of service if , in amendment no 10 , it allows peripheral Member States to make a distinction between internal and international flights .
How can that be reconciled with the internal market ?
I also agree with the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on this point , which states that whether the flight is an internal flight , a flight within the Community or a flight from a third country must not play any part in determining the level of airport charges .
Mr President , airports are very important in the economic life of the Union and regional airports are of crucial importance .
In my own country , Scotland , a study of the employment , wealth and economic activities generated by airports , mainly in tourism , came up with the quite significant statistic that in 1996 £ 1.4 billion was generated by activities at Glasgow , Edinburgh and Aberdeen airports .
Twenty thousand jobs related to airports and tourism were dependent on this .
So regional airports are of significant importance within the Union .
The report which we have in front of us deals with the question of charges and I agree with Mr Megahy that the report has a lot of faults and failings .
The Commission 's original proposal is obviously better and the final report is a bit of a dog 's breakfast and really could be amended .
The important thing which some of the other colleagues have touched on is this question of peripheral nations .
Like Mrs Ewing , I think that it should be peripheral airports because if we look at the question of the lower limit which the EPP voted for in committee this would mean that small airports like those which Mr Hume , Mrs Ewing , and Mr Gerry Collins use would each be covered by the legislation ; these are all very small airports and yet they are vital to the economy of their regions .

It is important that we go for the higher limit which the Socialist Group is suggesting .
Mr President , it gives me great pleasure to support Mr Väyrynen 's report and this Commission proposal .
Clearly , such a directive is needed , but the directive should not impose restrictions on commercial operations of airports or unnecessary administrative burdens on airports or those regulating them .
What is particularly important is that we should raise the standards of service but leave commercial matters for airports to decide , in consultation with the both the airlines and any relevant consumer organizations .
The key point I would like to impress on both the Commission and the rapporteur is that the thresholds for implementation in the directive , particularly for passengers , are too low .
Certainly the threshold for passengers should be set at 1 million passengers .
The directive as currently drafted makes insufficient provision for the transparency of arrangements at airports and consultation of users that we in this House would wish to see .
Mr President , I should also like to congratulate the rapporteur on his work which , I know , has been quite difficult and technical .
There is a great problem when you talk about aviation and , in particular , airport charges , in that the airlines always think that the airports are overcharging them and the airports think that the airlines are always wanting something on the cheap .
That is a fact that exists within the aviation industry .
I say to some of the Members who have spoken that it is always easy to look at national situations , but we must , in this whole issue , look at the European situation and what we can do to try and bring together the wide variations between airport charges .
Remember that this is a report on airport charges , not a report on problems that Members might have in getting from A to B on the Monday of a Strasbourg session .
It is a difficult and complicated issue . It is important to have transparency in airport charges , but we need to ensure that airports do not abuse their position and that airlines - particularly the large flag carriers - do not abuse theirs .
Regional airports are important , particularly in peripheral areas , which is why I think cross-subsidization is , if transparent , acceptable within a national airports network .
I agree with my colleague Mr Megahy 's analysis that what has come out of committee is not only unacceptable but , in my opinion , unworkable .
That is why the PSE has submitted amendments to rectify that situation .
Mr President , I am very grateful to the rapporteur , Mr Väyrynen , for his thorough work and his cooperative attitude .
I wish I could be as cooperative in responding to the various interesting points raised in the debate , notably by Mrs Ewing .
If I do not respond , it is not because she has failed to pluck my heartstrings - she did that a very long time ago - but simply because of the shortage of time .
I will , therefore , write to her on each of the questions she raised .
This proposal seeks to establish the three internationally recognized principles of cost-relatedness , transparency and nondiscrimination as the basis for charging for the use of airports in the Union and , naturally , I am glad that the Committee on Transport and Tourism shares these objectives .
For the sake of clarity , I wish to deal with each amendment in turn .
Subject to a certain amount of redrafting , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 3 , 4 and 6 .
Amendment No 5 refers to the idea of networks but the main justification for these types of networks - cohesion - is lacking in the amendment , and I , therefore , have to reject it .
I am pleased to note that there is a consensus - though one could be forgiven for thinking that there was not , listening to the debate - around the figure of one million passenger movements as a general threshold for applying the main principles , and I can accept this part of Amendment No 8 .
The new reference to networks in Article 1 is , however , misplaced , as the committee itself has acknowledged in later amendments by treating cross-subsidy and network issues separately .
So that part of Amendment No 8 , as well as Amendment No 18 , has to be rejected .
Subject to some redrafting , but with the exception of the reference to cargo facilities in the definition of airport charges , Amendments Nos 9 and 21 are acceptable .
One of the thorniest issues in this proposal relates , obviously , to conditions for cross-subsidization between larger and smaller airports within the same network , as addressed in Article 4 of the draft directive and in Amendments Nos 10 , 20 and 26 .
The Commission accepts the idea of defining networks , obviously .
As far as these amendments are concerned , however , the Commission cannot accept the idea of leaving the possibilities for subsidizing - that is charging higher than normal fees at the major airports - completely open with no applicable safeguards or conditions relating to cross-subsidies .
Obviously , such practices could lead to abuse .
However , the Commission cannot accept the idea of completely excluding these types of practices or limiting them only to domestic flights either .
Some explicit and transparent cross-subsidy practices can be important and , indeed in many cases , they can be beneficial for most carriers at the major airport since all carriers receive passengers from feeder flights which plainly would not exist if it were not for the smaller airports .
Furthermore , limiting acceptable cross-subsidy arrangements to domestic flights would contradict the very principle of non-discrimination .
Turning now to modulations in charges , while I can accept the idea of environmental charges only addressing local problems - which is , indeed , the spirit of our proposal - I cannot accept Amendment No 11 , because it only concerns specific and tangible environmental costs .
As the House will know , in many airports modulations are used as steering instruments to modify noise , pollution or congestion problems and they are a practical way of ensuring that users pay for the pressures that they impose and the equipment that they choose to use .
Obviously the Commission proposal requires these types of charging variations to be revenue-neutral and not a source of additional income for the airports , so that the interests of users are safeguarded by a transparent and fair system .
In principle , however , I can accept the clarification offered on rebates .
As for Article 6 of our proposal , which is addressed by Amendment No 12 , whilst I can accept certain textual clarifications , I cannot support the provisions on obliging all airports in Europe to provide their information in a standard format .
As the House will know , our proposal is not designed to harmonize the airport sector in Europe : it merely seeks to ensure clarity and transparency in the setting of charges .
In relation to Article 7 on consultation procedures , Amendment No 13 is asking for independent arbitration bodies .
There is , however , a legal problem with this type of authority since it could supplant a national court system and would ultimately become an interpreter of Community law .
That is not acceptable to the Commission , although I have to say that our concerns in this article are limited to the notion of arbitrators and the main part of the amendment is an absolutely necessary clarification of our original text .
Amendments Nos 14 , 15 and 24 concern timing with the aim of reducing the timescale for the implementation of the directive by two years .
I can only say that we have set the dates so that they do not conflict with the implementation of the directive on ground handling .
I am sure that , on reflection , the House will see the practical sense of that .
I can deal quickly with the remaining new amendments as follows .
I can accept Amendments Nos 16 , 17 , 22 and 23 , but Amendment No 19 is rejected because this formulation dilutes the non-discrimination principle in an unacceptable way .
Finally , I have to reject Amendment No 25 because the objective of the directive is not to penalize the air transport sector but to provide for a balanced framework that guarantees certain basic principles .
The amendments suggested have , in general , been very constructive , even in cases where I have not been able to accept them .
They certainly focus minds on the results that we want this directive to achieve and I am therefore grateful for the views expressed .
I can only hope that the Council will see things as positively and constructively as this House .
I am grateful to the rapporteur and his colleagues , regretting only the time that it took to respond but I guess that is inevitable when there are detailed amendments on a technical issue .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Parking card for the disabled
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0098 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a Council Recommendation on a parking card for people with disabilities ( C4-0033 / 98-95 / 0353 ( SYN ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Megahy ) .
Mr President , there are millions of disabled people throughout the European Union , and many of them are dependent on transport by car .
All the Member States grant parking facilities to such people by means of a disabled person 's parking card .
The rules and regulations for the issue and use of these cards are made by the Member States .
This recommendation quite rightly respects their right to do so .
However , in a developing European Union , disabled people should have the same opportunity as other European citizens to travel freely throughout the whole territory of the Union .
This recommendation makes that possible for those with parking cards .
At the moment , for example , there is no certainty that a German or a British car exhibiting its own national card and parked on yellow lines in Strasbourg or Brussels would not incur a fine for its owner or , at the worst , be towed away .
When this proposal comes into effect that should no longer occur .
I say ' should ' no longer occur because I think one thing we are familiar with in all countries is the zealousness of parking attendants .
But there will now be a Community model card which can be used alongside regional or national cards for a transitional period determined by the Member State .
The Transport Committee unanimously accepts this proposal and all the accompanying details .
Indeed I can say that the common position is a great improvement on the original recommendation that came before us at the first reading .
Most of Parliament 's amendments have been accepted , either word for word or in spirit .
We now have a recommendation which makes it clear that the definition of disability will be left to the rules of each Member State .
It also recommends , however , a wider definition than previously , to include people whose disability can lead to decreased mobility .
Secondly , it allows the new European card to be used in parallel to existing cards for a transitional period .
This is important to disability groups in Member States who fought hard for recognition of their existing cards , and also to local authorities and other bodies that might incur costs in the first case if this had to be altered too quickly .
The recommendation also says that information on conditions of use in the different Member States should be provided when issuing the parking card .
I think that is important .
Most importantly , the common position has taken up our suggested changes to the format for the card .
They have taken out the vehicle registration number which was there originally so that the card now relates to a person and not just one vehicle .
In addition they have removed the address and date of birth from the back of the card .
This was suggested both by Parliament itself and by various disability groups for very real security reasons .
In my experience in this House it is not always the case that a common position from the Council is better than the original proposal . In this case it is .
It received unanimous support in the Transport Committee .
The fact that it is a recommendation and not a directive of course gives it a weaker legal base .
I do not think , however , on a matter of this kind , that this should in any way impede its speedy implementation .
I see this as a small but significant step towards the recognition at European Union level of the equal rights of disabled persons .
I look forward to seeing it speedily implemented by the various Member States speedily in accordance with the details laid down in the directive , and to the opportunity for disabled persons to use their standard model card in the other countries throughout the whole of the European Union .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would first of all like to thank Mr Megahy for his excellent work , for we do not often find that the Council adopts nearly all Parliament 's amendments - at least in spirit .
That is no doubt a sign of the good work that has gone on here .
We can now for our part approve the common position of the Council at second reading and will then , hopefully , have obtained at last the European disabled person 's parking card , which has been promised for 20 years .
The Council has agreed in its opinion that the card can be used independently of the vehicle , hence that it is individual and not vehicle-specific , that for security reasons the address should not be recorded on the card and that information on conditions of use should be provided when the card is issued .
The Council is also proposing that the European card be used parallel to the national cards , which makes sense at least for a transitional period .
We shall also be discussing this week the report on the free movement of persons produced by the High-Level Panel .
For disabled people , freedom of movement is basically only a dream .
Reality causes them even greater problems , and there is an even larger number of hurdles for them to overcome than there is for so-called normal people .
Perhaps this European card will provide an opportunity to remove the initial small hurdles .
In my speech in December 1996 at first reading of the report I complained that this card is just eyewash , and I wish to reaffirm this again today .
Because , you see , it is left open to the individual states whether they introduce it or not , and it is only valid according to the particular regulations in the particular country , and these are not in alignment .
Nevertheless , the card is a first step in the right direction , and I hope it will be a benefit for everyone .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , only a few days ago I held a conference on the subject ' So disabled people might have a place in our midst ' .
It was interesting to see the great significance that was attached to the aspect of real discrimination against disabled people travelling inside the EU as a result of the non-availability of a European parking card .
The issue of increased mobility through constantly improving technical provisions , on the one hand , and a certain confusion as to the rights and duties of participating in road traffic in the EU , on the other , soon became the focal point of the discussions .
At the same time , those affected expressed their concern over too much regulation , as well as their fears as to whether their hopes and desires , which I convey as their man in Brussels , are being noticed and heard at all .
I recommend that the common position now on the table be given our unqualified acceptance .
The Parliamentary amendments I consider important from first reading have been adopted either word for word or in spirit .
Of particular importance in my view are : firstly , the decision in favour of an individual-based as opposed to a vehicle-based solution ; secondly , the special attention paid to security aspects in protecting the holder 's personal data ; and , thirdly , that our demands for subsidiarity , public accessibility and transparency represent a real basis in that , on the one hand , the community model can be used to supplement regionally or nationally valid cards already existing while , on the other hand , the issuing of this new model card is coupled with a duty to provide information about its conditions of use in the individual Member States .
Unfortunately , the recommendation fails to harmonize access conditions for such a parking card .
Also , and precisely because I come from a city which is to be the 1999 European City of Culture , namely Weimar , I recommend that Member States implement this recommendation quickly so that a place in our midst can really be made accessible to disabled people soon .
Mr President , it would have been a credit to the European Union if it could have taken a decision on a parking card for people with disabilities in less than 20 years ; and then we are still not talking about legislation which prescribes something , but a recommendation .
Mr President , it is vitally important to the European Union that ordinary people living with all kinds of problems can have some faith in this Union .
We really must ask ourselves , if it stops at a recommendation and does not lead to harmonization of the parking card , whether this will advance the credibility of the Union .
I actually cannot understand why the Member States have not been able , together with Parliament and the Commission , to quickly see to this simple matter of harmonizing parking cards for handicapped people .
To be honest , I think it is a disgrace .
I hope that this card does come and of course my group agrees with Mr Megahy 's report .
Mr President , I fully agree with the rapporteur that this is an important subject , precisely because of the social impact of the proposal before us today .
So I too am glad that the Council , in its common position , has adopted the unusual approach of practically accepting the vast majority of Parliament 's amendments , particularly those which say the card should belong to the holder rather than to a specific vehicle and remove the address and date of birth , for obvious reasons of security .
It is also very positive that it has been accepted that the definition of disability should be extended , that the card should be used in parallel with the other cards already in use in certain Member States , and that information should be provided at the time of issue .
However , as other speakers have said , we also regret the fact that this proposal is legally weak , as the rapporteur puts it , despite being so important socially .
In other words , it is just a recommendation . We think it deserves a stronger legal base , in view , I repeat , of its social importance .
Nevertheless , we support the proposal before this House and , of course , we congratulate the rapporteur .
Mr President , first I would like to thank Mr Megahy and all those who have contributed to the debate .
As Members will know , all Member States do grant special parking facilities to people with reduced mobility who , by the very nature of their condition , are more likely to rely on personal individual transport than on public transport .
The right to these special parking facilities is demonstrated by displaying a disability parking card inside the vehicle .
However , the design and the style of these parking cards vary considerably from one Member State to another and this can give rise to problems when users of the card find themselves in a Member State other than that in which the card was issued .
The diversity of the cards makes it difficult for those responsible for enforcing parking regulations to know if someone is eligible for the special parking facilities or not .
Against this background , the Commission gave an undertaking in its medium-term social action programme to submit a draft recommendation on the reciprocal recognition by Member States of a parking card for people with disabilities .
In addition to the mutual recognition of the cards issued in individual Member States , the Commission proposed that there should be a standardized EC model parking card , and details of such a standard card are set out in the recommendation .
The recommendation has been considered by the Economic and Social Committee , the Committee of the Regions and by Parliament .
At your first reading on 13 December 1996 the House proposed several amendments to the Commission 's proposal .
The Commission was happy to take most of your suggestions on board and , on my recommendation , adopted an amended proposal on 4 March 1997 .
The Council also took Parliament 's amendments into account when it adopted the common position on the recommendation on 18 December 1997 .
Since then , Parliament 's Committee on Transport and Tourism , at its meeting of 17 March , unanimously agreed the adoption of the common position .
I would like to thank the European Parliament and especially the rapporteur , Mr Tom Megahy , for such a very positive reaction and for your strong support for the proposal at all times .
The final adoption of the recommendation by the Council will of course ensure that people with disabilities will be able to benefit from parking facilities wherever they choose to drive in Europe .
This should help facilitate their greater freedom of movement , thereby improving work , shopping and leisure opportunities for at least some people with disabilities .
A very small move perhaps , but I think quite an important and significant step in the removal of barriers to fuller participation in European society .
It has taken a long time , but at least now this issue can finally be put to rest , and I would like to congratulate all of those who made that possible .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Recording equipment in road vehicles
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A4-0116 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) 3821 / 85 on recording equipment in road transport and Directive 88 / 599 / EEC concerning the implementation of Regulations ( EEC ) 3820 / 85 and 3821 / 85 ( C4-0009 / 98-94 / 0187 ( SYN ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mr Wijsenbeek ) .
Mr President , the Committee on Transport and Tourism has sent me , as rapporteur , limping into the debate .
I know it is sometimes difficult with the amount of travelling we have to do and the planes and trains which are not there , but it is curious , at least , that the late arrival of three Members , two from the UPE and one from the PSE , altered the majority for this report while voting was taking place .
That also reflects the fact that the report is quite controversial , open to different views , because it was very close .
What is it about ?
In fact , something new has cropped up .
Anyway , I have never experienced anything like this .
The Commission had presented a proposal aiming to improve the existing recording instrument , the traditional tachograph , by adding an extra piece of equipment in which a driver-card is fitted .
At first reading , Parliament , with the greatest possible majority , took the view that the on-board computer or digital tachograph would also be an improvement on the traditional instrument and could simply be used , even with CD-ROM , in place of the traditional instrument .
I have to tell you that I thought that a highly acceptable proposal .
I thought that a useful addition by Parliament and even the Commission was in agreement with it .
Then the Council adopted the common position that only on-board computers may be used in new vehicles .
The Council did that with fourteen votes in favour and one abstention .
As it stands , Parliament could support that common position , it represents the state of the art in the technology now being applied .
However , there are two problems with this .
In the first place , there is the matter of use and control in the other AETR countries which are not yet , or will not become , members of the EU .
Regarding the AETR , the Transport Committee has submitted an amendment , and it could be that something will come of that , but I expect to hear the Commissioner soon on this , saying that we will still have to accept some of the old equipment .
The second problem concerns the retrofit .
Personally , I find it unacceptable that the old lorries , of all vehicles , which experience has taught us breach the rules on driving and rest periods most , should be allowed to continue to run with the old equipment , which is so open to fraud , for ever and a day .
Some say that the problem will be over in five to seven years , but it is still five to seven years , and then most of these vehicles are usually put on the road again , often in some of the Member States around the Mediterranean .
Now to come back to the limping of my motion .
The first three amendments , and Mrs Langenhagen 's amendments , Amendments Nos 19 to 22 inclusive , still contain the 1A proposal and the reference to the Annex which goes with it . They were subsequently not included , nor was the Annex .
Obviously I will be leaving it to the wisdom of Parliament whether to accept Mrs Langenhagen 's motions but in any case I , as rapporteur , will rise after the votes on Amendments Nos 2 and 4 to indicate the subsequent logical order of the later voting .
I would very much like to hear from the Commissioner about retrofit and AETR , but I also think that the Commissioner owes us some further explanation about the origins and basis of the whole Article , that is a new regulation on driving and rest periods .
At the moment we are only talking about the means of control , whereas , in fact , we also need to examine the Regulation on driving and rest periods which needs to be amended .
The Commission is considering this at the moment , but I think that the two have to go hand in hand .
Now to my conclusions .
We have been surprised , and not unpleasantly , by the progressive common position .
We will have to see whether we are still going to consider both possibilities 1A and 1B , or whether as a Parliament we want to proceed further only with 1B . But no matter what happens : transport will and must become safer and more social in one way or another as a result of this proposal .
Finally , I would like to thank the Commissioner warmly for the cooperation but also , and especially , those in DG VII who helped me , simple lawyer that I am , to master this difficult technical material .
Mr President , since my colleague Mr Wijsenbeek has outlined the technical background so superbly , I can confine myself to considering the political aspects .
It seems so simple .
Lorries above a certain weight and buses with a certain number of seats have for years been fitted with a piece of equipment which measures driving and rest periods .
It is a neat bit of technology which has been improved over and over again by smart people in recent decades , but especially in their own experience by smart operators .
Drivers - the good ones excepted , I must emphasize - often literally bend the technology to suit themselves .
A government which takes itself seriously tries to do something about this .
It seems simple but as you know , so many heads , so many minds , a tangle which is difficult to unravel .
Rapporteur Wijsenbeek has pointed us more or less in the direction of the digital era .
Bravo to that .
Fourteen Member States were then able to choose to progress in the same way , the Commissioner and the Committee on Transport and Tourism have endorsed it , though we have to wait for the vote to see whether the same will happen in Parliament .
But my colleague Mr Wijsenbeek has already spoken about that .
Mr President , the Frankfurt Allgemeine Zeitung wrote nostalgically last month about the good old tachograph disc which will be replaced by a digital system in 2000 , also mentioning that the German industry is ready for this .
Kinsel was the first to propose a 1B solution .
If necessary , it said in the same report , the 1A solution could still be taken off the shelf .
Against this background , it is reassuring that the technology for digital tachographs is evidently no longer a problem .
This is not only evident from this report , I also say this because I am assuming that the Commission and the Council are both very wise bodies , surrounded by masses of expertise , which obviously cannot allow themselves to make any mistakes at this point with regard to the technical feasibility of the proposal which lies before us now .
Having said all that , I am not forgetting that there are still doubts even in our circle about the choice that has been made , especially on the points which the rapporteur mentioned just now .
I sincerely hope that they will be dispelled by experience in practice in the years to come .
The broad support that there seems to be for the shift to the digital era should now no longer be put at risk .
Mr President , well before the new digital tachograph is , can be , introduced , we will have to buckle down to further proposals for effective and more harmonized control .
Before the last Dutch Presidency , the Dutch inspection service , the National Transport Inspectorate , took the initiative to map out the enforcement regime within the Union .
What we already knew from the Commission reports , which were often seriously delayed , was confirmed .
The rules are the same on paper , but that is where it stops .
There is insufficient awareness of how badly this undermines the idea of a single Europe with an internal market .
How bona fide operators and drivers who respect the rules can feel daily that they are being treated with contempt , by authorities which are powerless or unwilling to separate the wheat from the chaff .
Mr President , during the Council meeting in which the common position was adopted , the Council asked the Commission to present a report , if necessary accompanied by suitable proposals , on the effectiveness and uniformity of inspection procedures operated by the Member States .
I would not have had that ' if necessary ' .
I am therefore assuming that the Commission will come up with proposals soon .
To put it more forcefully , what is the point of a new tachograph if enforcement practice continues with its old ways .
Mr President , what is going on ?
In 1994 , i.e. four years ago , the Commission presented a proposal which pays greater regard to road safety in general and the social legislation for long-distance drivers in particular , namely through the introduction of a new tachograph , because the current one is considered too easy to tamper with .
Actually the matter is quite simple .
All those affected , be it drivers , trade unions , haulage firms or the road users I interviewed , are in favour of an improvement .
This improvement was presented to us by the Commission in its very sensible proposal of July 1994 , but then Parliament wanted more .
At first reading in the summer of 1995 Parliament did not just vote for a piece of equipment which is less easy to manipulate , but also for the development of a super black box involving an extensive infrastructure with the firms and inspection authorities .
Global fleet management was to be a vision no longer .
It was two years later - in 1997 - that the Council 's common position was presented to us .
This is inadequate in many respects .
I ask you and the Council how it can come about that , in the final analysis , the Council has only voted on the super black box and not simultaneously on the satisfactory , cost-effective , sound , feasible and acceptable solution proposed by Parliament .
Who is hiding something here and why ?
When I first heard about the Council 's decision , I thought I was dreaming , and I still hope that this is all a mistake and that tomorrow this blunder will not be endorsed by Parliament as well .
I am in favour of a modern , technologically assisted transport safety system , but each businessman should be able to decide for himself in this free market of ours , whether he wants a superbox or the equally attractive , so-called improved solution .
The entrepreneur ultimately knows best what costs he and his business can sustain .
If the common position of the Council becomes a reality tomorrow , then the previous tamper-prone tachograph and the new superbox , which still has not been clearly defined and examined for its legal force - the old and the new equipment therefore - will exist for ten years or more side by side .
Neither have anything in common .
On the contrary , an incentive will be given for a driver to transfer from the old vehicle to the new because he knows that the two types of recording equipment cannot be compared with each other and that he cannot be prosecuted for failing to observe the proper driving and rest periods .
If the Council has voted 14 : 1 against the more sensible solution , but in favour of the superbox , this means that there is no wish to achieve increased control and hence improved road safety .
Or how do you see things , ladies and gentlemen ?
I hope that our vote tomorrow will not turn into a nightmare and that we will vote as at first reading , because I think like you , Mr Wijsenbeek , 1A and 1B are the correct solution .
Mr President , I thought I was alone , but Mrs Langenhagen has beaten me in introducing some element of caution , alongside this stimulating technological innovation .
Like all technological innovations , this has financial implications , and so caution is needed .
There is a risk , in this case , that it will favour one party , namely the manufacturers of this new equipment , and worry the other party , namely those who have to buy them without total guarantees , not only for the operation , but for the credibility of the checks that can be made with this equipment .
Carriers , and not just Italian carriers , have already been gravely concerned by an investment that could give rise to losses , as it might have to be renewed even in the short term .
I personally , and to some extent my group , are not against the introduction of 1B equipment , but we are asking for it to be done gradually , because not everyone agrees with the results of the tests so far conducted .
We propose that it might be better to allow a transition period , a free choice , firstly for the Member States and then for the businessmen in the countries themselves , of whether or not to use the new equipment or keep the 1A equipment with the addition of a digital reader , at least for a specific period .
It would appear that the costs of either operation are much the same , but the first , the incorporation of a digital reader into the old system , would provide greater guarantees for the time being , while awaiting the official initiation of the 1B equipment .
It is true that this could complicate the control systems , so those working on the road will have to check not only the operation but also the honesty of those using this equipment .
In this case , however , unlike our regrets in a previous speech on tourism , the principle of subsidiarity should be defended , or even imposed , for in this case it is also a question of defending a principle of discretionary power .
In such a delicate framework which might affect a sector already troubled by other factors , such as the increase in motorway tolls , those who will be paying the cost of this reform should be allowed to choose .
Mr President , experts consider non-compliance with the rules to be one of the most serious problems in the transport sector .
I share the opinion that this problem has not been caused in the first place by defective control equipment , the tachograph .
I think the main cause is the inadequate performance of the investigation bodies .
The rules on driving periods are also not geared well enough to the characteristics of road transport and that invites infringements .
Even so , I share the Council 's view that the tachograph must be replaced by an on-board computer or black box as the means of control .
The technology of the tachograph is outdated .
It is susceptible to fraud and , unlike the on-board computer , cannot be used to improve operations .
When the price of the on-board computer is also comparable to that of the tachograph , with or without smartcard , the on-board computer seems an obvious choice .
Now that the Council has also opted for this , I do not want to hold on to the original choice of Parliament at first reading , which wanted to give transport companies the choice between an improved tachograph and an on-board computer .
The co-existence of three systems , tachograph , tachograph plus and on-board computer , can only make enforcement more difficult .
I am sorry that the Council did not decide to go for a retrofit .
When new equipment is introduced , you cannot avoid using the old and the new alongside each other for some time .
But the Council should have set a deadline for the use of the tachograph .
Now we are going to be faced for a long time with tachograph discs in old lorries which soon hardly anyone will be able to read and , according to the rapporteur , it is mainly the old lorries which break the rules on driving and rest periods .
My amendment to make the on-board computer compulsory after a number of years did not win sufficient support in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , however .
I would rather not have a retrofit at all , than a retrofit which amounts to an upgrading of the old tachograph .
If the Council now , in 1998 , votes for on-board computers with a large majority , I think it would be stupid , in the next century , to equip old lorries with technology which is in fact already out-of-date now .
Mr President , who actually still believes in this House that the demands articulated by Mr van Dam - for improvement and harmonization of driving and rest periods and for an improvement in the control systems - can still be achieved ?
I have been a member of this Parliament since 1989 and this is a demand that has been made time and time again .
We know that enforcement takes different forms within the European Union .
I can judge this fairly well from a German point of view , too .
Because the system is not working and will not work , we need to have improved recording equipment in the vehicles .
The digital system is a correct way forward , but it should not be introduced without used vehicles being retro-fitted with the driver-specific smartcard at the same time .
The tachograph needs to be retro-fitted ; we have the technical facilities to do this .
The periods quoted here , namely until the year 2003 , are much too long .
Furthermore , the reduction for vehicles licensed since 1996 is totally absurd because we know for a fact that 10 and 15-year-old vehicles are driven mainly in the countries of central and eastern Europe , and they will be driven for some years to come .
I need to refer to something else , too , particularly where the situation in central and eastern Europe is concerned : it was 1995 when the tachograph was introduced .
I think it is asking too much to now lay down the digital system at one go , so as to transfer to a new cost-effective system after five years .
The interim solution would clearly be more acceptable .
We have - or could have - the following paradox : for example , new vehicles fitted with the digital system from 2000 onwards might no longer be able to enter the countries of central and eastern Europe because the appropriate reading equipment is not available there and their police are not equipped with the necessary apparatus .
You can just imagine the way things might develop for us under certain conditions !
The chance to arrive at a comprehensive solution , e.g. one involving intermediate stages , better monitoring of drivers ' hours , the introduction and implementation of better social legislation , has not been seized .
Finally , Frits Castricum : it is not only German industry that is ready ; we know that companies in Great Britain , in the Netherlands , in Italy and in France are ready too and possess both the technical and technological know-how to change things !
Mr President , let me begin by saying thank you to the rapporteur , Mr Wijsenbeek , for the many years of work he has done on this matter .
The issue of tachographs goes hand in hand with the unresolved issue of driving and rest periods .
On the question of the latter , the European Parliament is still waiting for the Commission 's proposal on what changes are considered necessary .
It would have been good if we had been given the opportunity to discuss these issues in one context .
It is necessary to set requirements for functioning equipment in lorries .
At the same time it is also important that the technology and the systems in which people have invested , perhaps in every company in a country , can also be used for its full service life .
Anything else would be a waste of resources .
It would be quite unreasonable to demand that already heavily burdened companies reinvest in new systems .
It is a different matter to say that , when systems need to be replaced , the best available technology should be adopted and systems introduced that are the same for all Member States .
The longer-term work also includes legislation in this area with regard to the membership negotiations which are about to begin and with regard to bilateral negotiations with third countries in central and eastern Europe .
It is highly desirable that there should eventually be common rules both with regard to driving and rest periods and with regard to technical systems for tachographs .
In a single market and in a Europe virtually without frontiers , certainly taking a somewhat longer-term view , this will become necessary .
Mr President , the last time it met , this Parliament spoke out for a tough approach to dealing with danger on the road .
The measures we propose include measures to promote better compliance with driving and resting periods in freight and bus transport .
This requires better enforcement , and fraud-proof equipment can help with this .
I have six short questions to put to the Commissioner .
First , is it true that the digital tachograph , 1B in the documents , is clearly better in this respect than the improved conventional tachograph 1A ?
Second , is it true that both types of tachograph have reached a stage of development which would mean that making type 1B compulsory from 2000 would not result in delays ?
Third , is there any truth in the statements from some colleagues that countries in Central Europe are prepared to cooperate with the installation of 1A but not 1B ?
Fourth , what is the Commissioner 's view on the absence of any provision for existing vehicles ?
How great is the risk that bona fide transport operators will be subject to competition from operators driving old vehicles without an improved tachograph ?
Fifth , I think we have the best chance of finally reaching a decision if we go for 1B , given the views in the Council of Ministers .
Sixth , the key question to the Commissioner , with reference to my colleague Mrs Langenhagen 's argument , what will best serve the interests of road safety and responsible social behaviour ?
Finally , whatever is chosen , the outcome stands or falls with proper enforcement in all Member States .
Mr President , the introduction of a new generation of tachographs is obviously a tangible contribution to road safety , as several Members have said in the course of the debate .
It is a tangible contribution to better social conditions for professional drivers , and clearly also a tangible contribution to fairer competition both within road transport and between the different modes of road transport .
I am extremely grateful for the sustained interest of this House and for the continuous commitment shown in particular by the rapporteur Mr Wijsenbeek .
The House will certainly recall that this Parliament wanted the Commission to amend its original proposal in 1995 by adding the possibility of introducing full digital equipment , the so-called 1B option .
Since the first reading technical feasibility studies have been undertaken , a great deal of work has been done with all the sectors involved , including enforcement authorities , social partners and the industry , with the result that the Commission and the Council are now convinced that having option 1B alone is the right approach .
We live and we learn , and we are happy to be instructed by many of the arguments put in the first place by the Parliament .
This House will not be surprised to know that , so far as I was concerned , they were in any case pushing at a fairly open door .
The Commission , consequently , will not support those amendments aimed at reintroducing the 1A option .
Whilst we agree that would be better than the current tachograph , it remains a hybrid solution that does not use the best available technology and does not give the same advantages as the 1B option in terms of security and flexibility for users .
Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 4 and 19 to 22 are therefore not accepted .
I would like to respond to those honourable Members who made the point about retro-fitting , by emphasizing that a good control system is very dependent on the proportion of the vehicle fleet that is equipped .
I have therefore argued consistently in the Council for some kind of retro-fitting that would have achieved the right balance between better enforcement and reasonable cost for the operators .
I regret , however , that a large blocking minority could not accept such a compromise .
Obviously no discussion on retrofitting should , however , justify the introduction of the new tachograph for new vehicles .
Therefore , considering that there is a broadly held view that the issue of retro-fitting is - how can I put it politely - ' not ripe for decision ' , it should remain on the table of the Council .
This at least will enable the Commission to return to the issue later , as it most certainly will , possibly on the basis of a modified proposal .
So far as retro-fitting is concerned , we had to ensure that we did not let the best be the enemy of the good and we have had to work on the basis not of what we would most prefer but of what we were most likely to get .
I hope that the House will share our view that it was pragmatically better to proceed on that basis .
Amendment No 3 is rejected because it is already covered in essence by the joint declaration attached to the common position which states that the Council and Commission will take steps to adapt the AETR Agreement as necessary in the light of the new tachograph .
In response to other honourable Members on this AETR point , the legal services of the Commission and the Council have made clear that there is no reason why European Union vehicles equipped with a new digital tachograph should encounter problems in the AETR third countries .
Vehicles equipped with a better enforcement tool should be accepted in view of the fact that they obviously aim to apply the same rules as the existing tachographs .
Moreover , the outputs of the new system , i.e. the printouts , will be much easier to interpret than the existing ones .
They will use the same pictograms to show the same information .
That should be more than sufficient , especially when we consider that if the current tachograph is not functioning the AETR Agreement simply requires a hand-written log from drivers , which is worse than nothing .
The real challenge will be to ask the third countries to introduce the new system for their own vehicles .
That might require a transitional period as has been suggested in the course of today 's debate ; but both the Council and the Commission have committed themselves to take all appropriate steps to achieve that .
On that basis , I welcome the declaration attached to the common position and I hope it will go some way towards reassuring honourable Members who have expressed doubts and concerns on this .
I would like to respond to at least one of Mr Cornelissen 's other questions , and that is relating to whether 1B will work .
The answer is most definitely Yes , as repeatedly tested and as demonstrated in working conditions and in very strong simulation exercises .
So he can be sure of that , but I am glad he raised the question , together with several other questions .
I would conclude by saying that I am happy to inform the House that I can accept Amendments Nos 5 to 17 , which must be some kind of world record !
They clarify or strengthen operational or security provisions of the common position .
I thank the Committee on Transport and Tourism , and Mr Wijsenbeek the rapporteur in particular , for the work on this proposal which will make a very significant contribution to the further and beneficial evolution not only of the common transport policy but to standards of fair competition , of security , of safety and of honesty in the operation of road haulage in the European Union .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Social security schemes for persons moving within the Community
The next item is the report ( A4-0052 / 98 ) by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 on the application of social security schemes to employed persons , to self-employed persons and to members of their families moving within the Community and Regulation ( EEC ) No 574 / 72 laying down the procedure for implementing Regulation ( EEC ) No 1408 / 71 ( COM ( 97 ) 0378 - C4-0450 / 97-97 / 0201 ( CNS ) ) .


Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all thank you very much , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten . You have seen fit to comment on this issue , Regulation No 1408 , on occasion before , of course .
I thank you for your tenacity and persistence here .
You know that the Socialist Group - and , I think , the whole of Parliament - support you in this matter .
The technical amendments to the present Directive are all correct in principle and long since overdue .
Unfortunately the Commission was once again somewhat fainthearted .
That is why we have supported some amendments of yours .
I also think these were needed in order to send a message to particular groups , such as students , pensioners and the unemployed , and to show generally how seriously we take freedom of movement .
The right to freedom of movement is already anchored in the Treaty of Rome .
However , it is always surprising to discover what obstacles and barriers the Member States put up against this and how reluctant they are to bring about equality of social treatment .
A series of Commission proposals and parliamentary opinions are lying dormant with the Council .
They are not being implemented because the political will is lacking .
I welcome your suggestion , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , that we should be given an overview of which Member States are blocking progress so much .
I welcome it regardless of who the culprits are !
The Commission likewise is a bit too complacent and cautious in several areas .
This is shown in the new action programme on freedom of movement , which fails to represent social security with the same commitment shown for the free movement of capital , goods and services .
It is our aim as a Parliament , as elected representatives , to guarantee workers the right to freedom of movement , to reduce discrimination and to plan and take a courageous step towards further integration , and not wait , as so often happens , until the European Court of Justice has taken the lead .
I think it is proof of how impoverished we are as parliamentarians if the European Court or national courts need to show us the way in the matter of European integration .
This is a political task and not , in fact , a job for the judiciary .
I hope with this Regulation we can move a little closer to the objectives I have just stated .
Though I hope , too , that we can finally record a success , to the extent that an amendment to a Regulation proposed by the Commission , which we have unanimously passed in Parliament , will be implemented by the Council of Ministers .
If this is the case , then I am certain that some of the scepticism of Europe 's workers and citizens will be reduced in the process .
Mr President , first I want to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten for her excellent report , in which she once again defends before this House the rights of migrant workers , including frontier workers . For Europe will not truly exist until we have removed the practical obstacles which confront those people who have to cross a border every morning in order to go to work in another Member State .
The report supports the technical amendments proposed by the Commission to update the regulations relating to the coordination of social security schemes for migrant workers .
However , as well as these technical amendments , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten presents some amendments with a greater political impact - basically those which demand concrete actions to correct the existing shortcomings in transfrontier health care .
The Commission should present a serious proposal in this respect , to include what Parliament is about to approve in the amendments to this report .
Basically it is a question of frontier workers , their family members or their survivors being equally eligible for health benefits in their country of residence and in the country in which they work .
Furthermore , this right should extend to frontier workers when they are retired or not in employment , always being based on their professional activities in their country of employment . That is the only way to achieve a Europe which is diverse yet united , in which borders do not represent any loss of citizens ' rights .
Mr President , Commissioner , every year we hold a debate in Parliament on technical amendments to Regulation No 1408 / 71 .
It is good that we do this , but I think that the main function of these debates is to clarify a number of deeper problems which can no longer be solved by technical amendments and legislation .
I would therefore like to thank the rapporteur , who has tabled a number of amendments which will enable us to debate fundamental problems in relation to cross-border social security matters .
However , I still think that the Council will again not adopt these amendments .
That is actually the crux of this debate .
People appeal to us , as Members of the European Parliament , about their problems all the time , when it is the Member States which could do so much bilaterally .
In the light of this I would like to say something about cross-border health care .
I support Amendment No 3 , Mrs Oomen-Ruijten 's amendment , to give border workers the opportunity to obtain medical care on the territory of the other state concerned as well .
The same goes for Amendment No 4 , which guarantees entitlement to medical care in the Member State where a retired person used to work .
This covers retired workers .
The problem of self-employed people who have worked in a lot of other countries has not been resolved yet .
The Member States of the European Union still think too much in terms of regional care areas based on national criteria .
However , change is unavoidable as the internal market develops .
Care areas need not stop at national borders by definition .
Let me offer my own region as an example .
I live in Zeeland , an area which is cut through by a major river , and services in Belgium are much closer than services in the Netherlands .
I take the view , therefore , that solutions could be found , for example within existing euro-regions .
I think the Commissioner ought to put this point high on the agenda of the Council of Ministers too .
At this time when technological innovation goes hand in hand with increased mobility , and where distance is playing less and less of a role , we need to have the political courage to see cross-border cooperation in health care as an opportunity and not a threat .
The arrival of the euro will accelerate this process as it will make it easier to compare prices between the Member States .
The various Member States will have to create more scope for cross-border health care , including the purchase of medicines abroad .
The fact that I am not alone in this view is already clear from the contributions of my colleagues , but also from the submissions to the Court of Justice in the Becker and Kohl cases .
I am absolutely convinced that we must not continue to wait for another judgment from the Court of Justice , but that the politicians should take the lead in matters of this kind .
The arrival of the euro is precisely the opportunity for us as politicians to take the lead .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I can express my ardent support but briefly here , although I have to say that it is tinged with considerable annoyance .
For here realism really does change to minimalism .
It is clear that students , refugees , unemployed pensioners and those about to retire should be included in the scheme .
It is clear too that civil servants , third country nationals and the self-employed who do not have large amounts of capital behind them should also be included .
Yet , Commissioner , what has to happen before the Council finally looks for a solution to these problems ?
It is not as if we were discussing this issue for the first time .
The single market , ladies and gentlemen , is in a bad way right on the eve of the euro .
I do not know if you have ever had a puppy that has gone romping through the fields - on four legs .
The single market is hobbling badly - and it hurts to watch it - because its fourth leg , the freedom of movement of workers , is lame .
It might not keel over , it can get about on three legs still , but it is painful .
We need to get the single market out of the habit of moving in this way , for it does so at the expense of dependent employment in all its forms .
We have not even begun to address the atypical forms of work that are developing .
And we cannot justify this inaction in a situation in which the single market is being consolidated by the euro .
I believe this is a matter of the utmost urgency , and if something is not done about it soon , then something will certainly happen .
Mr President , the proposal for a Council Regulation , on which the report we are discussing is based , is reasonably and substantially supported by the members of the National Alliance .
We agree on the need to update the Community regulations in question , to take into account the changes in national legislation and several bilateral agreements arranged between the Member States on this subject .
The actual freedom of movement of persons within the EU is one of the principal objectives of the construction of the Community and is sanctioned by the Union treaties . However , this objective has not yet been achieved in full , particularly with regard to the freedom of movement of workers and self-employed persons .
For this purpose , it seems advisable to have a clear and simple framework of reference regulations , a sound basis on which to begin the removal of obstacles and difficulties in the mobility of workers within the EU .
The members of the National Alliance also agree with the amendments included in the report .
Social security beneficiaries should also include students , pensioners and others , providing , of course , adequate resources and insurances for health and maternity .
The essential condition is that persons come under the legislation of one or more Member States and are citizens of one of the Member States , with this condition extending to their families .
Frontier workers should also be entitled to a pension , an income based on the legislation of the Member State in which they have worked .
It is also necessary to regulate the transferability of all pension rights , both those connected with compulsory schemes and those resulting from membership of supplementary schemes .
The latter have continued to develop in size , particularly among the more senior professional workers , who are particularly interested in mobility .
The members of the National Alliance note however that the lack of a European agreement for the protection of workers will lead to industrial firms relocating to regions where the workforce costs less and is less well protected , with the risk that national systems will be brought into line with a lower level of social security and protection .
We are concerned that , while strengthening the prominent positions of the national industrial firms on the market , we will end up ignoring the social themes .
The national governments tend to cut these costs , possibly to be competitive .
If we want to avoid such a dangerous scenario , the EU should play its specific role in the field of social security and protection .
Since we have built an economic and monetary Europe , we have greater reason to establish social standards that can be supported at European level .
Only in that way can we truly maintain the economic and social cohesion of the European Union .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking all those who contributed .
I know how frustrating it can sometimes be for those who constantly referred to the matters that they have approached again this evening .
In particular I wish to thank Mrs Oomen-Ruijten on this matter .
I understand precisely when she says that she has problems on her doorstep dealing with frontier workers .
We are trying to solve them and this is what I propose in that regard .
We welcome the positive attitude of Parliament on this particular proposal , because you share the Commission 's opinion that Regulation 1408 / 71 and , indeed , Regulation 574 / 72 on the coordination of social security schemes need to be updated in the light of changes made in national legislation .
You also agree on the simplification of the reimbursement system for health and maternity insurance as a consequence of the modification of the implementing Regulation 574 / 72 , 1995 .
The Commission also takes note of your concern about the need for a clear and comprehensive statement of the reasons for the future proposals in order to identity their purpose .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten also suggests four amendments .
I wish to deal with them .
The first and the second concern the extension of the personal scope of the regulation in order to include other categories of persons not in active employment .
The Commission has already submitted a proposal to the Council on 13 December 1991 for the extension of Regulations 1408 / 71 and 574 / 42 to all insured persons .
As this proposal is now being actively discussed in the Council , it would not be appropriate to present a new proposal with the very same object at this stage .
As regards the third and fourth amendments , they seek to extend the right to health care to members of the family of a frontier worker and to former frontier workers residing or staying in a Member State other than the competent Member State .
The Commission is very aware of Parliament 's concerns and it shares your view in this matter .
In 1995 it submitted a similar proposal to the Council and that was , unfortunately , rejected .
However , it seems very difficult for the Commission to take on board these amendments in this proposal since the issues dealt with go beyond the scope of the Commission proposal which , of course , is limited in this proposal to updating the current text of the regulations .
However , I should say , and I wish to emphasize this : the Commission supports the ideas expressed by Parliament in its report .
It is the Commission 's intention to include them all in a proposal for a fundamental revision of the regulations which we presented at the end of the year .
The important thing to remember here is that this particular proposal is a purely technical one .
We are talking here about updating the existing regulations .
The changes that are necessary because of case law are because of Member States ' modifications of their own legislation .
We are not talking about new items in this particular proposal but we will be doing it later on in the year , as I say .
In answer to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , I would like to say that there are indeed delays , which are quite frustrating at times , but she must remember that unanimity is required in the Council to deal with these matters , and that it is very difficult to achieve in anything related to social security .
Mrs Oomen-Ruijten asked what the story was about some of the proposals .
Certain Member States are blocking , which prevents us getting unanimity .
Four proposals should be mentioned here .
I am talking about unemployment benefits , that is , the exportation of them .
That is being blocked by two Member States .
Then there is the calculation and exportation of pre-retirement benefits .
The Nordic countries plus one other country are against that .
On the question about civil servants , I would like to say that good progress is being made on that particular proposal - that is one of the proposals for the introduction of these categories into 1408 / 71 . So there is good progress on civil servants .
As far as students and the non-employed are concerned , there is blocking there too by some of the Nordic countries and one other major country .
To Mrs Weiler I would say that I appreciate how important this is so far as the freedom of movement of people is concerned .
But in reply to Mrs Boogerd-Quaak who asked why we do not move ahead of the Court , the answer is that we expect the Court judgments on the two cases pending before the summer .
This will allow us to honour the commitment I am giving here that before the end of the year we will make a proposal covering all these outstanding issues .
But I have to say that the Court is important in this regard .
It determines the limits available to us as regards the interpretation of the Treaty .
So if I made a proposal to the college in advance of what is about to come within the next couple of months , and if I got it wrong , I might have to re-do the whole proposal again once the interpretation of the Court was in place .
So , I would say to the rapporteur and to Members that these are matters to which I give my personal attention .
We are making some progress in some of them .
Unanimity is denying us the progress we would like to make , but once we have cleared this hurdle , we will be able to make a comprehensive proposal other than what is a purely technical matter dealt with this evening by way of this proposal .
Mr President , I can always say to my compatriot that the Commission is aware of the problems we have .
But I think I need to apply the brake a little when I hear the reply you have just given . I agree with the first two amendments , but they were already in our proposal .
Parliament is submitting this motion so that part of your own earlier proposal , which leads to even bigger problems and perhaps may not be accepted , may serve as a helping hand to assist you in extending coverage to students .
That is why I say : think about it again and see if you can come up with a better answer tomorrow before the vote .
Secondly , access to health care .
I think Mrs Boogerd-Quaak knows far more about this than I do , coming as I do from Limburg , because she lives on an island .
It is absolutely essential that you fulfil the promise you made on this point .
Thirdly , civil servants : progress ?
It is actually very simple because there are proceedings before the Court of Justice or the Court has given a judgement .
That is not really progress .
What I would like , and I repeat , is the written info on all these subjects and please tell us which country blocks what kind and what subject of that proposal .
I do not think the Commissioner failed to hear the question .
He probably did not want to answer !
The reason I would like to take just one moment to reply to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten is this : I want her to be absolutely sure about two things .
First of all , the Commissioner and the Commission support your point of view .
That is important to say on the record .
Secondly , we are going to make a proposal .
But this particular proposal here is a technical amendment which is an adjustment in accordance with ongoing amendments that are necessary on a yearly basis .
So this is not the place to do it .
As regards the Member States who are blocking certain of these proposals , I would be pleased to give that information to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.30 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , page 6 of the Minutes clearly contains an error .
What has been recorded is that Mr Rübig asked the President a question about crime in Brussels and about whether this subject has been referred to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
He received the answer that this problem was being taken seriously and that the authorities in Brussels had been informed of it .
But the Brussels ' authorities are not the Committee on the Rules of Procedure .
I merely wanted to ask whether the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities was dealing with the matter as a question of urgency .
We have taken note of this matter and I shall see that it is looked into .

Madam President , I am sure that Mr Gallagher always tables excellent amendments , however yesterday Mr Berthu mentioned my amendments to the Herman report and consequently on page 9 of the Minutes the name Gallagher should be replaced by that of Hager .
Thank you very much . We shall amend the text accordingly .
Madam President , I just wanted to say that I was present at the session yesterday .
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr Poggiolini , you asked to speak on a point of order .
Madam President , going back to what I was trying to say a little while ago , the arrival of spring has given the Italian Members a nasty surprise : flights have been done away with from Rome and Milan , places where the Italian Members used to meet to come to the European Parliament .
Air France has said that the Parliament , the Quaestors and the Presidency are to be blamed for this , as they failed to renew some agreement .
I almost have the impression that , following the judgment of the Court of Luxembourg , there is a desire to punish Members , not just the Italians but the Members in general , as the problem does not just concern Italy .
It is no longer possible to get to Parliament without making incredible journeys from one part of Europe to another .
I would like the Presidency to give us an explanation for this .
Mr Poggiolini , that was not a point of order .
The same opinion was expressed yesterday by Members from other countries .
I believe that we have taken note of this and that the matter will be pursued .
Implementation of the budget and discharge
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0097 / 98 by Mr Elles , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on postponement of the discharge to be given to the Commission in respect of the implementation of the General Budget of the European Communities for the Financial Year 1996 ; -A4-0091 / 98 by Mr Wynn , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on giving discharge to the Commission in respect of the Financial Management of the sixth and seventh European Development Funds for the 1996 financial year ; - ( A4-0094 / 98 ) by Mr Wynn , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the Commission report on the measures taken in response to the comments made in Parliament 's resolution accompanying the decision giving discharge in respect of the General Budget for the Financial Year 1995 ( COM ( 97 ) 0571 - C4-0126 / 98 ) ; -A4-0093 / 98 by Mr Blak , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on giving discharge to the Commission in respect of the Financial Management of the European Coal and Steel Community for the 1996 Financial Year ; -A4-0092 / 98 by Mr Kellett-Bowman , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on the specific annual reports of the Court of Auditors on the financial statements of the decentralised Community Agencies ( OJ C 393 , 29 December 1997 ) - 1996 Discharge Procedure ( including the decisions giving discharge to the Administrative Board of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions ( Dublin ) and to the Management Board of the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training ( Thessaloniki ) in respect of the implementation of their budgets for the 1996 financial year ) .
Mr President , I should like to concentrate for my first five minutes on the follow-up to the 1995 discharge and then move on to the discharge for the EDF for 1996 .
The 1995 discharge asks the Commission , the Court and Parliament to carry out certain actions .
I am glad to say that a lot of those actions have been adhered to and that we have made a lot of progress in the way that discharge will be carried out in the future .
If one looks at the report we can see that there have been and will be improvements to the system from the way the Commission reports to Parliament on its findings .
We gave additional comments through an amendment by Piet Dankert at the committee stage , asking if we can get a better response , hopefully before the summer recess , so that we can take that into consideration before we look at the next year 's budget .
Also , for the first time we have the responses from the Member States , albeit twelve months after they were due .
However , at least we received them . And this time we have already received them from the UK , which is a major achievement .
One would hope that the other fourteen Member States will give us their responses just as quickly .
Of course we do not give discharge to the Member States , we give it to the Commission .
But when we have that information in front of us it helps us to question the Court and the Commission .
As far as the DAS goes , the Court has once again complied with our request about submitting its findings on the activities within the report .
However , referring to Mr Elles ' report , he makes the point : ' If the Treaty of Amsterdam were already in force , the rapporteur would probably no longer in the present situation be able to recommend postponement of the discharge but would be obliged to propose its refusal ' .
We have had this proposal since 1994 when the DAS first came into being .
We found a solution for it then with the correct form of words for the 1994 and the 1995 discharges .
If the Treaty of Amsterdam is going to make things more difficult , I would suggest that the institutions involved - Parliament , Commission , Court of Auditors and Council - get together within a very short space of time to hammer out exactly what we expect from the DAS .
This has been an ongoing debate since 1994 and we need a resolution to it .
I am pretty sure that what Mr Elles says is what I have been saying for the last two years .
If we carry on like this we will never get a positive DAS for the Union 's budget , and that does not look well in the eyes of the taxpayer .
We need to get a solution to this and it will only be done if we get all the institutions together talking about this .
The report also calls upon the Court to bring its annual report forward to the first October session .
I know this causes problems for the Court , but the procedure we have gone through recently does not do justice to the report or to the work of the Court or the work of Parliament .
It is not acceptable that our workload is such that Members of the Court are allocated only two minutes ' speaking time in committee .
If we can bring the process forward it will give us all a lot more time to get into the detail of what we should be discussing .
It will give Members a lot more time to analyse each aspect of the annual report , even though that it may be shorter .
But we need to take that extra time .
If it came forward in the first October part-session , it would also fit in nicely with Parliament 's first reading in the second session in October .
Within the report , I accept that there are situations where we asked the Commission for certain actions and it says that it cannot do better than it is already doing .
That applies to paragraph 8 on action necessary to improve collections and recovery of sums due to the Community .
The Commission lays great stress on SEM 2000 .
Let us hope that it works .
We expect reports on that .
I also need to mention olive oil and cotton .
This has been ongoing since 1994 when I have been doing reports .
I am glad to see that action will be taken in these two sectors and that sooner or later we may get some monies repaid to the Community .
On Amendments Nos 11 , 12 and 13 , on classical swine fever , I will leave that to Mr Mulder , who is a far greater expert on pigs than I am !
But it is a serious issue when it comes to taxpayers ' expenditure .
I have two final points on this report .
Firstly , the Commission 's reply to paragraph 79 of the 1995 discharge resolution does not give the explanation necessary concerning the Berlaymont Building .
I ask the Commission once again to undertake an inquiry to find out where the blame lies for this .
Finally , on this report to the Court of Auditors , we reiterate our request which we voiced in resolutions in 1992 , 1993 and 1995 about information concerning the financial controller 's lack of approval on refusals of visas .
I am sure Mr Friedmann will take that on board .
Concerning the EDFs , things could be worse .
If Mr Elles is actually saying we should refuse discharge for the general budget , it would have been quite easy to get Parliament to accept that we should refuse the EDF budget also because of the arguments put forward over the last two years and the fact that only recently we voted in this Parliament not to give an opinion on the new financial regulation for the eighth EDF funds .
The reason is because of the arguments we have about our role within the European Development Fund .
The situation is that we have responsibility without authority .
We are supposed to monitor the spending of those appropriations without having any authority to do anything about them .
We have no way of influencing that spending ; all we can do is give a discharge at the end of the day .
The easiest thing , following the Court of Justice ruling , is to say : we are having nothing to do with this ; if the Commission and the Council want a discharge , then they can go ahead and give it ; we are not going to give it .

However , on reflection , that would be rather childish .
We have to accept that Parliament has a role in this and we have to say that we want to see the EDF budgetized .
That is our aim , that is what we wished had come out of Amsterdam , knowing full well that it probably would not .
Until the EDF is budgetized , Parliament will have a great problem in its role , especially in giving discharge .
Therefore , as I have said , we would expect the EDF to be budgetized some time in the future - we have the support of the Commission on this - and the Council should reconsider and realize that it would be far better administered through the general budget .
The choice has not been easy but , at the end of the day , the committee 's recommendation to Parliament that discharge should be given is probably the right one .
However , there are three points to raise in this connection .
First of all , the advance payments to the eighth EDF .
According to the report , the Court states quite clearly that payments are being made from the sixth and seventh EDFs to the eighth without a legal base .
The Commission does not contest this .
We get rather annoyed when the Council tells us that lines cannot be implemented because there is no legal base .
Yet here we have a blatant contradiction of that argument , where money is being spent without anything resembling a legal base .
On those grounds alone , we could have said that we are not giving discharge to this report , but we are not doing that because we accept the practicalities of trying to get money to ACP countries .
So I ask the Council and the Commission to take on board that we are not best pleased about this , to say the least , but we would expect the situation to be ratified in the near future .
I have to say to the President-in-Office that it is rather surprising that there is no mention of this in the Council opinion .
The Council 's report on the general budget was wonderful but this issue was not mentioned .
On the tendering procedures , there are several things stated within the report and in my opinion , especially on quality control of tendering procedures and the hard currency payments .
We ask the Court to keep an eye on this , and we ask the Commission to make sure the tenders are correct in the future .
Finally , on the DAS , it is good to see a positive DAS but there is one part where 4.5 % of payment transactions could not be assessed because of material obstacles .
That needs to be looked at , even if it is only a small amount .
I am sure we can get over those obstacles in future .
Mr President , we move from discharges concerning large funds of money to two decentralized agencies which are very transparent in that they are dealing with much smaller sums of money .
May I thank the services for finally getting the details of this agenda item correct .
We are dealing with the discharge for the administrative board of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions which is in Dublin and the management board of the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training , known as CEDEFOP , in Thessaloniki .
In preparing this report the Committee on Budgetary Control has had the advantage of reports from the Court of Auditors , for which I thank the President , and two very fulsome reports from the Council recommending us to give discharge .
May I say in the presence of the Council thank you because in past years they have arrived very late and have been rather superficial ; this year is much more helpful .
We are also helped by an opinion from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
May I first deal with Dublin because I am getting a bit fed up with one aspect of Dublin .
The financial regulations , both a general one for the Community and the one concerning this agency , require correct division of powers between authorizing officers , financial controllers and accounting officers and still the Court is reporting to us that Dublin has not got it right .
If the Court reports next time that it is not right , I fancy that we shall not be recommending discharge for the 1997 year .
When the new agencies , the second generation , were set , up the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control were very wary of the potential overlap between what the various agencies were to do .
We have to specify here that there is an overlap between the Foundation in Dublin and the European Agency for Health and Safety and we must keep them separate .
We cannot have a duplication of work .
The Dublin Foundation has had a good 1996 and if it gets these details right there is no problem as far as discharge is concerned and we are very happy to recommend discharge for the 1996 year .
CEDEFOP in Thessaloniki have had a rough time .
They were transferred from Berlin to Thessaloniki and into temporary premises .
There were difficulties with staff not prepared to move away from Berlin for family and other reasons and they were understaffed .
There was a time when we thought there was a possibility that CEDEFOP might go under , but thanks to the director who resolutely got on with the task they are now carrying out fully their responsibilities .
The Court has drawn attention to the fact that they are not following the financial regulations strictly in obtaining tenders for projects in the research field .
The Court also points out that we still have problems with the contract for the new building which is a unique type of contract in my experience and has got to be watched closely .
Of course , in vacating the temporary premises we must make sure that financial details are covered properly .
Now that CEDEFOP is fully operational I hope that their budget provisions , their forecasts and everything to do with the running of the agency will be more smoothly presented , because the Court has some difficulty with the irregular transfers of money to CEDEFOP .
This is a point which is raised from time to time by the Court because of the difficulty of operating an agency so far from Brussels .
Again , the committee recommends to Parliament that we grant discharge .
In this report there are therefore two discharge recommendations : one for Dublin and one for Thessaloniki .

I now turn to Mr Elles ' report where Mr Tomlinson and I have put in a working document in connection with fraud in the transit system .
This subject has occupied a lot of European Parliament time .
The Committee of Inquiry reported in March last year , after a year 's intensive work .
Mrs Wemheuer 's report recently secured a very satisfactory response from the Commission .
Mr De Luca 's report also covered the special report from the Court of Auditors on the subject .
It would be churlish of us not to recognize that the Commission has made a great deal of progress .
There is new legislation being put in place and there are new rules for dealing with transit matters .
I have had reports from users of the system of an improved devotion to duty on the part of customs officials - morale has gone up .
I believe that when reports are submitted to us we shall find that far less money than that which we said was being lost in the transit system is being lost now .
There remain the outstanding debts .
That is a very difficult situation for the customs services and for the Commission , because the rules do not permit the Commission to remit any of these outstanding debts .
They are a matter for separate negotiation by the individual customs authorities with the carriers and freight forwarders themselves .
I hope that those debt burdens will not continue for much longer because they must be putting some of those companies very much at risk .
However , the proposed computerization of the transit system is now three years away when it should be only about 18 months away .
This we do not like .
It is all the more disappointing since the computerization was proposed and planned long before the inquiry first sat .
Nevertheless , we are falling seriously behind .
I do not blame the Commission entirely because five states volunteered to enter the first phase and they are falling behind as well .
It is important that Mr Elles should use this delay as one of the reasons for recommending deferral of the discharge for 1996 .
Madam President , Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I shall probably not need my full three minutes , Madam President , for I am somewhat pressed for time since I currently have an important group meeting in the House .
In its annual report on the 1996 financial year in respect of the agriculture sector , the Court of Auditors touches on several areas in which irregularities have been discovered .
These include the cultivated-plant compensation scheme , livestock premiums and the organization of the tobacco and wine markets .
I do not wish to go into the abuses mentioned in the report in any detail , but would merely point out that a lot needs to be done in order to eliminate , or at least check , the misuse of those funds which have been allocated to the agriculture sector .
The citizens of the European Union naturally expect these resources to be used efficiently for the purpose for which they were intended and moreover they expect that the process can be audited at any time .
I support the proposal to postpone the discharge .
EU agricultural expenditure tends to be more in the forefront of people 's minds when funds are running low .
We have in recent months had repeated debates on individual areas of expenditure .
There are still production sectors which suffer from severe public criticism , even when EU funds are used in a proper manner .
When these sectors are also the subject of irregularities , it is no wonder that serious questions are asked about agricultural spending .
In future it will not only be market-organization expenditure which will have to pass scrutiny , but also and increasingly the integrated administration and audit system .
Here I would just like to recall to Members ' attention the cattle registration and beef labelling schemes , which are designed in the long run to win back consumer confidence .
Any irregularities here would have devastating consequences , in my opinion , and would without doubt throw into question the sense and purpose of the whole system .
For this reason the Commission is also called upon to draw the necessary conclusions from the abuses highlighted by the Court of Auditors .
The impending reform of the CAP gives us all the opportunity to draw up regulations which are more transparent and less susceptible to irregularities . This is a real chance for Agenda 2000 , which should not be missed .
This also applies to the whole BSE issue , which has still to be fully resolved , and to the various problem areas indicated by the Committee of Inquiry .
I therefore refer in particular to the conclusions , where action is also called for .
Madam President , in the opinion approved by the Committee on Regional Policy , it has been brought to light that , for all the sections relating to the Structural Funds , the year 1996 has been a turning-point in the commitment of allocations .
From this point of view , we must be pleased as all the allocations initially provided for have been committed , not just those for 1996 , but also those for 1994 reincorporated into the budget .
However , in our committee 's opinion , the same optimism cannot exist for the closure of the programmes .
Many programmes in the period prior to 1994 remain open , with the main problem being the large number of programmes , rather than the amount of the resources .
The Committee on Regional Policy points to a total lack of assessment of the impact of the measures and funds on small and medium-sized businesses , a question which has already been brought to light and which I believe is very important as the Luxembourg Council attaches great importance to this sector .
Finally , it is the third time that the Court of Auditors is using the statement of assurance for this part of the budget .
It might be useful if the Court were to add a clarification on the concepts of formal and substantial errors , irregularities , illegalities and fraud .
I think this explanation will be very useful , not just for our committee and for the sector we are dealing with , but for the entire budget .
Madam President , I wish to begin by thanking you for the chance to present the recommendation of the Council regarding discharge to the Commission in respect of its implementation of the budget for the financial year 1996 .
I am also very pleased to have been able to attend earlier this month a session of the Committee on Budgetary Control , and I thank Mr Elles for his kind words .
The discussion we had there on the Court of Auditors ' report and the discharge recommendation was of considerable importance to all the parties involved .
I appreciate the important work done by all the rapporteurs , who are prepared to devote their time to ensuring that taxpayers ' money is safe .
The reason I attended that meeting , and the reason I am here today , is because the Council makes a recommendation on discharge which it regards as very important .
But it is Parliament , and Parliament alone , which , acting on that recommendation , has the responsibility for granting discharge .
As you know , on 9 March the Council decided to recommend that Parliament grant discharge to the Commission for the management of the Community budget for 1996 .
That recommendation is the result of lengthy and serious discussion by the Council , during which a number of areas of concern were highlighted .
The action that the Council would like to see taken on these areas is set out in the comments accompanying the discharge recommendation .
The view of the Council is that to gain significant improvements is to focus on the future and apply the lessons learnt from the report .
To achieve this there is a need for cooperation between the Commission and the bodies , including the Member States .
It is the Commission which is responsible for executing the budget but real progress can only be made if everyone who handles Community funds takes their share of responsibility for achieving the highest standards of financial management .
It is for this reason that the President of the Council has written to the President of the Economic and Social Committee to stress the Council 's concern over the audit of the travel claims of the committee .
Both the Council and the European Parliament are determined that financial management of the Community budget must be improved .
The annual report of the European Court of Auditors is a very valuable tool to help us achieve this , and we must use it to the full .
We may have very different approaches as to how we wish to use these opportunities to the best advantage but I know that we share a common goal of achieving improvement - significant improvement at that - in the management of the Community budget .
From the comments accompanying the Council 's recommendation on discharge , you will see that we consider that it is particularly important to focus on the lessons for the future at a time , such as now , when the Union is considering policy reforms in key areas , in particular the common agricultural policy and the Structural Funds .
The enlargement process will make this even more important .
Another key lesson from the report is the need to make sure that Community expenditure is actually achieving results .
We must ensure that taxpayers ' money is properly spent and accounted for but we also need to ensure that it is being used in the most effective way possible to achieve our policy aims .
For this to happen , the Community needs to assess its needs and priorities rigorously , it needs to legislate clearly , to monitor progress and to evaluate results .
We need a system that tells us not just that money has been spent and all the proper procedures have been gone through but also what the impact of the expenditure is and what has really been achieved with the taxpayers ' money .
The Council 's comments have highlighted areas where there is a need to focus more on objectives and on the evaluation of results .
The Council is extremely concerned by the excessively high incidence of errors which the Court found when it did work on the statement of assurance .
The Court estimate of substantive errors is barely changed from what it was last year .
The Council considers this unacceptable .
The comments contain a clear statement about the need for reform .
It is happening that there is some indication that the level of errors for the EAGGF Guarantee Section is lower than the average for the budget as a whole , but for the Structural Funds it is higher and this high rate of errors is a cause for grave concern .
You may then ask why , having said that , the Council is recommending that Parliament grants discharge .
The reason is , as I have already indicated , that the Council believes progress will only be made if there is cooperation between the different parties who have involvement in handling Community funds and if they all accept their responsibility for achieving the highest standards of financial management .
The Council is facing up to its responsibilities for ensuring that reform is carried through by working in cooperation with the Commission to achieve this .
As already mentioned , the Commission has made great efforts through the SEM 2000 initiative to improve both its internal financial management and its cooperation with Member States .
These measures are beginning to show results and we will continue to monitor progress closely .
The Commission has also generally responded to the observations of the Court constructively .
In a number of cases , measures have already been taken on recovery of misspent money , on reducing the level of advances and on eliminating dormant commitments .
The Commission 's undertaking to submit a proposal on reform of the financial regulation to make this clearer and more appropriate to current circumstances is also a useful move forward towards better financial management .
The Commission is taking measures , but more needs to be done .
I know from the discussions in the Committee on Budgetary Control that Parliament is particularly concerned by lack of progress in certain areas .
These are real concerns which , as you will see from the comments on the recommendation , the Council shares in many cases .
Taking one of the committee 's main concerns - strengthening the fight against fraud inside the European institutions - you will see that the Council has called for all institutions to authorize UCLAF to carry out inquiries in appropriate cases .
The presidency is looking forward to the Court 's forthcoming special report on the functioning of UCLAF .
The Council also shares Parliament 's concern that measures to support SMEs should be more accessible and the results more visible .
Procedures for getting aid to SMEs , the intended beneficiaries , need to be rationalized and simplified .
The Council welcomes the fact that , in December 1997 , the Commission launched an assessment of the impact of the Structural Funds on the SMEs and has requested that the outcome be communicated both to the Council and Parliament .
The Council has also commented on weaknesses in the Commission 's management of external aid .
The Council has stressed the importance of improving budgetary implementation of both PHARE and TACIS .
The PHARE programme is particularly important in the context of preparation of the beneficiary countries for accession .
The Council has called on the Commission to take account of experience acquired in the evaluations aiming to improve these programmes .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has criticized the Commission for the slowness of progress with measures to update the Community transit system , particularly the computerization project which we have heard about this morning from Mr KellettBowman .
The Council agrees with Parliament that modernization of the transit system is essential .
There should be cooperation , not confrontation , on this difficult project .
No-one realistically expected the wholesale reform of transit to be completed within twelve months , but significant progress has been made in improving customs control measures .
I wish to take this opportunity to pay particular tribute to Mr Tomlinson and Mr Kellett-Bowman for their excellent work on this subject .
There has also been steady progress in agreeing the legislative changes that are needed .
Reflecting the priority given to this matter under the UK presidency , the Council has broadly agreed the legal changes needed to pave the way for more detailed reform of the system .
Further discussion in the Council has been deferred pending receipt of Parliament 's opinion on the Commission proposals .
As Mr Kellett-Bowman has said , it is disappointing that the transit computerization project has suffered delays , in part because of the complexity of the project and the way it was underestimated by the Commission .
However , the Commission has given its assurance that the project is now under proper management control , and I am confident that Member States will support the project through to its implementation .
Similarly , setting up the integrated administration and control system was a major technical and administrative task involving considerable investment and administrative reorganization .
Member States and the Commission have cooperated to implement the system as quickly as possible and good progress has been made in many areas .
The Council would like the system to be fully implemented in 1998 and has asked Member States to ensure that checks conducted by IACS are fully operational and comply with the principles of sound financial management .
The Council has made it clear in its comments that it expects the Commission to improve its performance in all of these areas where serious weaknesses have been identified , but progress requires increased efforts and greater vigilance on the part of all the Community 's institutions .
The Council has recommended that discharge be granted and has invited Member States to work with the Commission to ensure that the lessons drawn from the report are acted on and , where changes need to be made now , they are made .
Where there are lessons for the future , they need to be fed into the policy-making process .
From the Council 's perspective , this is the most constructive way forward and it is on this basis that the Council recommends to Parliament that discharge should be granted to the Commission for the 1996 financial year .
Madam President , your rapporteur , Mr Elles , proposes deferring the decision for discharge to September , and has asked the Commission to take a series of measures between now and then relating to the Commission 's various fields of activity .
The Commission has taken note of the report in question .
It will do all in its power to comply with the wishes of Parliament .
A certain number of indications on the major points raised by Mr Elles may , however , already be given .
With regard to the fight against fraud , my colleague , Mrs Gradin , last week sent a letter to Mrs Theato specifying the procedures under which information on internal investigations for the Commission could be made available to you .
Furthermore , as stated in the document that the Commission sent you on 18 November 1997 , on improving the fight against fraud and corruption , UCLAF will make the necessary contact with the national legal authorities in case of suspicion of fraud or corruption .
As regards UCLAF authorization by all the European institutions in the pursuit of its enquiries , the Commission is looking at measures relating to the consolidation of the powers and of the mandate of UCLAF within the Commission to ensure its independence .
UCLAF procedures giving the best possible assistance to other institutions confronted with fraud enquiries will therefore be more closely specified .
As regards the basis of the enquiry on the transit system , the Commission has had to change its approach on the new computerized transit system , the NCTS , because of its complexity , which made it too difficult to manage .
The report scheduled for September will outline the state of progress .
We hope that the project will be able to work with five Member States before the end of 1999 , but there have been many difficulties , as you know .
In the agricultural sector , in accordance with the resolution of this House of 18 April 1996 , the Commission has now strengthened the audit unit ( unité apurement des comptes ) by 15 members .
It will also be submitting a composite report on the introduction of the integrated financial control system , and will draw the requisite financial conclusions of any inappropriate operations .
As regards the SMEs , the Commission has launched an overall assessment , the final result of which should be available towards the end of the year .
In the external policy field , the Commission has proposed a review of the regulations on reconstruction aid in the former Yugoslavia , and will strengthen its delegation in Sarajevo .
These are measures which take into account the severe criticism expressed by this Parliament and the Parliamentary delegation which went to Bosnia recently .
Furthermore , the Commission will submit a proposal for a new regulation aimed at creating a unified framework for budgets and procedures .
As regards the decentralization of PHARE activities , the Commission is actively pursuing its consideration of the possibilities , but believes that the complete transfer of the national programme as a whole requires a little bit more time , and will probably not be possible until 1999 .
It should be emphasized , furthermore , that on 15 October 1997 the Commission decided to set up a common management service for Community assistance to third countries .
This is an important step toward harmonization , rationalization and transparency in tender procedures , contract award and in the general manner of operating .
This new service will continue the process of decentralization which is already under way .
As regard the audits by the Court of Auditors on the activities of the European Investment Fund , the Commission has always undertaken to respect the Court 's right to audit , while respecting the competencies of each of the institutions and bodies concerned .
It will propose a new meeting with the Court for the purpose of reaching an agreement on this issue .
In the field of administrative and budget management , the Commission has undertaken a vast programme of internal reform .
Four major sites have been opened up to this effect .
Launched in 1995 , the SEM 2000 initiative has provided the foundations and instruments to build up healthy financial management .
The MAP 2000 project complements this in the personnel and administrative field .
Adopted in 1997 , it sets out a framework for modernizing the running of the Commission , based on the principles of decentralization , simplification and rationalization .
In parallel , the Commission has undertaken an in-depth study of its activities and resources .
The results will serve as the basis for a reorganization of the portfolios and the structure of services for the next Commission .
Finally , the Commission is now dealing with the difficult question of the linguistic implications of the forthcoming enlargements .
Mr Elles , in his resolution , has included the European Parliament resolutions relating to tourism , ECHO , PHARE and the MED programmes , following to the various special reports of the Court .
These reports have already been discussed at length , and it would serve no purpose for me to return to them .
The Commission will , of course , respect the content of these resolutions .
Madam President , I believe we are on the right track , and I have no doubt that in September the Commission will be able to present the elements that will allow you to definitely give discharge for the 1996 financial year .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , some time ago the media presented a report which worried a lot of people , gave rise to a number of jokes and became a real talking point .
The story was not about the European Commission nor about Parliament .
A major German-based car manufacturer had carried out trials on a new model , which had reportedly overturned during testing .
What did the manufacturer do ?
It re-designed the car and restored customer confidence .
If the Commission had been this same manufacturer , it would have said : " let us first carry out an internal investigation to establish whether the car actually existed and whether or not there were any moose in the area at the time ' .
Years later - and by this time the company 's shares would have fallen through the floor - we would probably have received a report stating that , while there were moose around , it could not be said with any certainty that a moose had personally been involved in the car overturning .
In the meantime , the Commission would probably have improved the car anyway , but would have said nothing to anyone about this .
On a more serious note , much of what we are debating today has been discussed before on numerous occasions .
Almost everything which the rapporteur , Mr Elles , writes in his report , and which I can support on behalf of my group - in other words , all parts of the report - , are points which we have often expressed .
The question of why we are now postponing the discharge is an obvious one , since much of what is addressed there could well have been said at any time during the past 12 months .
Many of the new issues involved may well have been present a year ago in a different form .
We could just as easily have got together and said " discharge with critical comments or postponement of discharge ' .
The difference is a matter of degree .
What does this reveal ?
It reveals a loss in confidence .
Not only a loss in confidence between a few Members of the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Commission .
We possibly still have much more confidence in you than others do .
But it reveals a loss in confidence in European institutions - and not only in this House but with the public at large .
This is a major problem .
I do not think that we can solve it by postponing the discharge , but perhaps we can use this to illustrate what is wrong .
Reports will be appearing this week in the media , or may already have appeared , on the subject of Europe - and not on the discharge or on the granting or postponement of the discharge .
These European themes include enlargement , monetary union and everything connected with the concept of Agenda 2000 .
If we want to achieve all these things - and we really want to - then the face of Europe will be dramatically changed in the years to come .
We want this change - and here I am speaking both to the Council and to the Commission .
We want this change and we want to be involved in bringing it about .
But it can only function if the citizens of Europe put their trust in the Union and its institutions : if they feel they are based on clarity and transparency , that there is democratic accountability and that Parliament is not just there to make comments now and again , but is in real dialogue with the Commission - which by this means and this means alone is subject to democratic accountability .
This is the fundamental problem and I believe that it is the reason for postponing the discharge , in order to make it clear that improvements have to be made - and not only in our personal relations , for I do not think that the situation here is as bad as all that , but rather in terms of the external impact involved .
I would like to illustrate this by means of an example , since this has already been touched on by almost every other speaker in one form or another .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I address my remarks specifically to you .
The criticism which has been made of the computerization of the transit system is not to do with the fact that it is a very difficult subject , or that it is a complex process which has lasted longer than was foreseen .
We all know that this sort of thing can happen at any time .
No , Madam President-inOffice , ladies and gentlemen of the Commission , we are talking about something quite different . The call for computerization was the central demand of the first Committee of Inquiry set up by this Parliament .
The Commission 's undertaking to do this and to make this the central issue has contributed significantly to the fact that in our final report our dealings with the Commission were actually quite harmonious and resulted in a well-balanced report with well-balanced demands , rather than simply succumbing to directing criticism at the Commission .
You met us half-way and you proposed a plan as to how to proceed further .
We know that the unexpected can always happen .
But why did you fail to inform us ?
You drew up a timetable and you then confirmed it at a time when you already knew that it could not be met .
That is where the mistrust lies .
You informed us that there was to be a delay , but you told us too little , too late and only after repeated inquiry , and I would like to know why .
Hence the misgivings on our part .
It was not that nothing could have happened to delay such a complex project .
We can well appreciate that .
In spite of everything , we still live in the real world and know that things can go wrong , that problems can arise and that sometimes it is not possible to keep to schedule .
But the point I am making is the fact that you again failed to keep us informed ; that is where the confidence building comes in .
This is the key point .
And for that reason this issue perhaps affected us much more than any of the others .
Then there is the integrated control system .
How often have we discussed this subject ?
Deadlines were set and then extended and all the time we were told " we are on the way , we will have an impact on the Member States , we will get results ' .
We are quite ready to believe this , but I want to know why are we still standing here making the same demands as before - only this time things are worse .
The situation itself is not worse - what is worse is the fact that we are not going to believe what you tell us .
This is indeed a dramatic turn of events .
A final point , which Mr Elles did not mention , is one which was introduced through amendments tabled by Mr Bourlanges .
This concerns staff policy .
Here too it can be said that much of what has been criticized in other points , such as the implementation of the programmes and so on , is still connected with the fact that the Commission tells us that we do not have enough staff , that we have bottlenecks and so on .
We accept that .
But at some point there has to be a plan on the table , there must be transparency .
When we are told that there are still efficiency reserves , that restructuring could be introduced , then we have to know how big these reserves are , when they are to be mobilized and how .
If the Commission really believes that we cannot enter the new millennium with many more Member States and an increasing number of duties to perform , since the reserves must run out sooner or later , then it must tell us this and demonstrate it in a plausible manner .
It simply will not do for the Commission to say , when it comes to each and every little programme , that we have five people missing here , three people missing there and maybe even twenty people missing somewhere else .
This is why we engaged some company or other to sort out the problem .
Later , years later - as was always the case when we put our minds to it - this company tells us " that really was the reason , but we are on the right road ' .
Yes , I really do think that we are on the right road , but we should be doing more than just showing that we are on the right road , we should be doing it in such a way that people can believe us .
I shall say one more thing and this will be my final word on the subject . The European Union has an institution which is responsible for , and which can influence , the people 's trust in the Commission - and that institution is the European Parliament .
If you fail to convince us , or if you do not win or regain our trust , then no-one in this European Union will trust you in the future , for you yourselves cannot be voted in or out of office .
We are the middle-men , we are the democratically elected body .
We need a strong Commission for the future and we need a strong Parliament too .
But this Parliament needs a Commission which it can work with and to which it can say " Yes , we can confirm that and give it our full and unreserved support ' .
Madam President , in preparing the discharge to be given to the Commission in respect of the 1996 financial year , we had a pleasing new experience .
For the first time the Council complied with a request which Parliament had been making for many years by submitting in good time its position on the discharge , with the result that a detailed debate could be held in the company of the President-in-Office of the Council prior to the vote being taken in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
For this we should like to express our thanks to Council Minister Liddell .
As far as the actual discharge for 1996 itself is concerned , things seem less than promising .
In the excellent report which was adopted unanimously in the Committee on Budgetary Control , and for which I would like to offer my sincere congratulations to the rapporteur , Mr Elles , a proposal is made to postpone the discharge and , I believe , justly so .
On the basis of the report submitted by the Court of Auditors , for which we again express our thanks to the President , Professor Friedman , who is present here today , and to all members of the Court , and on the basis of in-depth information and discussions with the Court and with the Commission , the rapporteur lists five important reasons which justify postponing the discharge .
Then we also have the negative findings of the statement of assurance , which the Court of Auditors delivered particularly in respect of the Structural Funds , while its assessment of the agricultural sector was somewhat more encouraging .
There is still a period of grace for assessing the DAS , but once the Amsterdam Treaty has been ratified , Parliament is obliged to incorporate its results fully into the discharge .
I fully agree with the comments made here by Mr Wynn , that our various institutions should first discuss how we should handle the DAS in future , how this is to be set up and how this is to be used .
As far as I know we have never before had such a large number of grounds for postponement .
Does this prove that the deficiencies in implementing the budget are on the increase ?
What it does prove , however , is that Parliament in its supervisory role condemns these deficiencies and insists that they be eradicated .
If the Commission fails to comply with our demands before the September 1998 deadline , then the refusal to give discharge could ultimately remain in place , and this would be followed by a vote of noconfidence and the subsequent dismissal of the Commission .
But we should not make threats . The rapporteur is quite specific about this and I agree with him .
Our approach is , on the contrary , a constructive one .
By highlighting the weaknesses and by urging that these be effectively overcome , we are in fact contributing to the efficient and rational use of budgetary funds and are helping to build public confidence in Europe and in its institutions .
If we examine the individual points of criticism contained in the present resolution , then it becomes clear that the present Commission can no longer plead that these deficiencies were the fault of its predecessors .
It has been in office long enough to have brought in the necessary improvements .
This applies equally to the transit procedure , where little progress has been made towards the introduction of computerization - though the Commission itself considered this a priority matter - and to the elimination of mismanagement and fraud , as attested by the deficient administration of the PHARE , TACIS and MED programmes . I will say nothing here about events in the tourism sector .
The grievance often expressed concerning the failure to carry through the integrated control system for agricultural spending is in this respect just as significant as the inefficiency in promoting SMEs .
As far as UCLAF is concerned , I am pleased to see that what is being said is very much in keeping with what Parliament has been aiming at for many years .
I freely admit that the Commission has been making efforts to move towards our demands , especially in recent months , and I agree with Mrs Gradin , with you Mr Liikanen and with Mr van den Broek , that we should gradually reduce our catalogue of complaints .
But this must be done by September , and so I would ask that you give us clear-cut answers to clearcut questions .
This is also something which applies to your officials .
Long-winded explanations in unintelligible language obscure more than they clarify .
In conclusion , let me offer the Commission some advice : do not confuse Mr Elles ' statement that " the auditor is a watchdog not a bloodhound ' with the saying " his bark is worse than his bite ' .
In closing , allow me to express my thanks and recognition to the rapporteurs , Mr Wynn , Mr Blak and Mr Kellett-Bowman .

They have done an excellent job and their reports have been unanimously adopted by the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I recommend this to the House .
Madam President , the question of how seriously the European Commission is taking this Parliament is central to this debate to our group . This is particularly relevant when we are talking about the Wynn report on the follow-up to the 1995 discharge , and the Elles report on the 1996 discharge .
It has already been said by previous speakers , and I agree that the Commission should take this Parliament very seriously .
This is good for public opinion , and it might also be good for the Commission itself .
I will just say a brief word about the Wynn report .
He was right ; I will discuss swine fever .
What is the current system ?
If there is an outbreak of swine fever somewhere in Europe , the European Union will pay 50 % to 70 % .
The remainder has to be found from the national Treasury .
Different countries have different systems .
In some countries the farmers are wholly responsible , in others the government pays .
My question to the Commission is : is this not a clear case of unfair competition ?
Should something not be done about it ?
Is it not an indirect state subsidy when the government pays for everything ?
My second question is : should the system not be judged on risk ?
The interested parties should make a bigger contribution when they might pose a high risk by the system they use .
My group can largely endorse the Elles report .
It is necessary , particularly in view of Agenda 2000 , that the integrated monitoring system for income support is perfected .
If we are to extend this system , it has to work well .
My group will therefore vote in favour of the Elles report .
We hope that , before 15 September this year , the Commission will have presented sufficient arguments to convince Parliament that it should grant discharge after all .
Madam President , Mr Liikanen , ladies and gentlemen , at the end of December 1995 the budgetary procedure made substantial funds available for reconstruction in the former Yugoslavia .
Since then I and some of my colleagues , and in particular Mr Giansily , have been looking into why the Commission is finding it so difficult to implement these funds effectively and quickly - after all they are supposed to constitute an immediate aid to reconstruction - and to get them to where they are needed .
My advice , based on what we are doing in the discharge procedure , is as follows : continue to appeal to the Commission to do better , to create a better legal basis , to listen less to the Council and not to be blackmailed by it - for the Council too has played its part in events here .
For a long time this approach failed to have any effect until we brought some real pressure to bear - and this was in the form of the reserve which we provided under the last budget procedure .
This year some ECU 30 million will not be allocated for Bosnia unless the situation noticeably improves through the summer .
We need a proper legal basis for implementing all budget lines thoroughly , quickly and effectively , that is to say we require thorough , effective and well-trained personnel to be present on the spot and , most importantly , we need a decentralized decision-making process - and this is something which is still clearly giving the Commission considerable cause for concern .
We have been reliably informed by the delegation out there that the decision-making processes operated from Brussels , where no-one knows the real situation on the ground and where files are just moved from one desk to another , cannot cope with the task in hand , and that people there cannot reconstruct their parliament or their schools because of some blockage or other at the Brussels end .
This situation simply cannot be allowed to continue .
The pressure brought to bear by the reserve has meant that new proposals are again being submitted , and that is why the postponement of the discharge is so important . I have learned a lesson from all this , namely that the Commission ultimately responds to pressure
The Commission has often said " yes , we too have read the report from the Court of Auditors and now everything is better ' .
This time we really want to be convinced that the Commission has learned something , that it is now prepared to improve its own management structures and that it is ready to make amends for the political damage inflicted on us by the Bosnian affair .
The question which arises is not just whether taxpayers ' money is being used to good effect , but as far as Bosnia is concerned , centres on the public image being presented by the European Union .
Why are the Americans better at these things ?
They are not better people , after all .
Nor are their officials any better or worse than our own .
But they do have a clear strategic notion of what is important and they have effective machinery .
When it comes to Bosnia , we could do worse than learn from the Americans .
I would ask the Commission , and in this case Mr Liikanen , urgently to take note of the fact that Bosnia is not the only problem .
My belief is that the Commission also has a problem with DG IA .
We naturally discharge the Commission as a collective body , but as this collective body is able to take part in today 's debate , it must be capable of amending its internal structures in such a way that when something nasty occurs in a certain area , then there is a mechanism for putting this right internally .
I am sure that Mr Liikanen and Mr Santer will make good use of the time between now and 15 September to focus on this matter .
Parliament will then be in a position to deal with you in quite a different way .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too support and agree with what has been said so far .
It is a somewhat difficult exercise for Parliament to have to say how the taxpayers ' money , the public money , the money we are called upon to use properly - with the European Parliament being first in line to do so - is the subject of this type of application , which is certainly not inspired by any criteria of healthy financial management , which the Treaty lays down as an obligation .
I am referring to one section in particular , that of foreign measures , in the context of which the image of the Union should be irreproachable and something of a " buttonhole ' with regard to third countries .
However , apart from the emergency humanitarian aid distributed by ECHO , it seems to me that , for all the other items of expenditure , what is intolerable is not just the accumulated delays but also , unfortunately , the discrepancies in every budget heading .
Every one of us has direct experience of fair , objective and irreproachable complaints made by operators , by NGOs or by other bodies who work in the field and who have to wait 18-24 months for payment , after an undertaking has been assumed and signed by the Commission .
These things are beyond any logic and understanding of our Members .
Many of us on the Committee on Budgets fail to understand , for example , the reason why certain budget lines are so late : one which comes to mind is that ECU 150 million of late payments have accumulated over six years .
These figures cannot fail to lead Parliament to take appropriate measures .
I become concerned when I hear people talking about initiatives in the personnel policy aimed at scorning in any way the European civil service with proposals such as that of limiting senior jobs to five years , plus five non-renewable years .
The basic problem , Commissioner Liikanen , should be treated with an overall approach , which should , first and foremost , make the point on what we want as a personnel policy and as a European civil service and what this should be .
This European public function should be assessed , reforming it where it is lacking , but also praising what was always , at least until a few years ago , a task that was taken on with a spirit of sacrifice and service .
However , although the aim is to renationalize everything , it is clear that the results in the field can only depend on what is expected of the European public function .
Mr President , for the third time , the Court of Auditors has refused to give an overall positive assurance on the legality and regularity of payments made by the Commission .
Hence our rapporteur 's statement that , if faced with a similar verdict from an auditor , the members of the board of a multinational company would probably have to immediately resign .
This time , unlike in 1994 / 1995 , the Committee on Budgetary Control proposes that we consider that the trust laid upon the Commission by the Parliament no longer be granted .
The Commission has now been at work for three years ; as soon as it came into office , it announced its determination to establish rigorous action to improve financial management . It now no longer deserves indulgence .
Speaking for my group , I am glad to see increasing concern on the part of the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control with regard to the situation of the Community finances , which is more than worrying . I approve the reasons set out in this report , arguing for the postponement of discharge .
How can we do otherwise , if we remember the two resolutions adopted by this House , the first relating to the MED programme - which had emphasized the serious irregularities committed by the Commission - and the second , much more recently , relating to allegations of fraud and irregularities in the tourism sector ?
I therefore hope - like many speakers - that the firmness of the rapporteur will not go unnoticed , and that if the Commission fails to give a concrete response to the demands set out in the resolution , a vote of no confidence will effectively be passed , so that our good intentions are not short-lived . This should prove that sweet words from the Commission are not enough to cajole the majority of our Parliament into giving it a discharge .
The watchdogs mentioned by Mr Elles in his report - and I note he has already left - need to be more like bloodhounds than like poodles .
If not , the taxpayers in the Member States would simply continue to be taken for a ride .
I conclude , Mr President - your predecessor was only too happy to give extra time to other speakers - by saying that with regard to the Wynn report , let us , please , spare the EDF , as this is the only body which has received a positive statement on the part of the Commission .
It is not in the budget . It is under the control of the Member States .
Let it remain there .
Mr President , I would like to address my remarks primarily to Mr Kellett-Bowman 's report on the satellite agencies .
This is a momentous report because it is the end of the first tranche of reports on the two older agencies , Dublin and Thessaloniki .
But it also sets out in the appendix the principles which we will move to in the new discharge procedure following the KellettBowman report which Parliament has adopted - and I hope the Council will accept - for discharge for the newer agencies which have been created .
This will give Parliament not only power over the budget , but power over control of expenditure once it has been allocated to the separate agencies .

As Mr Kellett-Bowman points out in that report , a single report is a wonderful idea ; themes can be developed across the agencies and horizontal issues can be compared between the agencies themselves .
We can develop themes and get a good control over the agencies in future .
Also , we can look at each agency individually .
That is something to be welcomed .
I also welcome the third point made in Mr Kellett-Bowman 's report , that there will be an input from the substantive committees themselves , because they are best placed to evaluate the work of the agencies as it pertains to their committee .
Turning briefly to the agencies in the report , taking Dublin first of all , I fully support what Mr Kellett-Bowman has said on this report .
I am pleased at the efforts that have been made by Dublin and Bilbao to limit duplication and minimize conflict between the agency in Dublin and the one in Bilbao .
That has not been easy .
The two directors are to be complimented on that .
Mr KellettBowman makes reference to a memorandum of understanding to be signed by the two directors .
I hope , too , that the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control can have a copy of that memorandum of understanding , as well as the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
It is important that we have a working document to work on in future when it comes to budgetary matters .
One issue I wish to take up on the Dublin question is one which is not shown on the Dublin budget accounts : the amount of money that has not been accrued due to exchange rate losses .
I raise this point in working Document No 4 for the Budget Committee and again draw this to your attention , particularly because Dublin has lost some ECU 1 million in exchange rate losses in the year 1996 .
Until there is a single currency , with all Member States which host agencies participating , the problem of exchange rate fluctuations will be a real one .
Over the next couple of years it may well be even more acute for agencies in those countries which remain outside the first wave of the single currency .
I would argue strongly for a mechanism to correct both positive and negative effects of exchange rate fluctuations .
After all , if we vote a budget for an agency , we should try to ensure that the agency gets the budget we voted and does not incur losses for reasons outside its control .
On Thessaloniki , I am delighted at the progress that has been made on staffing problems .
Commissioner Liikanen is to be praised for the work he has done to achieve this .
Another point I want to take up is the proposal regarding the building .
This is now seven months behind schedule .
As you know , Parliament forced this issue by putting a payment into reserve .
This procedure shows how we can have an effect and get a building started when we withhold the money .
If that point needed stressing , the signing of an agreement by Alicante - the trademarks agency - with the Spanish Government for a ECU 24 million building without proper control or consultation with Parliament 's Budget Committee underlines this question .
This is something to be followed .
I would therefore like to add my voice to the recommendation and add a request for the Commission to report back to us on proposals for safeguards to be applied when any building question arises .
Mr President , I have three minutes and three comments : transit , personnel , EDF .
There is nothing more to be said about transit .
You have acted , the information systems are behind schedule , and you know it .
I would like to draw your attention to a specific fact , which is that once we have improved the situation in the transit field , we shall be seeing classic forms of contraband developing .
Here , we will be confronted with the inadequacies of our overall customs systems , which are lack of information , lack of integration , lack of homogeneity , and also sometimes , lack of motivation .
Here , I am not saying that Community institutions and Member States are lagging behind , but that we should really substantially improve our control of transit procedures , at a time when criminals are returning to more traditional forms of crime , which we may be less efficient at combating .
The second comment concerns personnel .
Let me go into a little more detail - and Mrs Wenheuer mentioned this - on an idea which goes against the flow , namely that while of course the personnel resources made available to the institutions and in particular to the Commission are insufficient , at the same time the number of missions is increasing , the competencies of the European Union are extending and the number of Member States is increasing .
We are managing a European Union which will very soon contain some five hundred million inhabitants , with horizontal operating personnel in the Directorates-General of around ten thousand people .
It 's pretty laughable really .
And how do you react ?
With timidity .
You are considering decentralization , but that will have its own limits , due to what I would discreetly call the growing heterogeneousness of national administrative systems .
You are considering privatization , delegating to third parties .
In principle , we are not against this , but we have the impression , like the Court , that it is carried out on an excessive basis and without many precautions .
It is not acceptable that some of the decisions in the field of the orientation and distribution of funds should be entrusted to third parties .
And finally , you are envisaging Eurodeployment .
We are waiting for you to show us some evidence in this field , but we can see that there are limits .
My third comment involves the EDF .
The rapporteur , Mr Wynn , is right to propose the discharge , even though we are extremely dissatisfied with the conclusions of Amsterdam .
The purpose of the discharge is not to be the Court of Appeal of the treaty , even if the European Council and the heads of states who signed the Amsterdam Treaty have been remarkably unambitious .
But we are very concerned by the problem of the legal bases .
On this point , we are being extremely indulgent towards you , but we will not let that happen again .
If you do not quickly find the appropriate legal solutions to correct the break in continuity from one EDF to the next , we can hardly go on being forgiving .
An evil which has not been condemned , an evil which is tolerated cannot be accepted by this Parliament !
I would like to thank you overall .
I am evidently in agreement with Mr Elles ' report and with the other reports .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteurs of all the reports , and in particular Mr Elles for his outspoken and unbiassed report .
The postponement of discharge is a serious measure .
There must be sufficient grounds for it , as , otherwise , Parliament will be guilty of unwarranted action .
I believe Mr Elles has highlighted some serious issues .
The weaknesses in the customs transit system are a big problem , as they cause losses that obviously run into millions .
It is worth noting that customs that have remained unsupervised are doing harm to Member States because they have to be economically supported out of the nation 's gross domestic revenue .
That is why developing a computerized system would be of great advantage to Member States , but the Commission has to take responsibility for it .
The administration of EU programmes is difficult because the geographical references are enormous .
For that reason it makes very large mental and moral demands on EU officials .
That is why the least we can ask is that EU internal administration should be in good shape ; then we have to turn our attention to the administration of programmes .
Mr President , the European Parliament , in my opinion , all too often criticizes the Commission for its lack of supervision and all too rarely criticizes Member States for its sheer negligence .
Fraud is very possible when the most important task for member countries seems to be to minimize its net costs , while maximizing its income .
If the EU is paying out , it is as if there were endless funds .
The European Parliament rapporteurs , in my opinion , give too much weight to negligence on the part of the Commission and understate their own countries ' responsibility for surveillance .
Furthermore , relations between Parliament and the Court of Auditors seem very bureaucratic .
They appear to be living in a different age .
Neither seems to be living in reality .
Parliament has systematically argued for the European Development Fund to be included in the general budget , but to no avail .
This being the case , discharge from the use of resources is now only a formality , rather than Parliament scrutinizing the appropriate use of funds in connection with acceptance of the general budget .
As there is no real alternative to discharge we can only give the Commission our blessing .
And we could endorse that with a rubber stamp , hopefully without arousing Parliament 's whole bureaucratic machine .
Mr President , my party colleague has already discussed the group 's argument in favour of postponing the discharge for 1996 .
I shall not therefore repeat those arguments , but simply stress that the Commission should get a yellow card for the way it deals with some of the issues which are of concern to us in Parliament .
For me personally this applies above all to the question of the lack of democratic control for measures against fraud involving EU funds , which is an important problem to get to grips with .
I know that the Commission is working towards this , and that we in Parliament have given a number of opinions on it .

As regards Mr Wynn 's report on the granting of a discharge in relation to the European Development Fund for the 1996 financial year , the Green group entirely agrees with Mr Wynn that the existing procedure is strange , namely that the European Parliament should grant a discharge without being able to have any influence over the budget .
This report points out , among other things , how remarkable it is that funds from the seventh European Development Fund have been used without any legal base to finance measures which come under the Fourth Lomé Convention .
It goes without saying that these funds should be repaid as soon as possible .
In the Kellet-Bowman report on some of the decentralized bodies there are , in spite of everything , small problems both in Dublin and Thessaloniki which we must tackle , including financial control in Dublin and the buildings in Thessaloniki .
Mr President , I congratulate the Council for the serious attention they have shown this year towards discharge .
We have had evidence of a political discussion at Ecofin , of a ministerial presentation in the Committee on Budgetary Control and a ministerial presentation here in plenary .
The Council is deserving of our thanks and our congratulations for those three things .
It has made the discharge debate more serious .
I would like to accompany my congratulations to the Council with a warning to future presidencies about the dangers and the consequences of recidivism .
If they go back to their former ways Parliament will be as irate at a future presidency as it is warm towards the present one .
So , my congratulations !
My second point is in relation to transit .
Here I would take issue slightly with my good friend Commissioner Liikanen .
In his intervention he spoke about the Council changing its approach and dealing with five Member States as if somehow that was an act of planning .
It is not .
It is a manifestation of failure .
It was not a conscious decision to change approach .
It was a failure of the contract we had for computerization .
While I am prepared to congratulate the Director-General and staff of DG XXI , I do not think we can have it as a matter of record that somehow everything was going along quite smoothly and we decided to change our approach .
The approach has changed because it has failed and the transit reservations we have are extremely serious , as shown in paragraph 4 of Mr Elles ' excellent report and paragraph 15 of the explanatory memorandum .
There has , indeed , been progress .
But the scale of the progress , the loss of revenue and the impending enlargement of the Community mean that progress is insufficient and not backed by sufficient urgency .
Thirdly I turn to the statement of assurance .
In the debate a number of references have been made to the statement of assurance .
There is a feeling that some Members are beginning to doubt its utility because it always produces the same result .
I hope that we will continue to value the statement of assurance .
It is an extremely useful tool that should not in any way be denigrated because it leads to a bad result .
Obviously we have to be able to look forward to an improvement in the results .
But if there is an agreement about the statistical base on which the statement of assurance is undertaken , we have to live with the results .
My fourth point is in relation to our procedures .
I would like to say yet again that we have a fundamental need to examine discharge procedures .
It is my opinion that we spend far too long in the contradictoire procedure between the Court of Auditors and the Commission .
It means that there is too much time wasted , too much long-winded dialogue , too much wasteful use of audit resources so that by the time we come to a discharge procedure , we are dealing with out-of-date information .
I hope that all the institutions will make efforts to obtain a discharge closer to the events to which it relates .
That means reviewing the length of time we spend on the contradictoire procedure .
With those few comments , I support the Elles report and once again congratulate the Presidency for the work it has done in politicizing this important process .
The President-in-Office of the Council , Mrs Liddell , has to leave us at this point , owing to a meeting , a trilateral discussion on marketable securities .
Thank you , Mrs Liddell , for attending this sitting .
Mr President , one of the main reasons Mr Elles is today presenting us with a motion for a resolution about postponing the 1996 discharge has to do with the MED programmes , and from what we are hearing , not just the MED programmes , either .
And it is in that context - of the MED programmes - where the misunderstandings arise .
The first misunderstanding is that the European Parliament , or more specifically the Committee on Budgetary Control , is opposed to decentralized cooperation .
The second misunderstanding is that the European Parliament has blocked the relaunching of such cooperation .
But I want to stress that neither of those things is true .
In fact , the European Parliament gave the green light for the relaunching of decentralized cooperation over eight months ago , with its resolution of 17 July 1997 .
Furthermore , that green light will be confirmed when Parliament votes on the resolution which will conclude the present debate .
How , for example , could Parliament be opposed to cooperation between universities in the Member States and the associated countries of the Mediterranean ?
On the contrary , the European Parliament is not opposed to it , but there was a serious management problem which was mainly located in Brussels , and was discovered by the Court of Auditors .
And it was the European Commission which stopped the programmes .
Once the management problem has been resolved the programmes can of course be relaunched .
But - and it is a big but - we need to draw conclusions from the lessons of the past : the European Commission needs to learn from this affair .
The first lesson is that the European Commission needs to take a more significant role in the management of these decentralized programmes .
The second lesson is that those operators who committed themselves to cofunding but failed to deliver should not be allowed to participate in the new programmes .
Thirdly , the sums identified as recoverable must be repaid .
Fourthly , the financial losses , and also the serious loss of confidence , resulting from this affair mean that disciplinary steps need to be taken , because there is no doubt that there has been serious negligence .
And the fifth lesson is that the European Commission should send all the details of this affair to the judicial authorities in Belgium , France and Italy so that they can examine any possible legal implications .
Before I finish , I want to make it clear that I have no doubts about the European Commission 's good intentions for the relaunch of the MED programmes but , just as good intentions are not enough to pass an exam , come back in September and show us that you have learned the lessons I have just explained to you - and do not look at me like that !
The Council said exactly the same thing , although it then went on to draw different conclusions .
Mr President , in the resolution on postponement of discharge hardly any mention is made of the Structural Funds , except in relation to small and medium enterprises .
I think there was no justification for this , as the problems in 1995 were exactly the same as those in 1996 , and we have had SEM 2000 in the meantime , which means there will be some improvements .
To my mind the new Commission proposals regarding Agenda 2000 comprise far-reaching improvements , even though the problems of combating fraud , the question of who the interest should be paid to , and how this should be calculated has not yet been sufficiently worked out in these proposals .
I would like to focus on another point , Mr President .
People in this House speak regularly about the damaging situation related to the implementation of the recommendations on transit made by the Committee of Inquiry , and the damaging delay in computerization .
I wanted to emphasize that .
But on 25 March I came across a new point in a Dutch newspaper which is on the one hand very interesting , but on the other extremely alarming .
Mr President , in the recommendation , we in the Committee of Inquiry worked on the assumption that transit is only able to function when customs function as one in Europe .
That is not to say that it is one service , but that it functions as one .
This newspaper report in fact concerned Spain ; Mr President , I read that the Spanish authorities are going to hold the cigarette manufacturers responsible for the sale of illegal cigarettes .
This is good news , but I think it will throw the entire system into confusion , because the Spanish authorities seem to be saying that the manufacturers are selling their cigarettes knowingly and despite warnings to known smugglers .
Spanish customs are alleged to have registered these smugglers .
Mr President , this raises questions such as what is the legal situation ?
Because if the customs duties are not transferred , then there is the obligation to seek the guilty party , but the risk liability remains with the carrier .
Mr President , will he be discharged of his liability , or are the fines for the manufacturers an addition to his liability ?
I think that in both cases we are dealing with a precedent within the European Union .
In that context it would interesting to see whether , now we know that the Spanish customs have a blacklist , whether this blacklist has been brought to the notice of the Commission and of other customs services .
That would make the operation a lot easier .
A third question which arises is why the manufacturers in America and England did not respond to the requests made by the Spanish authorities to suspend their deliveries to known smugglers .
This kind of unilateral declaration might lead to a significant shift in trade traffic .
That is why I see every reason to question the Commission about this . My final conclusion is that it is high time the Member States acknowledged that these kind of issues should be tackled jointly and in conjunction with the Commission .
As soon as it comes to individual operations , the matter only gets worse than has already been established by the Committee of Inquiry .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the budget control mills grind slowly and still produce the same old bitter grain .
We are now dealing with the draft budget for 1996 .
The Court of Auditors presented us with its report in 1997 .
We have spent the whole time debating this matter with some intensity .
But instead of coming to our conclusions , we see ourselves compelled to request a postponement .
Anyone watching our efforts from the outside would hardly be impressed by all this .
Nevertheless , we hope that this postponement - and our committee decision was a unanimous one - will produce greater efficiency and bring more pressure to bear on the Commission .
I am sure that something will be set in motion before September .
However , this method can surely only be used once .
I believe that the decisive pressure only materializes according to whether or not there are sufficient votes to refuse a discharge , whether this be today or at some unspecified time in the future .
There are certainly plenty of grounds for this - one only has to think of the lack of trust , which many speakers have mentioned , and the negative findings of the statement of assurance .
On the other hand , the Commission is certainly not refusing to provide us with the necessary information .
The Commission has reacted in a very constructive way to many of the comments which have been made , but this is not enough as far as we are concerned .
In recent years the debates have focused increasingly on the responsibility of the Member States , which account for some 80 % of EU spending and which are then responsible for controlling this expenditure .
The Commission is only responsible for monitoring this control process .
While this explains many a delay , it cannot serve as an excuse for everything .
The Commission remains responsible for failing to reveal the negligence of others and for not proposing adequate changes .
The budgetary control procedure of the European Parliament is still more powerful than that operated by the national parliaments .
We can only improve the effectiveness of our budgetary control system by making it absolutely clear who is actually responsible and perhaps by taking a brave decision once in a while .
It saddens me that we have to have this debate on postponement of discharge at all .
It saddens me because we would be better off expending our efforts on promoting the development of common policies rather than on cursing the Commission .
But the reasons for postponing the discharge are numerous , as Mr Elles ' excellent report so ably demonstrates .
These are familiar difficulties and Parliament is simply forced to prevail upon the Commission to take action .
On previous occasions I have made it clear that I find it embarrassing that joint funds are being managed as badly as they are .
And it is scandalous that the Commission has not as yet succeeded in implementing the PHARE area programme more effectively to produce tangible and visible results in the destination countries .
But I would like to express my appreciation that we have now got a positive dialogue underway , and that the Commission is determined to take a number of measures designed to correct the failures and inadequacies found in the programme today .
I would like to note in particular the Commission 's announcement today to the effect that the proposals set out in the special report on PHARE will be implemented in 1999 , concerning delegating the administration to the destination country itself .
I look forward to hearing that on 1 January the administration of the PHARE programme will indeed have been transferred to a specific country .
I would also like to know the name of the country concerned , and I strongly urge the Commission to ensure that , if any legal changes are necessary , the relevant motions will be tabled , so that we can ensure that all obstacles are cleared out of the way to allow us to implement true decentralization on 1 January 1999 .
Mr President , the course of this debate on giving discharge for the 1996 financial year has in my view demonstrated two different things . The first is the fact that the EU and its staff are better than their reputation suggests .
In many respects the content of the various reports under discussion today has shown that a great deal of what Europe and the staff of the EU are doing is progressing smoothly .
However , the reports have also shown that there are many weaknesses and deficiencies which we cannot ignore .
I should now like briefly to say something about three of these issues .
Firstly , it is a scandal that the results of the Committee of Inquiry into the transit system are being implemented at such a snail 's pace .
There is some kind of paradox here .
Computers are getting faster every day .
Every six months a new generation comes on to the market and all the while the computerization of the whole system is proceeding ever more slowly .
Now to my second point . In recent days and weeks we in this House have been engaged in an intensive debate on the completely inadequate use of resources in central and eastern Europe , particularly in respect of the PHARE , TACIS and MED programmes .
With negotiations on new membership barely started , this completely inadequate deployment of funds hardly augurs well for the future .
Finally to my third point . We have established on numerous occasions , particularly in connection with the BSE Committee of Inquiry , that we in the European Union - and particularly at Commission level - need a disciplinary code for our officials which will put an end to the Commission claiming with fascinating regularity that its hands are tied by the existing disciplinary code and that therefore there is no point in its even trying .
We have received an undertaking from the President of the Commission , no less , that this Commission will be presenting a new disciplinary code .
We look forward to it .
The postponement of the discharge must be taken seriously .
We do not want the situation in the autumn to be the same as it is now .
Mr President , first of all I must commend the rapporteur on his report .
I agree with his recommendation to postpone the discharge , and I also agree with the reasons he gives in his report about why that should be done .
In this debate I will dwell on two points . The first is what the report refers to as lack of democratic responsibility on the Commission 's part .
What does that mean ?
Or if you will , what is Parliament worried about ?
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Budgetary Control cannot reach an opinion , whether positive or negative , about discharges because the Commission will not give us the figures we deem necessary and have formally requested from it , to enable us to form any opinion at all .
The current regulation on the service conditions of Commission employees bans them from providing the European Parliament with figures without prior permission from the hierarchy .
That largely explains the dearth of figures we get , because as you can understand , we cannot form opinions based on the paroles d 'honneur of various Commissioners to the Committee on Budgetary Control , for example ' there has been no deception ' or ' the matter was investigated but no figures are available ' , etcetera .
In my view , the issue ought to be tackled by adding something to the interinstitutional agreement between the three institutional bodies , which as we all know , happened in the case of the investigative committees .
This Gordian knot must be cut , in other words a way must be found to provide the European Parliament with the figures it must have if it is to exempt or not discharge the Commission for its implementation of the budget .
A second point , one which I am repeating for the umpteenth time and which concerns the European Parliament , is that we ourselves ought as soon as possible to modify the way the Committee on Budgetary Control works .
It is something I always stress , and we must hurry so that we can respond to present-day needs . All this , of course , is related to the issue of the UCLAF 's autonomy , a body which has been successful so far .
And the UCLAF cannot be autonomous if its employees continue to be bound by the employment conditions of the Commission 's staff .
If UCLAF is to monitor the Commission , then those who are to monitor the Commission cannot be Commission employees .
Mr President , thank you very much for this debate .
I will comment on only two major areas of the expenditure which have been dealt with here .
First , external programmes and then Structural Funds and DAS .
On the external programmes , I will very briefly mention that the Commission took a major decision in the autumn to create a common structure for all external programmes .
This is now being implemented and we hope that it will be completed soon .
It means that management of the PHARE , TACIS , MEDA and other programmes will come under one common structure where we hope to standardize all the procedures and public tenders and simplify the way we run the external programmes .
There are too many different procedures and too many different types of contract .
It is extremely difficult for our clients and also very difficult for us .
If we have simple , transparent and standardized procedures it is much easier to control .
This common structure will be put in place this year and we will be able to keep the Committee on Budgetary Control informed of the process .
Mrs Kjer Hansen referred to decentralization and deconcentration and I can say that the Commission agrees in principle .
It is , of course , true that it is better to run the programmes close to the people who are concerned .
This is something we must do to improve efficiency , but of course the balance between efficiency and control is a very delicate one .
We must , therefore , decentralize and deconcentrate as quickly as possible and the recipient country and authority must be able to re-organize their working methods accordingly .
I have discussed this a lot with my colleagues and in the case of PHARE it is clear that we can move forward fairly rapidly in some sectors , perhaps more rapidly than with whole countries .
As far as DAS and the Structural Funds are concerned it has been suggested that not much has happened .
Perhaps I can briefly mention what has happened with the Structural Funds because we have been working very hard on this issue over the last few months .
We got the first DAS in autumn 1995 .
It showed that there had been a high level of irregularities , especially in the field of Structural Funds .
Irregularities , not fraud .
It also said that most of these irregularities , perhaps 90 % , take place at the level of the final beneficiary .
That was in autumn 1995 .
In 1996 we established the group of personal representatives of the finance ministers of the Member States to clarify the situation .
We cooperated with the Court of Auditors and asked their advice and there were two key areas .
Firstly , the rules of eligibility were not clear in the existing regulation .
There was no agreement on what was eligible and what was not .
Secondly , financial regulations were not accepted as a principle .
We therefore concentrated on these two issues and were able to conclude our extremely lengthy and arduous work in the space of one year , following which we accepted the eligibility sheets for all the Structural Funds and they entered into force on 1 January 1998 .
The whole process took about eighteen months .
The Commission has also said that the financial corrections will be applied from 1 January 1998 in order to clarify the uncertainties and ambiguities of the present regulation which dates from 1993 .
At the same time , of course , we have tried to see how we could improve the whole legal framework to avoid this kind of ambiguity in the future .
We fed our experience of DAS into the preparatory work on reform of the Structural Funds .
This reform , which was presented to you in various committees on 18 March , has taken into account a large number of the remarks by the Court of Auditors and our own findings .
We must concentrate more on several objectives .
We must cut down the number of initiatives : there will be only three .
We must simplify procedures concerning commitments .
That will be done .
When a programme is accepted the tranches for the programming period will be accepted at the same time .
We must also agree on how financial corrections are made .
The new regulations are very clear .
If a Member State identifies an irregularity , it can transfer the funds to another project ; if it is the Court of Auditors or the Commission which identifies an irregularity , we will withdraw the funds .
The question of financing the regulation is extremely important and we hope that this presidency and future presidencies will work hard to get it accepted in time for it to enter into force on 1 January 2000 .
We have made a start on the extremely difficult task of financing spending on the Structural Funds in the long term , and I am very pleased to note the words of the presidency that it is a joint effort .
There are tens of thousands of participants in the Community projects .
Whatever we do in the Commission we cannot solve every single problem in the final beneficiary countries .
We have our responsibilities but we must be able to carry them out together .
I shall be pleased to come back to the Committee on Budgetary Control in the autumn .
We have discussed with the President and the rapporteur the possibility of grouping these issues so that we could have perhaps a couple of meetings before the summer and finalize matters in the autumn .
We are keeping an open and constructive mind .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Criminal proceedings to protect the Union 's financial interests
Mr President , I am rather concerned , and I am sorry I did not have a chance to raise it before Mrs Theato spoke , that a corrigendum has been published to the report of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
The corrigendum affects the very issue which was the substance of the only significant argument in committee .
It seeks to replace in paragraphs 7 , 9 and 10 the words ' European public prosecutor ' with " European judicial authority ' .
I have to say as somebody who has consistently opposed the use of the words that do appear in " Corpus Juris ' , in English , " European public prosecutor ' - and that was the whole substance of my intervention in committee - that I find it amazing that by corrigendum we have now got a major and fundamental amendment to the report .
That is certainly what it is in English and I seek your guidance because I think that this is far too substantial an amendment to be done by way of corrigendum .
Yes , I would just like to explain that .
I have the German text and in this version the term " public prosecutor ' carries a certain meaning .
There is nothing comparable at European level .
This term is represented differently in each language .
I have had approaches made from so many sides that I have resorted to the German text as it was submitted in committee .
I am not responsible for the translation .
Clearly , something has been created here which does not yet exist , which takes account of national circumstances , usage and traditions and indeed powers of authority .
What we should really call it ultimately becomes the second question .
I would therefore ask you not to attribute a particular meaning to this word as such , but rather to identify the underlying concept .
I hope that Mrs Gradin will have the opportunity today to comment on this matter , for we are not seeking to interfere in national arrangements but rather are contemplating the setting-up of a new European institution .
Mr President , I should also like to draw your attention to another matter .
I am speaking on a point of order .
I do not know what the list of speakers looks like , but if for a third time we find that Mrs Gradin has to voice her opinion and that of the Commission while Members of this House are pouring into the Chamber , with all the noise that this entails , and with the vote soon to take place , then I say that this is simply unacceptable .
I would therefore ask that you organize the sitting in such a way that Mrs Gradin has the full attention of this House and is not disturbed by noise of any kind .
I hope that you will give this matter your attention .
Mrs Theato , if all speakers observed speaking time , we would not run this risk , but they have to observe it strictly .
With regard to Mr Tomlinson , I have to say that the problem has to be examined .
It is a report on an initiative , on which we are not pressed , for we are not in the legislative field , but I understand that the problem is a very , very delicate one .
Mr President , We shall try to help you in this respect so that Mrs Gradin also has enough time at the end of the sitting .
I believe that this conversation has now illustrated right from the start just where the problems lie in this respect .
This report has also helped to focus our minds on a problem which has again been highlighted both by the conclusions of our Committee of Inquiry into the transit system and indeed by the whole episode of fraud at EU budget level . The problem is this : at the end of the day we cannot complete the internal market as long as we are working to 15 sets of national rules .
I believe that from a purely technical point of view we would be taking an important step if we were to distribute translations of the Corpus Juris study to the 15 Member States and national parliaments , so that opinions can be expressed in the various parliaments as to what can be practically achieved in this area .
One hopes that the various comments expressed by the Members of this House would then also move the process forward .
This is a programme on which we shall probably be working for some considerable time in partnership with the Commission and the Member States .
With this in mind our group gives the report its general approval .
Mr President , words are obviously very important things and words can be used either to emphasize something or to conceal it .
I would like to say something about the word " subsidiarity ' .
This is a word which gives many of us problems .
In some respects it is difficult to pronounce , but it is clearly even more difficult to understand .
If you look it up in the dictionary , the definitions given suggest that what is involved is the principle of self-responsibility , whereby those above should only be called in , or intervene , as a secondary consideration in the event that those below are incapable of handling the situation for themselves .
The dictionary will often also refer to various papal encyclicals for possible uses of the word .
This is all very well , but it hardly suffices for our purpose .
In a European context the word " subsidiarity ' has a third meaning , and possibly an even more important one , in that it is constantly misused by those looking for a reason not to have to do something , or to postpone something indefinitely .
This is exactly what is happening now in connection with the proposed European public prosecutor or judicial authority .
I believe that we reached agreement on this matter in the discussions held by the Committee on Budgetary Control .
We should therefore demonstrate here today in this House that we require better coordination between the national prosecution authorities in those areas involving the control , prevention and sanctioning of fraud affecting the financial interests of the Union .
In far too many areas we see , time and time again , that many Member States regard the improper use of EU funds , and EU funds alone , as a pardonable offence , and that even national prosecution authorities take a very long time to deal with these fraudulent offences by way of appropriate sanctions .
The report calls for a stronger UCLAF to be set up as a matter of urgency to tackle this problem and also demands the establishment of a new institution - call it what you will - and the name European public prosecutor perhaps gives the wrong impression here .
In substance we need something which will ensure that the national prosecution authorities change their nonchalant attitude towards the abuse of the Union 's financial interests , which they have displayed all too often .
We need to achieve greater coordination so that this type of offence can be properly prosecuted and , if at all possible , removed from our midst .
Mr President , Commissioner , our course is clear ; we all know how we should proceed in providing the Commission with the legal instruments and penal provisions to combat organized crime .
But the discussions I have held here on this subject over the years have always been inconclusive .
Fraud is on the increase , and a friend has compared me to the Sophists who used a race between Achilles and a tortoise to prove that the goal is ever more distant .
Fraud is becoming increasingly prevalent , to the extent that I am beginning to think that fraud has ceased to be a crime and has become instead an economic instrument for boosting competitiveness , used by Member States to protect their economies from each other .
Why is it that monetary convergence - which requires sacrifices by so many states - can be implemented , while crime cannot be effectively combatted ?
There is no lack of proposals !
We all know how to combat crime : by furnishing the legal instruments and by laying down criminal penalties to ensure that those who engage in organized crime do not go unpunished .
Unless these measures are taken and while Parliament , through its Committee on Budgets , continues to vote against the proposal to spend money on scanners to physically ascertain what is going on at our former borders , then crime will certainly continue to increase and , like Mrs Theato , I will feel like a sort of " Don Quixote ' and " Sancho Panza ' tilting at the computerized windmills of crime which in fact spread crime and fraud throughout Europe .
Mr President , I think Mrs Theato 's report on criminal proceedings relating to the protection of the EU 's financial interests constitutes a very worthy and significant contribution to the discussion of how to proceed in this area .
In the debate on tourism , we expended a great deal of effort and a lot of time on the subject of transit , and these examples amply illustrate the crying need for results in this area .
But this also demonstrates how difficult it is to make progress unless all the Member States show the political will to make some concrete decisions in this area with a view to putting in place the systems required for effective collaboration .
Mrs Theato is proposing some very necessary initiatives , but at the same time , I must say that the report is rather ambitious .
It is ambitious considering how difficult it is to come to any decisions in this area , and here , of course , I am thinking of our good old problem of the convention to protect the financial interests of the EU not having been ratified .
The fact that this has still not been ratified in some Member States does present a problem .
This is a serious area and an important one , and I would also like to illustrate this with a simple example - perhaps even a banal example in the wider context - but right now in Denmark we are debating the problem of the loss of many millions of kroner that Denmark incurs because fathers are avoiding their obligation to pay child support .
They move to other countries , and it is painfully apparent that the Danish authorities do not stand the slightest chance of recovering the outstanding sums .
Thus , this topic also affects everyday life ; there are many such examples .
I believe the stage is set for some exciting ideas on promoting proper cooperation , to bring about improved exchange of information , to strengthen UCLAF , and then as regards this present public prosecutor - or whatever the term is going to be .
I think it is important for us to have more information on the table , and I am looking forward to June , when it is hoped that the Commission will respond with more detailed material so that we can make some progress in this discussion .
It is an important area .
Thank you for the report .
Mrs Theato 's report on the criminal proceedings for the protection of the Union 's financial interests raises a fundamental problem which is inherent in the Maastricht Treaty , as amended by the Treaty of Amsterdam , which is the transfer of sovereignty between Member States in the European Union in the field of justice , notably though Article 280 of the Treaty .
It is true that in this case good arguments have been used , as the Elles report has emphasized , regarding the refusal to discharge the budget for 1996 , but these arguments are also used for purposes which we believe are questionable .
Indeed , if there is no satisfactory outcome to the fight against fraud , corruption and organized crime , we will naturally wonder , as we do for the euro , whether there should not be more integration in the legal and criminal field .
The liaison body between the national and Community judicial authorities would naturally be UCLAF , the Commission 's anti-fraud unit , which should , in a manner of speaking , become the European public ministry .
But we forget that the inadequacies , the negligence and the culpable mishandling by the Commission of its lawsuits in the case of mad-cow disease or that of tourism , should be the competence of national courts only .
In truth , in the longer term , there is a degree of risk that , in order to combat the mafioso inclinations which arise from clientelism and organized fraud , we might get to the stage , as Mrs Theato wished , where we wanted to set up a European public ministry or a European judicial authority , to return to the terminological debate between the British and the Germans .
However , this terminological debate is not neutral ; it shows that there is a real , fundamental problem with regard to the culture of the various Member States , in terms of the freedom of the states , the freedom of the nations .
And from this point of view , the terminological debate shows just how dangerous the road is down which people are trying to send us .
For our part , we refuse to go down that road , because we do not wish there to be a further , supranational judicial authority to substitute the sovereignty of the Member States .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mrs Theato .
We have a useful report , which clearly underlines the wish of Parliament to enhance the fight against fraud , maladministration and the abuse of European taxpayers .
In that regard everybody is equally committed to the fight against fraud .
I certainly pay tribute to Mrs Theato for the valuable work she has done over the years , both in the Committee on Budgetary Control and as its chairman .
However - and I say the first part absolutely clearly - I have to express some reservations , not about Mrs Theato 's analysis of the problem but about the remedy prescribed for the problem .
As I indicated in my point of order my reservations are about paragraphs 7 , 9 and 10 and the use in the English text of the words ' European public prosecutor ' , and what I believe to be the misinterpretation and the misuse of Article 280 as it is referred to in indents ( h ) and ( I ) .
Article 280 enables the Union to intervene to take subsidiary action under the first pillar .
But it is not my concept of subsidiary action to have , for example in paragraph 7 , the European public prosecutor having the ability to delegate powers to national public prosecutors .
That is the antithesis of subsidiarity and is the basis on which we have wrongly quoted Article 280 .
In conclusion , the intervention of the corrigendum , far from making matters easier , makes it worse .
It is one thing to talk about a ' European public prosecutor ' , a single official and his / her role , together with the staff , but to turn it into a ' European judicial authority ' manages to compound the problems that I have in relation to Article 280 .
There are good sentiments in the report ; there are merits in the analysis of the report .
The prescription is one that we are a long way away from being in a position to realize , and it is for that reason I will not be supporting those parts of the report that refer either to ' European public prosecutor ' or ' European judicial authority ' .
Mr President , it seems to me that we are making Europe into a kind of giant with huge legs , driving the economy it runs with arms just as long involved in the fraud and organized crime that are becoming more rapacious today , but with a brain that is sometimes very small and heads in a very modest political direction and that , finally and unfortunately , has no kidneys or liver , organs which it should use to get rid of the negative aspects .
I apologize for this image , but it seems to me that Mrs Theato very specifically wanted to show this , and I thank her for her persistence in continuing to deal with this problem .
How can we imagine that we can make progress in a situation in which the national states are competing with each other , in a situation of disparity due to the fact that some states regard Community fraud as a specific crime while others do not ?
To conclude , going back to Mr Bourlanges ' image , I think that Mrs Theato has been far-sighted and specific and that the corrigendum is right .
Mr President , how can we imagine a European public prosecution service without a specific European judicial authority ?
Mr President , this report leads me to think that the status quo in the fight against multinational fraud is unsatisfactory .
As I have repeated on a number of occasions , I support any improvement in cooperation between the national prosecution authorities and , naturally , I also support the optimal use of existing databases .
There is no doubt that developing UCLAF into an independent coordination and information body would be a real contribution to the fight against international crime .
But of course we need a clear definition of the role and responsibilities of this special body , and we also need to know what provisions are to be made to protect its independence .
In other respects , of course , neither the principle of an alternate international criminal justice system nor the principle of ne bis in idem stand in the way of an efficient prosecution of transnational fraud ; the real problem here is the absence of an effective intergovernmental legal procedure , and this has to be put right .
We reject the idea of a public prosecutor with European-wide jurisdiction in the same way as we reject the Europeanization of criminal law . For this reason we cannot accept any report which would lead us in this direction .
Mr President , the report is a good one because it is moderate , if I can say that ; it considers the issues in light of a real situation that exists in the area of the EU 's economic interests that are being affected , as we have seen recently .
I must come down in favour of medium-term or , if you will , short-term planning in contrast to the long-term planning relating to the cases of paragraphs 7 , 9 and 10 which Mr Tomlinson raised .
I must point out that with the corrective action proposed - it matters not how we go about it - a great lack of clarification is removed .
And I must remind us all why such an authority is essential .
The authority must exist , ladies and gentlemen , because - and I speak as a practising lawyer - the Commission cannot arraign any Member State .
A citizen can go to a Member State and lay a charge and the authority can intervene , but the Commission itself is not empowered to approach a national authority so that it can protect Community interests and call for the initiation of criminal proceedings when there are accusations about specific criminal injustices .
So these amendments ought to be supported and I will ask Mr Tomlinson , who helped so much to complete this report , to view the matter in a different light .
Finally , I should like to say that the UCLAF 's role seems to have succeeded so far .
However , the UCLAF itself must put its house in order and , mainly , adopt practical measures that will enable it to deal with the problems . One of those measures is that its staff must not be bound by the employment conditions applicable to Commission employees .
This is the third time that this has happened .
I am very sorry that I always have to speak under these circumstances .
The rapporteur , Mrs Theato , and I share the conviction that a well-functioning European judicial area is essential if we want to guarantee freedom , security and justice for all our citizens in the years to come .
This has become even more clear in view of the forthcoming enlargement .
The opening of the negotiation conference takes place today - as you know - in Brussels .
The new citizens joining the European Union will expect the European Union to provide them with guarantees in this respect and so will the citizens of the 15 present Member States .
Mrs Theato 's report is part of this much broader endeavour , even if it relates directly to the financial interests of the Community .
In order to move towards an area of freedom , security and justice I favour a gradual and pragmatic approach .
This is necessary because our point of departure is 15 different judicial and penal systems in our Member States .
There are many different definitions of fraud .
The varying level of administrative and penal sanctions , and the insufficiencies of judicial cooperation among the 15 provide a breeding ground for crime and corruption in general , and also against the EU budget .
So far we have used the Maastricht Treaty as best we can .
It has produced some successful results , such as the regulation on the protection of the financial interests and the regulation on spot checks , but clearly we need to broaden the understanding among practitioners of the utility of our work by addressing issues close to the hearts of citizens .
The multi-annual programmes do precisely that .
We now have a number of programmes in operation : GROTIUS for judicial cooperation , STOP to combat sexual exploitation of children and trafficking in women , DAPHNE to fight violence against women and children , SHERLOCK on forged documents and OISIN on police and customs cooperation .
Another two programmes have just been approved by the Council of Ministers : ODYSSEUS on border controls , migration and asylum and FALCONE on the fight against organized crime .
Taken together , these programmes are an impressive start to practical cooperation between the relevant specialists in all our Member States .
They allow practitioners from various areas of the judicial world to come together to compare best practices and to learn to appreciate and respect each other 's way of doing things .
The academic work done to prepare the Corpus Juris is yet another example of how to prepare the ground for further initiatives .
Such preparatory work is essential if we want to succeed in improving the legal framework which has to protect citizens .
The protection of the Union budget is of special concern to me , as I am responsible for the fight against fraud .
It is also of great interest to citizens for tax revenue to be well spent and fraud-proof .
The budget of the European Union affects all taxpayers .
They demand protection against fraud and corruption .
The only efficient way of doing this is through common action .
This was fully recognized in Amsterdam .
It was decided that the taxpayers ' money must be protected in an equivalent way in the Union as well as in all the Member States .
We were also given a legal instrument : the new Article 280 , with a qualified majority which provides for a much more efficient decision-making process .
I agree with the rapporteur that in order to ensure that the Union finances are equally protected under criminal law in all Member States , we need efficient cooperation between investigation authorities and the judiciary in all Member States .
One important contribution will be the ad hoc legal interface in UCLAF staffed with legal experts from all the Member States .
This will help to coordinate and assist national investigators and , where necessary , judicial authorities .
We have put such a proposal to the Commission but , as I have stressed on a number of occasions , such an activity needs human resources so I expect the European Parliament to take its political responsibility in this respect .
I am also establishing an anti-fraud unit on external assistance and another dealing with the fight against corruption .
I will also establish a dedicated intelligence cell focusing on customs fraud in particular .
A number of other improvements in the UCLAF organization will also be made , notably in its computer unit , but these are questions I will come back to next month when we discuss Mr Bösch 's report .
With regard to the concept of a register or database managed by UCLAF , I wish to report that the Commission has already proposed such a register in the additional protocol to the Convention on the protection of the financial interests submitted to the Council in 1996 .
It was , however , not integrated in the final result , so I am still reflecting on the best way in which to bring the idea back to the table .
The role of UCLAF in assisting prosecuting authorities in the Member States is laid down in the second protocol to the convention .
Unfortunately , as was said earlier , not a single Member State has yet ratified the various conventions dealing with the protection of the financial interests of the Community .
This is very disappointing , as many Members have said in the debate .
I hope the issue will be addressed at the European Council in Cardiff .
In the event that Member States do not ratify these conventions , the Commission must seriously consider how to make progress and here we have the new Amsterdam Treaty that gives us some better instruments .
I am thinking in particular of the new framework decisions in Article K6 which will be moved to Article 34 .
Or the more operational Article 209A which now will become Article 280 .
Moreover , conventions will enter into force when they are ratified in half of the Member States .
Mrs Theato also calls for certain changes in the Staff Regulations .
The Commission has already expressed its positive attitude to certain adjustments in its communication of 18 November 1997 .
My colleague Mr Liikanen commented on this at the time .
I also wish to inform you that I am preparing , together with Commissioner de Silguy , a proposal to protect the new currency , the euro , from forgery and counterfeiting .
You will receive a communication on this subject very soon .
This brings me again to the ambitious ideas of the ' Corpus Juris ' .
These ideas have , as you know , been the subject of debate in academic circles for some years .
The Commission is committed to looking at all its aspects .
A number of experts are now comparing the legal system of fifteen Member States in areas such as taking of evidence , mutual assistance and admissibility of proof .
So a great deal of preparatory work has already been done and an interim report is being worked on .
I have no doubt that the ideas contained in this document will form part of the future discussion on a European single judicial area - an important discussion that also has to link in with implementation of the Amsterdam Treaty .
Madam Commissioner , thank you for your speech and for speaking in a difficult situation .
In this respect , I think that the Conference of Presidents will have to examine the problem , which has already been raised several times , on the conditions in which the last speech is made before voting .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 noon .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Votes
I would like , before the votes , to make an announcement .
The Bureau decided yesterday to send a message of congratulations to Mrs Nicole Péry , our former Vice-President , who has just been appointed a member of the French government .
I am particularly happy to make this announcement because I am , as you know , Mrs Péry 's successor , although I am in no way trying to replace her .
Mr President , now that all the amendments have been adopted , I would like to ask the Commission , and via the Commission , the Council , to have another look at whether it might be possible for Parliament 's wishes to be met .
Yesterday we agreed that Regulation No 1408 / 71 , which deals with frontier workers , who should be getting decent rights , is still being blocked as far the jurisprudence in the Court of Justice is concerned .
We discussed this very thoroughly yesterday , and it turns out that the amendments tabled by Parliament were not adopted by the Commissioner .
I also asked the Commission yesterday to ensure that we would receive written information on all the proposals which are being blocked , and to tell us who is blocking what , and why .
I was given a response by the Commissioner , also after the debate last night , which was negative .
He agrees in substance , but he is not prepared to adopt the proposals .
Mr President , this is why I am requesting that we should not have the final vote on this proposal , and that we should instead refer the report back to committee . We should have an opportunity to have a proper debate with the Commission and the Council .
I now understand from the President of the Commission that the Council , the British Presidency , wants to discuss this proposal on 6 April , and that this Parliament is being put under heavy pressure to proceed to the final vote .
On behalf of all those who are waiting for improvements , the frontier workers who are for ever left out in the cold , I call on the Council , which always takes the benefits , but never wants to provide any more rules , to give its support to the proposal not to implement in the final vote the modifications to Regulation 1408 as they are before us .
Mr President , I rarely disagree with Mrs Oomen-Ruijten but I have to do so today .
I would oppose referral back to committee .
I have looked at the exchange that took place in the Chamber last night .
I have also seen a copy of Commissioner Flynn 's letter to the rapporteur .
I agree that it is a shame that the amendments cannot be accepted at this stage but I note the Commission 's intention to accept the two main amendments , Nos 3 and 4 , in the context of the general revision of Regulation 1408 / 71 which will come forward later this year .
I hope the rapporteur will support those amendments at that time .
Also , in the context of Anne Van Lancker 's own-initiative report on the issue of frontier workers , the separate question of the position of various delegations in Council is one which would have to be answered by Council .
The rapporteur is fully aware of that .
My final point is that the Council looks to adopt this on 7 April .
That is not the most important issue by any means but it has driven the entire timetable for our dealing with this proposal .
No purpose would be served by referring this matter back to committee .
I therefore oppose it .
Mr President , I also rise to oppose referral back to committee .
What we are voting on this morning is something that the Commission has already taken on board and accepted .
It has shown a willingness to look at other areas also .
As my esteemed colleague Mr Hughes has said , this is a matter for Council and we should not use it as a delaying or blocking tactic .
Let us vote on the issue before us and not mix up other issues with it .
I oppose referral back to committee .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I think that it is a scandal of the highest order , and one which has been running for years , that the problems caused by an incomplete system of regulations and a lack of harmonization , which frontier workers have to endure on a personal basis , have still not ben solved .
We in this Parliament are responsible for doing everything we can to bring maximum pressure to bear on the Council and the Commission , whose efforts in this area I fully acknowledge .
We can do this by agreeing to the proposal put forward by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , even though the UK Presidency may be somewhat annoyed about it .
What we are trying to do here is to represent the interests of a large number of people , and not those of a Presidency which is hoping for less discord in the ranks .
Mr President , on behalf of the Commission I wish to reaffirm to the rapporteur that the Commission is very supportive of everything she has said .
The first two amendments you have voted for this morning are already on the table of the Council and are being discussed at this time .
I am quite prepared to give my support to the other two , and will make a proposal before the end of the year .
However , this morning the House is asked to vote on purely technical amendments to the annual adjustment of Regulation 1408 / 71 .
On the other point , which is , of course , related , unanimity is required , and I very much ask for the support of the House in pressing the Council .
These other four items are blocked , although we are making some progress on them .
But this morning you are asked to vote on technical adjustments to Regulation 1408 / 71 , which happens on an annual basis .
This is going to the Social Affairs Council on 6 April , and it would be a great pity if the House could not see the usefulness of doing this at this time .
I say to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten that her point is taken on board , the Commission is supportive of her point of view and we will be pressing this matter with whatever support we can get and wherever we can get it .
But unanimity in the Council is involved .
As I say , some progress is being made , and I hope we will be able to address the outstanding two amendments - Nos 3 and 4 - before the end of the year when the case law judgments we are expecting by the end of June are clear so that the interpretation of all of this directive is clearly understood .
I appeal to Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , recognizing that the Commission is supportive of her view , to relent and allow this to go to Council to have these technical amendments cleared at this time .
Mr President , I will speak very briefly .
To me the issue is that the Commissioner now wants the Council to have all the benefits , whereas the frontier workers continue to have all the disadvantages .
Who in this House will therefore dare to vote against my proposals for it to be referred back to committee , on account of the British Presidency on 6 April ?
I would like to discuss this with you and the Council in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
( The matter was referred back to the committee responsible )
Mr President , in our amendment my group has called for the setting up of a Mr or Mrs Reconstruction for Bosnia and Herzegovina .
In discussions with the other groups and with the Commission we have reached general consensus that if we withdraw the word Mr or Mrs Reconstruction , then the amendment will be approved , the reason being that it will be moving towards replacing this function with a Mr or Mrs Director-General appointed by the Commission .
We should not burden this initiative with terms which leave us in the dark as to who is involved .
I would therefore ask the House to vote on this amendment without including a ' Mr or Mrs Reconstruction ' .
Mr President , our group supports Mrs Müller 's proposal .
( The President noted that there was no objection to the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I look to you as a lawyer to give guidance to the House , and also to protect our interests .
In a very important report there was a substantial debate in committee and the most substantial part of the debate , as far as I was concerned , was about the use of the words ' European public prosecutor ' .
That has been the subject of debate in our political groups .
It is , therefore , fundamentally unsatisfactory when we come to plenary to find that we have a corrigendum deleting in paragraphs 7 , 9 and 10 the words ' European public prosecutor ' and replacing them with ' European judicial authority ' , which actually means something totally different .
To change ' European public prosecutor ' , which I regarded as bad , to ' European judicial authority ' , which I regard as even worse , and to do it by way of a corrigendum is an abuse of the House , and I look for your ruling on it .
Mr President , on the same subject , I certainly think that the replacement , debated in committee , of the words public prosecutor with independent judicial authority is not just a linguistic corrigendum , but is more like a coup d 'État .
I believe that the clerk 's department should have refused such a change .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have just discussed this problem a short while ago .
I started out from the German version , which was the one also voted on in committee .
The fact that there is no European judicial , prosecuting or investigating authority , nor is there a public prosecutor , makes it very difficult indeed to find a common term which does justice to all the different national systems .
The term ' public prosecutor ' was proposed in a study , but it is not an established term as such .
As I encountered a great deal of resistance to the German term for public prosecutor , which is ' Staatsanwaltschaft ' , I have tried to find a more neutral expression for my report and then to have this put to the vote .
It was of course not the different translated versions which were voted on .
Since approaches were later made to me that the translation was inexact , and even misleading , I requested that the term be changed to comply with German translation , which is what I started off with .
However , I should like to point out again that what we have to define here is something which does not yet exist .
Some time ago I even asked the Commission for a definition .
The term must be so filled with meaning that the jurisdiction of the Member States is fully taken into account and left intact .
For me , the problem therefore centred around the translated version .
I was slightly amazed that approaches were made to me on this subject late last night .
Yet I would earnestly request that you examine the general content rather than focusing on a word for which we have still to find a definition , which is what I have requested .
Thank you , Mrs Theato .
I must say that , for my part , it is more a question of the concept than the translation .
I shall ask Mr De Luca and Mr Bourlanges , as well as Mrs Wemheuer , for their opinion .
Then we shall make a decision .
Mr President , as you rightly said , the question does exist , and it is not just a question of terminology .
In fact , the term " European public prosecutor ' has a meaning .
Perhaps , in the attempt made by Mrs Theato , " judicial authority ' is a more comprehensive term that could incorporate both concepts .
Perhaps it is a solution I will suggest to the Chamber : not to use either the term " public prosecutor ' or " judicial authority ' , but " European judicial body ' .
I do not know how this term can be translated into the other languages , or whether it is compatible , but a body is something that is indefinite , that is half-way ; that could therefore solve the linguistic problem we are otherwise faced with .
Mr President , there is a fundamental debate , certainly , but here we are simply involved in a procedural debate , and we have to raise the question as to whether the draft which is submitted conforms with what was voted on within the Committee on Budgetary Control .
While open to correction , I think there is little doubt , firstly that the text on which we have voted and which is authoritative is the German text ; secondly , this German text included the expression " independent authority ' in German and it did not contain the expression " European public prosecutor ' , which for its part comes from another source , namely the corpus juris proposed by the Commission .
Therefore , I think that in procedural terms , there is no ambiguity .
We have indeed voted on a draft which spoke of an independent judicial authority .
In the event of disagreement with this draft , it would , it appears to me , have been necessary to table an amendment according to the prescribed procedure , and this being the case , there would have indeed been a translation error between the German text and the other linguistic versions .
I therefore think that we should stay with the vote on the basis of the German text , which is the faithful version .
Mr President , the various groups , including of course my own , have been discussing the report as it was then , namely without the corrigendum , and have formed an opinion on it .
I therefore believe that we can only vote on the text as we knew it at the time .
I would like to ask Mrs Theato to withdraw the corrigendum , since instead of clarifying the situation it has clearly only served to confuse matters further .
If she does not withdraw it , I will propose on behalf of my group that the report be referred back to committee .
Mr President , I agree entirely with the comments made by Mrs Wemheuer .
Like you , we believe that this is not just linguistic ; it is a different concept , so if we cannot have the withdrawal of the corrigendum we would like to have it referred back to committee for clarification .
Ladies and gentlemen , we therefore have a proposal relating to the corrigendum and a proposal for referral to committee .
I am thus going to put to the vote the proposal relating to the corrigendum , to see whether or not the corrigendum is accepted or refused .
Mrs Theato , do you agree with this procedure ?
Mr President , I should first like to know precisely whether , in the event that the corrigendum is not adopted , you will again allow a vote on the referral back to committee .
I need to know exactly what the course of the procedure is .
Is this in fact correct ?
Do we first have to vote on the corrigendum ?
If the corrigendum is adopted , will you still be having a vote ?
Mr President , I appreciate very much what you are trying to do and I agree with you but this is a procedure which we have not adopted before .
As far as a corrigendum is concerned , if Mrs Theato is prepared to withdraw it then I think that is the appropriate thing and we then vote on the original text .
If she is not prepared to withdraw it then I think we should refer it back to committee .
I should like to thank Mrs Green most sincerely for her contribution which has clearly helped clarify the situation .
I am prepared to withdraw the corrigendum .
I should just like to point out that this in no way concerns me directly .
But I would say that all those Members , wherever they may be , will now be leaving me out on a limb if they vote against the resolution on the basis of the withdrawal of the corrigendum .
I would like to make that absolutely clear .
Let me state quite categorically that the name of this new body , which we are going to set up some day or other , is not the main issue for me .
The most important thing in my view is that we get started , so that the protection of the Union 's financial interests is assured .
Mr President , the vote which you now wish to conduct is inadmissible .
The rapporteur said that the original text was in German .
If we are now to proceed to a vote , then we shall be voting on the work of the translators and not on the issue in question .
I therefore consider the vote you are proposing to be inadmissible .
We should be voting on the basis of the German text .
Ladies and gentlemen , I note the fact that Madame rapporteur withdrew corrigendum No 1 .
We shall now vote on the text without corrigendum No 1 .
We are in agreement on that .
Each person must take on their own responsibilities .
I cannot make any other suggestions .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
I would like to congratulate our colleague Tom Megahy for his hard work and the pertinence of the recommendations made in his report , which seem to me to go in the right direction .
Like many of our colleagues , I wish to support the amendments tabled by the rapporteur .
Hence I totally agree with the idea of differentiating between the " beneficiary ' of the card and the vehicle .
We are indeed well aware of the difficulty of implementing measures aimed at integrating disabled people into a society which increasingly excludes those individuals who have most problems adjusting to ever more demanding circumstances .
I therefore hope that these recommendations will be very quickly taken over by the Member States of the Union .
In this report , the question of a citizen 's Europe is once again raised .
I note that reality is always becoming more and more removed from the official rhetoric , and from the stream of stock market indicators , where individuals have no role to play .
Once again , I wish to denounce these blows against the values of solidarity and justice .
The European Union is a model of development and of civilization , and I want to remind you of that at a time when we are witnessing the dismantling of the Welfare State .
I grant that these words are somewhat removed from the original subject , but I fear that the measures aimed at social deregulation particularly affect people with disabilities .
I believe that in this field we have much more to do , particularly in terms of access to employment and the fight against all kinds of latent discrimination , which affects disabled people all too often .
Although my colleague Mr Megahy is right to point out that the Council is only opting for a nonbinding recommendation for governments to follow on this issue , I share his welcome for the idea of an EU-wide parking card for the disabled .
I am also happy to see Parliament 's specific suggestions being taken on board - for example the importance of issuing the card to a disabled driver for use with whatever vehicles they will drive , removing the need for bureaucratic renewal of the card each time a different vehicle is used .
I am also glad to find that the definition of disabled drivers will be left to the Member States , allowing this to be as broad as each country sees fit .
As always , EU guidelines should be a minimum standard on which we can build where countries wish to go further .
I hope that governments will do as much as they can to make travel easier for our many disabled fellow citizens , so that freedom of movement applies to all Europeans in future .
Recommendation for second reading ( A4-0116 / 98 ) Wijsenbeek
We have to bear in mind the following , and Mr Kinnock , the Commissioner responsible , confirmed this yesterday after the debate on modern tachographs :
1.In its decision the Council has only expressed an opinion on the future black box ( system mentioned in 1B ) .
The UK Member and coordinator of the Socialist group had to ask the Commission twice about this matter in the last sitting of the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
The Commission representative confirmed that only proposal 1B had been submitted to the Council.2.The new black box has not yet been decided on .
Do we really know what we are voting on ? 3.The Council Decision is flawed , because the matter of retrofitting has not been settled .
The Council rushed into this in order to force through a compromise .
Do you really believe that , in the absence of a retrofitting scheme , firms will not try anything and everything to preserve the old style of tachograph ?
A botched-up tachograph will certainly do nothing to increase measurement accuracy.4.Competition is being made very easy for the countries of central and eastern Europe .
Agreement was only reached with these countries in 1995 to put forward any kind of tachograph at all .
If the transport firms and inspection authorities in the European states do not even have the overall infrastructure required for the new device , then , as Adam Riese says , we can hardly assume that our competitors will be very eager to adopt it.5.There is no system in place for checking and recalling the data recorded by the firms in question .
Surely no-one seriously wanted this.After working for four years on this regulation in my capacity as rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I reached the conclusion that Member States want for the time being to retain the existing tachograph system , which is easy to manipulate .
The reasons are regrettable but all too obvious .
The Commission has done a complete U-turn and played right into the Council 's hands .
The majority of Parliament has done the same .
This does little for the credibility of the European Parliament .
On the plus side , today 's decision by Parliament constitutes a technical step forward .
On the negative side , however , it is a matter for regret that this will not be happening today but rather far into the future .
In the meantime , there will be a period of 10 years in which we will be driving through a grey area .
This will not be without its consequences .
It can hardly be reasonable for the EU to regulate road transport in such detail as is now happening with regulations on the design , installation , use and testing of tachographs .
The system also has to be approved by the Commission .
The Council is going even further and prescribing the obligatory installation of fully digital tachographs in all new vehicles from 1 July 2000 .
The proposal affects small hauliers in particular and those companies which do not always have the possibility of introducing new equipment without high costs .
Questions of this type should be dealt with at national level .
Detailed regulation at EU level must end .
All the nations of Europe are currently making a special effort to provide freedom of movement to disabled citizens .
An important element of this policy is access for the disabled to strategically positioned reserved parking spaces .
Permission to park in such places is granted by means of a special identity card issued by the authorities .
Fortunately , in most cases , these national disabled badges are still recognised when the badge holder travels to the other EU countries .
But it would still be much more practical and much safer for disabled citizens if a common EU badge were issued . Thus , the proposal for a regulation is a positive initiative .
Parliament adopted a number of amendments at first reading , aimed at further improving conditions for disabled citizens , and it is gratifying to see that the Council has allowed these proposals to be incorporated into its common position .
Against the backdrop of these positive results , I give the adjustment my full support .
Mr President , I should like to give an oral explanation as to why the Liberal group abstained in the final vote .
This was because the outcome of the vote on Article 4 , on the subject of national airport networks , would be , from our standpoint , unworkable .
Here there was a vote on the committee 's proposal number 10 , which had two recitals .
Parliament voted to accept the proposal by 251 votes to 243 .
As a result , compensatory payments made in respect of national airport networks will be restricted to domestic flights .
As Neil Kinnock said here yesterday , this goes completely against a key principle of the directive , namely nondiscrimination .
Charges must be the same for both domestic and inter-EU flights .
As this essential point in the report has now become distorted , the Liberal group felt they had to abstain from voting .
I would like to add that we opposed the Green group 's Amendment No 25 on the basis that our own Amendment No 26 as well as Amendment No 20 tabled by the Socialist group , had already focused sufficiently on environmental issues .
We are in favour of the underlying idea behind the proposal for a directive , namely that transparency and consultation should lead to the differences in tax systems being as small as possible .
European airlines could benefit from a clarification of airport taxes .
However , because we do not think the proposed formulations can be interpreted in such a way that the consequences can be fully assessed , we are abstaining from the vote .
Mr President , as we continue to move forward with the Single Market , the European Union is required to look at each sector of industry and ensure that there are no non-tariff barriers to trade within that sector . That is exactly what the Council Directive on airport charges intends to do .
Within the context of a single market , it is unconscionable that airport charges should be levied in obscure ways .
Just as consumers want to know what they are purchasing before they hand over payments , airlines ( who are indeed consumers of airport services ) should receive the same level of transparency .
Airports should be required to disclose what the fees are used for .
They should also reflect the level of use .
The airlines should not have to pay the same amount to land a small commuter plane as a jumbo jet at any given airport .
I agree with the rapporteur that there is no need to harmonise airport charges across the EU , in that different airports have different needs , and airlines that use a specific airport should bear the cost of that airport 's services .
It is for these reasons that I support this report .
I think Community legislation on airport taxes is unnecessary .
There are big differences between the situations in the Member States which make it simpler and fairer for these issues to be governed by national legislation .
In addition , it seems as if liberalization and EU harmonization are more important goals than providing for the public good .
For these reasons I am abstaining from the final vote on the Väyrynen report .
This report has considerable significance for small airports and their income could be dramatically reduced as a result .
Luxembourg , which has only one commercial airport , is keen to maintain a reasonable compromise between the airport authorities and the interests of the airline companies . The country is , however , dependent on these charges .
The Luxembourg Socialists therefore support the amendment proposed by Mr Simpson ( PSE ) , which seeks to apply Articles 4 , 5 , 6 and 7 of the directive only to those airports which have annual traffic of at least 2 million passengers or 50 000 tonnes of freight .
The Commission 's proposal was for only 250 000 passenger movements and 25 000 tonnes of freight .
While Luxembourg 's freight traffic is well above the limit provided for in the directive , its figure for passenger movements is about 1.2 million - and would therefore not come under the directive with the corresponding amendment .
This will allow us to ensure that our airport remains a cost-effective business .
It is therefore a matter of extreme regret for us that the motion was not adopted .
I have thus abstained from the final vote .
I would like to express my support for the Väyrynen report .
I am particularly interested in the fact that it is possible to include the specifically identifiable external costs resulting from environmental damage caused by air traffic .
I believe that collecting higher airport taxes is justified in the case of noisy aircraft , night flights , or aeroplanes which emit exceptionally strong kerosene fumes .
This extra tax is not only a sanction or a measure to discourage those causing the disruption .
The Commission rightly points to the fact that the differentiation should be aimed at bringing in extra revenue for the airport .
It should be intended as a compensation for environmental damage .
These extra receipts should be put into a fund for environmental improvements at the airport itself , or for cofinancing investments which people living nearby have to make as a result of disruption or damage .
Schiphol Airport is to my knowledge applying this principle carefully .
There is the risk that , in the event of extra environmental compensation not being used to cover genuine environmental damage and disruption , certain airports may attract disruptive flights in order to boost their income .
Taking into account these considerations , I supported Article 5 and Amendments Nos 11 , 25 and 26 in particular .
The proposal for a directive we are debating is the last of the measures envisaged in the third liberalization package for air transport .
The Commission proposes to establish one set of rules for the payment of dues at airports which it tells us will be based on the principles of non-discrimination , cost relation and transparency .
The proposal is based on strict , rational , financial criteria , which regard airports as simple commercial enterprises and ignore their vital role as a means to support economic development and cohesion , to exercise social policy , and to implement objectives related to environmental protection and the safety of flights , passengers and those working in the area .
The aim , of course , is not to improve the present services and infrastructure at airports and enhance safety , but to reduce costs for the airlines using the airports and once again to give them a boost in the race to share out the liberalized markets .
Needless to say , the last people to gain will be those who work for the airport management agency or the companies that use airports , since all they can look forward to is abolition of their collective agreements under the blackmailing threat of closure - as in the case of Olympic Airways - , aiming once more to cut costs for the companies .
Nor will the passengers benefit , who might have theoretically , since experience shows that under conditions of oligopolistic competition and market sharing , all cost cuts lead as a rule only to increased profits .
On the contrary , this directive will create problems for airport management agencies , granted that their reduced income will undermine their ability to develop and modernize infrastructures , to the detriment of flight and passenger safety .
The income reduction and parallel ban on state aid , combined with the suffocating framework imposed by financial discipline and cuts in the resources for regional policy , will directly affect the smaller airports and consequently the more distant and less accessible regions , which are precisely the ones that need help .
From that starting point , we stress our disagreement with the Commission 's proposal , which aims to relate the level of dues to the cost of the services and infrastructure provided .
Those dues cover the costs not only of central and busy airports , but regional ones as well , small and isolated as they are , and which , because traffic through them is limited , cannot meet operating expenses which are to a large extent inelastic , and cannot spend what they need to on modernization investments .
With the pending economic and monetary union , as well as the completion of the single market , several barriers to tourism within the Union will be lifted .
The question remains : will we truly have a single market in tourism as well ?
Currently , the EU 's lack of coherent thinking as regards tourism seems to indicate the answer to that question will be a resounding ' no ' .
It is for that reason that I fully support the report by Mr Aparicio Sánchez .
It is time for the Commission to begin considering the effects on the Union 's tourists separately when drafting legislation .
Just as we have started to look into consumers ' rights in their home country , we should also place an emphasis on the rights of those consumers on holiday .
It is these consumers who are most vulnerable , often in a culture with which they are not familiar , possibly on a whirlwind tour of several cities and not aware of local laws .
I welcome the rapporteur 's call on the Commission to increase transparency in the airline industry .
As we move toward liberalization of the Union 's skies we should consider how this liberalization ( and the airline industry 's habit of selective price discrimination ) affects the Union tourist .
The practice of code sharing should also be made more transparent so that the traveller knows which company is actually taking him on his journey , not just which company is selling him the ticket .
I also find particular significance in Mr Aparicio Sánchez 's call for harmonization of rules in the hotel and group tour sectors .
To truly have a single market , tourists must be protected by similar laws in each Member State .
The Commission , as this report points out , must organize its thinking vis-à-vis the tourist sector , as the areas that affect tourists are spread across DGs within the Commission .
By encouraging the different policy-making areas to work together , the EU can be sure to protect the tourist and provide for the industry to grow .
Improvements in the rights and safety of consumers are always an important goal , even though I think that the current impact of the tourism sector on the environment is the most pressing problem to solve .
The protection of the rights and safety of consumers and improvements in trading standards in the tourism sector are best taken care of at national level , both from the point of view of efficiency and of democracy .
I have therefore abstained from voting in the final vote on the Aparicio Sánchez report .
Mr President , I am happy to lend my support to this report today because I share its commitment to securing proper compensation for travellers who suffer when airlines or hotels overbook .
Too many people 's hard earned holidays have been ruined by this practice , whether it is due to mistakes by the companies concerned , or a deliberate act of policy .
The report is also right to point out that air safety needs more attention as the number of flights and passengers criss-crossing our airspace grows each year .
I hope that the Commission and Council will act on the rapporteur 's ideas and ensure that consumer confidence in the vital tourism sector of our economy is strengthened as a result .
I think this matter should be outside the scope of this Parliament .
Paragraph 11 of the report proposes that the Commission should present to Parliament and the Council the results of a study of overbooking of hotels and other accommodation etcetera .
Similarly , paragraph 30 proposes that , along with Parliament and sector associations , the Commission should organize annual conferences on the quality of the supply of tourism services .
The tourism industry is certainly of great importance for employment in many parts of the EU , but it is getting a little absurd when the above proposals are presented to this Parliament .
I consider these issues to be outside our area of competence .
Elles report ( A4-0097 / 98 )
Mr James Elles ' report on the implementation of the general budget of the Union for 1996 shows that the Commission 's attitude ends up irritating even those who were originally best disposed towards it .
Frauds which have been denounced from year to year are continuing unabated and the institutions tend to protect the officials responsible or at least give that impression , maintaining the lack of transparency which characterizes internal investigations . Energetic reform is non-existent .
For the third consecutive time , the Court of Auditors has refused to give its " statement of assurance ' for the Community budget , and the European Parliament , for its part , has just refused to give it discharge .
The reports of the Court of Auditors make appalling reading .
They show an accumulation of fraud and inertia , without really explaining where this paralysis comes from .
For its part , the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations goes further in its analysis and lays the blame on the structure itself of a number of European institutions and policies .
For example , the Elles report is concerned about the fact that more than one year after the conclusions of the European Parliament 's Committee of Inquiry on the procedures for Community transit , the computerization of this procedure , which was presented as an appropriate means of making it reliable and operational , has still not begun .
Worse still , as of March 1998 , the Commission has not even been able to establish a detailed specification of the system which would need to be installed to allow for a better detection of fraud .
Is this by chance ?
Should we , like the Elles report , blame only the Commission 's inertia ?
In reality , we have reason to believe that the problem goes far deeper : now that administrative documents concerning goods as well as internal border controls have been suppressed , has Community transit not simply become quite unmanageable ?
Could the same question not be raised with regard to procedures relating to Community initiatives in favour of SMEs ? They have led to such a fragmentation of appropriations that the Commission seems unable to say whether or not their objectives have been met .
There could be many more examples like these .
Overall , repetitive fraud not only highlights lax management , but the impractical nature of policies which were originally defined with an ideological aim of developing the European super-state , rather than out of any goal of efficiency .
Furthermore , by placing the Commission on a pedestal for so long , as the unchallenged guardian of the European interest , its control has hardly been facilitated , and we see the consequences today .
To truly fight against fraud , the Commission must be removed from its pedestal , and it must itself be subject to control .
It is clear that the refusal to give it discharge for the 1996 budget will have consequences .
If the European Parliament was logical with regard to its own actions , it would vote a motion of censure .
Kellett-Bowman report ( A4-0092 / 98 )
The Danish Social Democrats are abstaining from the vote on Mrs Theato 's report .
We believe that the report constitutes an attempt to prejudge development , since to a large extent it relates to a situation that will only arise if the Member States do not unanimously ratify the convention on the protection of the Union 's financial interests .
If such a situation should arise , it is not a foregone conclusion that harmonization of criminal law would be necessary in order to protect the financial interests of the Union .
Moreover , Denmark will remain outside any such initiative on the basis of our reservations about participation in EU legal cooperation .
I do not support the report 's proposal on the establishment of a European public prosecutor .
On the other hand , I think it is of course appropriate that those who commit fraud with EU subsidies are carefully investigated and caught at national level .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )
Financial assistance for SMEs
The next item is the report ( A4-0114 / 98 ) by Mr Pronk , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Decision on measures of financial assistance for innovative and job-creating small and medium-sized enterprises ( SMEs ) - The Growth and Employment Initiative ( COM ( 98 ) 0026 - C4-0138 / 98-98 / 0024 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , we are dealing with an important proposal , which has appeared thanks to this Parliament , namely as a result of the van Velzen report and the proposal made by the draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Tillich .
The Luxembourg Summit adopted these proposals .
SMEs generate new jobs .
In the European Union 6.5 % of all investments are made in start-up enterprises .
In the United States 37 % of all investments find their way to start-up enterprises .
Maybe that is why more jobs are is created in the United States .
The proposal comprises three complementary initiatives .
This plan constitutes the implementation of part of the Tillich package , ECU 420 million out of a total of ECU 450 million .
The first part , namely 40 % of the ECU 420 million , is allocated to the ETF start-up scheme which provides risk capital for SMEs .
I would like to stress that the name should be changed , and I suggest it is called the Euro Start-up scheme .
The new name is needed first and foremost to avoid confusion with other European schemes .
Secondly , the ETF scheme is implemented by the European Investment Bank , whilst the Euro Start-up scheme will be managed by the European Investment Fund .
Thirdly , it is not a very easy name for the European Commission to market .
The Commission will have to do something about marketing this initiative .
Unless the EIB is constantly involved , marketing it will be difficult .
It is also a rather meaningless name .
The Euro Start-up initiative aims to improve access to capital for high-end technological SMEs which are starting up or are in their initial stages .
These enterprises have a big growth potential , but have difficulty gaining access to capital due to the high risk involved .
There are only four Member States where such initiatives exist in practice , and in those countries they are working well .
In other Member States there is a great deal of interest in creating an instrument which provides investment in highend technological SMEs , and which can offer guidance .
With such a scheme the potential which already exists in a number of Member States can be extended throughout the entire European Union .
The second scheme is that of the joint European venture .
20 % of the ECU 420 million is set aside for this .
The aim is to promote the establishment of transnational joint ventures by SMEs within the European Union .
There have been some examples of cooperation between transnational SMEs in central and eastern Europe and in the Third World .
These examples offer hope and confidence that the joint European ventures will work .
It should be realized that these are not revolving funds which will pay themselves back after a number of years , in contrast to the other two initiatives .
The third scheme is the SME guarantee facility .
40 % of the ECU 420 million has been allocated to this .
This guarantee facility enables SMEs which are starting or have just started out to gain access to capital .
One thing I would like to emphasize in this report is the evaluation of these three initiatives .
The European Parliament does not want to add any conditions in advance , other than those proposed by the Commission itself .
Otherwise , it could take years for the programme to come into force properly .
What is needed is effective evaluation afterwards , rather like interim evaluation when a political decision needs to be made once a programme comes to an end .
What is also important is the length of the programme .
It was agreed that the programme would run for three years .
This was also promised by the Luxembourg Summit .
But three years is not less than three years , so if the programme starts on 1 May 1998 , than it should run until 1 May 2001 , rather than 1 January 2001 .
Evaluating it will become extremely difficult otherwise .
I call on the Council to change its view on this point , and to let the programme run for the full three years , particularly since the euro start-up scheme and the SME guarantee facility are revolving funds which have to run for 16 years .
All being well , these two programmes will cost the EU absolutely nothing after 16 years , and this is a wonderful way to promote job creation , whilst at the same time pursuing a frugal budgetary policy .
A big advantage of the guarantee scheme initiative is that the Member States which do not yet have it , will have to set it up , whilst other Member States will be better able to process the applications which precede the guarantees . These programmes are frequently over-subscribed , after all .
What is also remarkable is that it covers both national , regional and local systems .
In some countries , like mine for instance , the national system has developed further .
In others it is the regional systems which have come to further fruition .
It is good to learn from each other on this point .
I would like to add that , after the talks with the Commission , I have tabled some new amendments , namely numbers 18 , 19 , 20 and 21 .
Amendments Nos 18 and 20 are formal changes .
There is a mistake in Amendment No 19 ; it should read assessment in the English , not evaluation .
This should be similarly modified in the other languages .
Amendment No 21 has incorporated part of the amendment from the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy which had fallen between two stools .
To conclude , Mr President , I would very much like to thank the Members and the Secretariat of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for their excellent cooperation in this difficult case . I would also like to thank the other Members of the European Parliament , and especially the two committees with which we cooperated , the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
We have also cooperated well with the Council and the Commission .
I have rarely experienced such intense cooperation between the institutions as in this case , but it deals , after all , with a solemn promise made by the European Council , which we have to implement here .
Mr President , the report we are dealing with today , with its legislative proposal , was indeed one of the key issues of the 1998 budget debates , for which I was the rapporteur .
This legislative proposal is intended as an initiative for creating more jobs in Europe .
During the budget debate we reached an agreement with the Luxembourg Presidency which the EP and the Council finally complied with at second reading .
Now the Commission has tabled a legislative proposal .
I must compliment the Commission for having basically adhered to the conclusions of those debates .
These have indeed been taken into account in the Commission 's proposal .
The aim of the proposal was , and is , to adopt a programme which will quickly and easily help create additional jobs in innovative enterprises , and not in the administrative offices of the Commission and Member States .
The amendments to the Commission 's legislative proposal , which have been put forward by the Committee on Budgets , were drawn up with this in mind .
Let me now turn to the content of the report and to the amendments being proposed therein .
I should first like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Pronk , for his efforts in accelerating the procedure normally used for such proposals , which was something also requested by the Commission , for this has meant that we are able to debate the issue here today .
On the subject of the first amendment proposed by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I really have to say that this stratagem is not appropriate .
In the course of the 1998 budgetary procedure and in the decision , we did not set out that this programme should comprise ECU 450 million for three years .
We could not do this because we were deciding on a budget for one year .
The correct interpretation is that we reached a decision on ECU 150 million for the year 1998 .
During the deliberations between the Council and the European Parliament it was established that it was our intention to apply this programme for a period of three years with a total allocation of ECU 450 million .
However , this does not mean - and indeed this is the position of the Commission and the Council - that we require a legal basis for the remaining ECU 420 million .
With regard to Amendment No 3 , I have to say that it is indeed correct that we should also be taking account of those other small and medium-sized enterprises which are engaged in the social sector and in other areas of public health .
However , the same amendment seeks to stimulate the creation of employment , and as this refers to all enterprises it must therefore automatically include all those operating in the social sector .
I have serious doubts about Amendment No 7 , as proposed by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and drafted by Mr Harrison .
Perhaps this is why the wording ' if necessary ' has been used . I know , and this has already been said by the rapporteur , that Europe has had a very poor success rate with venture-capital funds and with this programme we wanted to provide some stimulation here .
For this reason we should be working with ventures which already exist and , instead of complicating the process by introducing a tendering system , let us therefore first take on those which have been successful .
This would also be in keeping with the content of the document .
I am therefore of the opinion that we should try to ensure that what we call risk capital is also made available to enterprises which are prepared to take the risk , and we should not impede this by erecting administrative barriers .
Mr President , in his introductory speech Mr Pronk reminded us of the intense cooperation between the three bodies .
This was largely the result of the European Parliament having financed this project out of its own budget .
That is why it was necessary for the others to cooperate with us .
The European Parliament did this to create the opportunity to submit at least one concrete project before the summit on employment in Luxembourg .
I am still extremely satisfied that we ended up doing this , albeit with a great deal of trouble .
The objective of the entire project is obviously to create employment .
I accept the idea that SMEs can play a vital role in this .
I would like to point out , however , that there seems to be a certain amount of hype going around .
Everyone thinks that as soon as a new small firm has been set up , everything will be fine . Yet if you look again a year later , you will notice that quite a number of these new SMEs have disappeared .
That is why I would like to emphasize the request we are making in our amendments to include education and mentorship . The people concerned deserve top-quality support , whether in the context of entrepreneurship , as was formulated during the employment summit , or else as part of this project , to ensure that the jobs created will last .
Another element I would like to point out is the one expressed in Amendment No 11 . The final assessment should devote considerable attention to the quality of job creation , to social protection and trade union rights for example , as well as to the type of job creation .
Is it atypical , full-time , and so on ?
If this forms part of the assessment , then it obviously means that this should also play a role in the objectives , at the time when the projects are given approval .
I hope the Commission will pay attention to this right from the start .
Simply leaving it to the Member States is an extremely dangerous strategy , because in some of the Member States hamburger jobs are proving more popular at the moment than a balance between flexibility and security .
In conclusion , I would like to point out that the link with what we refer to as the third system , the so-called social economy , which may be found in public health or culture , is very important to us in the project . It is my view that there is enormous scope for job creation in this area .
I still believe that this sector has been hugely underestimated , by the Commission as well as others . I would like to argue for these projects to be linked to the proposal we are discussing today , and which I hope we will approve tomorrow , once the Commission has adopted enough of our amendments .
Mr President , in his report Mr Pronk has clearly presented the problems and concerns in respect of the proposal for a Council Decision on measures of financial assistance for innovative and job-creating small and medium-sized enterprises .
I should like to thank him most sincerely for his valuable contribution and I hope that his proposals will be given due consideration by the Commission and the Council .
For years the institutions of the European Union have been stressing the importance of SMEs in the area of job creation .
All available figures show that SMEs form the backbone of employment growth in the EU and that this situation will continue .
The smaller the business , the more successful it generally is in creating jobs .
Various financial schemes have been devised and introduced continually since 1992 , some of which undoubtedly proved successful .
In spite of this , Commissioner , I am constantly aware of criticism that the programmes lack cost-effectiveness because the application procedure for SMEs , no less , is too complicated , too bureaucratic and too protracted .
Many SMEs have to hire expensive consultants just to process their applications .
These defects should all be put right in the new proposals .
The criticism which has been expressed , namely that there is no comparative assessment of the performance of previous measures in terms of cost per job created , is sadly justified .
This lack of transparency makes it considerably more difficult to prepare the new measures which are being planned .
Nevertheless , I hope that what the rapporteur calls the ' ETF start-up scheme ' , the joint European venture and the SME guarantee facility , particularly for businesses employing fewer than 100 people , will all prove successful .
It is precisely these enterprises which experience problems when it comes to the provision of risk capital .
Parliament wants to promote this through the SME guarantee facility and in so doing to create more jobs .
I therefore expect that the final amount allocated will be something which approaches what has been proposed by Parliament .
The success of the new measures is vital for the unemployed of Europe and is now a matter of real urgency .
The sooner these are implemented , the better it will be .
Our motto must be ' more jobs , less bureaucracy ' .
I hope that we can quickly achieve this goal , though not , as Mr van Velzen says , by giving employers even more regulations to cope with .
That would be regrettable .
Mr President , I welcome the Commissioner to the House .
At the outset I want to congratulate my colleague , Mr Pronk , for a wonderful report which comes at a very opportune time for us .
Last week in Brussels we discussed the proposed changes to structural funding and to the support mechanisms under the European social fund , in particular those for employment creation , and we saw with some disquiet that the real amounts of money allocated for employment creation and training processes were being reduced overall .
As my colleagues have already said , the SME sector accounts for over 66 % of all employment within the EU .
Ireland is unique in the sense that our criterion for SME status in the European Union is an average of 250 employees or under .
The majority of companies in Ireland in that sector would employ 80 people or less .
This presents us with a great opportunity to send out a very strong message to those people who are putting their own capital at risk that we are willing to act with them as joint partners in creating new enterprises , new jobs and , in particular , new economic wealth .
There are a couple of things we should focus on more than we have done .
Mr van Velzen touched on the fact that a lot of SMEs shut down within a year of being set up .
The main reason for that is that they do not have access to more long-term finance than just a one-year term loan .
Secondly , they do not have the same access to training which would allow them to keep up with the new technologies , with new economic forecasting to enable them to be competitive within the main markets .
I congratulate Mr Pronk on his proposals with regard to the very technical aspect of providing venture capital to these small enterprises , so that Europe once again can be in the lead in creating new employment .
Finally , I do not think it is appropriate that the third sector should be included .
Following on what Mr Schiedermeier has said , it is important to recognize that we can protect workers ' rights and social entitlement , but that does not mean we have to add on more bureaucracy and red tape .
Mr President , the previous speakers have already pointed out that it was partly thanks to Parliament that these resources have become available .
It is my view that they were released for a good cause , namely to support those enterprises which are starting out or are in their initial stages and which need capital .
The fact that we are doing this is unique .
On the other hand , we should ensure that no money is wasted , either at the research centres or in the hands of those who are responsible for channelling the money .
For that reason and because we are worried that these resources might be misused , we tabled an amendment to paragraph 3 of the proposal .
We tabled Amendment No 17 for the same reason , because we believe that if you want to evaluate , you should know what you are evaluating .
At the moment there is still some uncertainty over the implementation measures .
I would like to know from the Commission what its position is on these amendments .
Mr Pronk mentioned that we worked together very closely on this point and that we acted unanimously .
Those who have known me for some time know that I normally try to use reason when looking at things , and this includes the debate between the Commission and the Council . But I think we should both use reason , and , together , take a serious look at each others amendments .
Mr President , Mr van Velzen also pointed out the importance of mentorship for young entrepreneurs and people starting out .
I believe Mr van Velzen is too dismissive in saying that many of those who start out do not continue .
I share his view on mentorship , but I believe there will always be risks and that we should look at the people who have progressed further than the start-up stage .
Because , as it turns out in America , many more new jobs are created than lost through risk .
That is why I hope that we will be able to look at this programme in a positive way .
Mr President , firstly I would like to congratulate Mr Pronk on his report , and on the fact that he has succeeded , in quite a short space of time , in coming to grips with the essentials in this matter and making important and worthwhile changes to the Commission 's proposal .
Hopefully the Commission will be willing to accept them .
I am particularly satisfied with the report 's mention that part of the SME structural funding programme should be aimed at funds for third sector SME 's , especially for public health , education and the Arts .
This represents that broad interpretation of the notion of innovation that is needed .
Innovation does not just mean technological invention , but also possible new ways of producing services or care .
Naturally , the main responsibility for the nation 's health and other such things rests with the public sector , which small firms in the third sector can only complement , never replace .
The small companies I allude to are often firms in which women mainly work .
I am happy too that the report mentions the need for a report on female entrepreneurs , as a separate exercise .
These companies I am talking about are often very small .
Women are inexperienced as entrepreneurs and they lack information on funding opportunities .
However , women often work in labourintensive service industries , so investment in such companies will lead directly to job creation .
It would be advantageous to all , men and women alike , if information on funding opportunities via the EU were easily accessible at one source and there were no need to search for it among the various authorities .
This is very important .
Mr President , like the others , I thank Mr Pronk for his work .
I am struck by the degree of consensus there usually is on this important subject right across the parliamentary groups .
We in this Parliament all seem to know that this is the hope for dealing with the horrendous joblessness .
This is the bright star shining in that darkness .
I come from an area with a tremendously sparse population and I have to ask : what is small ?
In many parts of my area small would not be 50 employees ; that would be big .
I join with the honourable Member who appealed for a special set of rules for the micro SMEs .
Some of the most innovative schemes in my constituency have started off with five to ten employees , sometimes in quite remote places .
If the idea is good enough remoteness can often be overcome .
There is one in Skye where scientifically skilled people , working in tiny areas , create instruments to measure various parts of the body for various purposes .
The thing produced is so small that it is not costly to despatch it to all parts of the world .
That business started off with two men and now it employs about 30 top scientists who are happy to live on Skye .
It can often be that something starting in a tiny way can become very important to the whole community .
We could all give examples like that .
Mostly these small businesses have the problem of a narrow investment base and that is what we are trying to address .
I welcome the three schemes which Mr Pronk has so ably described .
However , one has to say that once the small business has got over the start-up problem and shown some success in job creation , what happens then ?
That is when the test comes .
Very often in my country - and in others - they go into bankruptcy because of late payment and the lack of a code for that .
There was a programme recently on the BBC which suggests that the Commission is about to introduce a directive on this subject .
I hope so .
In the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on which I served for some time , we all unanimously wanted a code for late payment .
It is late payment that undoes all the work we are trying to do here , and often the culprits are big companies , local authorities and , I have to say , institutions of the European Union .
They are all at fault in driving many of these companies - who have managed to get over the hurdle of getting started and creating jobs - out of business .
The old schemes worked rather well , once we managed to get quite a lot of banks to support the European Investment Bank guarantee system .
We have not really had a proper evaluation , as one speaker said , of performance in terms of cost per job .
I put a lot of information around my constituency in Scotland about that scheme and many people wrote to me .
It should not really be me who provides the publicity .
A lot of companies simply do not receive information about the EIB , not even about the important work being done by European Information Centres .
For example , there is one excellent centre in Inverness , but it does not receive enough funds to disseminate the fact that it is there and what it can offer .
I welcome this report with all its merits and hope it will be passed unanimously .
Mr President , first of all I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent report .
It is certainly widely recognized throughout the European Union that SMEs are fundamental to the future of our economy .
With that in mind , I certainly welcome this report which seeks to build on Parliament 's commitment to creating conditions in which SMEs can develop .
We all know that small and medium-sized enterprises account for more than 65 % of our employment , and it is right therefore that in finding ways of strengthening our economy most effort is put into helping them over the initial difficulties .
I would certainly support the calls for help because I am a little bit like Mrs Ewing in my constituency .
Many of the proposals concern businesses with under fifty employees , indeed under twenty employees , and a lot of these industries are the micro-ones who start from very small beginnings but can flounder very speedily if they do not get that initial help .
Late payment is certainly one of the major problems , and I think we must ensure that we give the flexibility that is needed and that we do not hang more red tape and bureaucracy around their necks .
This is one of the problems I find with national governments , especially when support comes from the EU - that there seem to be more bureaucratic conditions tied in to all new proposals .
Unless we can lighten this up , unless we can find flexibility here , then I think we are not achieving what we are hoping to achieve and that is to get people in the EU back to work .
In my own constituency , we have the particular problem of the difference between the pound sterling and the punt .
The UK government has to date been unable to tackle the high rate which is the most overrated cost of any currency in the world .
The pound sterling is certainly putting many of my small businesses , especially in border regions , out of work and they are experiencing considerable difficulty .
Those are the challenges I think that we have got to face and if we do not face up to those challenges , then I think we will not be doing the job that we are certainly here to do , and we will not achieve in the long term what we hope to achieve in getting the people of Europe back to work .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate Mr Pronk on his report .
As all the other speakers before me have said , no doubt all the studies and statistics maintain that the future of European employment depends on small businesses , which in the last ten years have been the only ones able to create most new jobs .
In Italy , for example , there are around four million small businesses , which represent 90 % of our enterprises .
The SMEs have had the highest growth potential and , therefore , the highest potential to create jobs , precisely because they are the best at adapting to market requirements .
However , the SMEs are too often forced to assume all the business risks , without any type of facility , either in terms of tax concessions or in terms of access to credit , as the State normally only favours and helps large businesses .
Among other things , it is precisely the difficulties in obtaining money , other than at often totally unreasonable bank rates , that determine the conditions for an increasingly more worrying spread of the phenomenon of high interest .
Consequently , I share the spirit of the initiative favouring the new financial measures for SMEs .
In particular , I agree with the opinion expressed by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on the need to give specific priority to business with less than 100 employees , establishing accurately and transparently the real potential for growth of the businesses themselves , that have to create new jobs ; however , these new jobs also have to be permanent .
To help the more dynamic SMEs , particularly with regard to the small undertakings of young people and women - possibly the most disadvantaged sectors - by making more funding and finance instruments available , will mean not only an increase in employment but also technological innovations , competitiveness on the market and , above all , greater ability for economic operators to face the challenges and opportunities of the imminent European Monetary Union .
Mr President , as recalled by Mr Pronk and by those before me , for years we have been trying to identify effective means , methods and solutions to contribute towards facing the employment problem in a positive way .
The reality confirms that in all Member States the SMEs are the backbone of the business sector in Europe , the only ones , as previously pointed out , that have managed to create new jobs in recent years .
The SMEs are therefore the most able to adapt to fast changes , they are more flexible , but they also have greater difficulties in finding capital on the markets and in gaining access to credit at lower rates .
We therefore need , as we are already doing and as proposed in the communication , to increase the growth potential and the vitality of SMEs at Community level , by facilitating and enhancing access to capital .
For this reason , last year , while preparing for the Luxembourg Extraordinary Summit , the European Parliament called on the Council to adopt strengthening and expansion measures in favour of SMEs and proposed the creation of a new budget heading B-55 , job market and technological innovation , to be financed with ECU 450 million over three years , dividing the measures into two sections : initiatives in favour of the job market and technological innovation , in addition to the amount already provided by the EIB and by the European Investment Fund .
In particular , the initiatives favouring the job market are also based on the implementation of the Commission communication indicating the need for local employment initiatives , identifying too 17 different sectors in which pilot projects would be financed as would the spread of the good practices that have produced satisfactory results in terms of employment in recent years .
I am thinking , among other things , of the development and promotion of pilot projects within the third system - not the tertiary system , as it is often incorrectly called or translated - which , in addition to creating jobs , is an efficient local means of participating in and providing positive answers to social , environmental and cultural requirements .
At this point , I have to say that , not meeting expectations , with the proposal we are discussing today , the Commission is allocating a reference sum of ECU 420 million , excluding the initiative of the first section .
Frankly , it seems a little strange to me , as it does to Parliament , and inconsistent with the indications and choices of the European Parliament accepted by the Luxembourg Council .
In addition to approving the Commission proposal , it is therefore also necessary to correct what has been mentioned above and include it in the proposal legal basis , as proposed by the rapporteur , whom I congratulate .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to start by thanking Mr Pronk for the work he has done on his report , which could be seen as ground-breaking as far as this Parliament 's work is concerned .
I would also like to make clear from the start that I am in favour of the growth and employment initiative .
The European Parliament has made ECU 150 million available , and all this is primarily for the benefit of small and medium-sized businesses , businesses with up to 250 employees , as set out by the European Commission .
We are unanimous in this Parliament in our support for this scheme .
Yet I would like to put a few objections to Parliament and the Commission , Mr President , in the hope that we will also remain critical when seeing through this entire initiative .
My first objection concerns the fact that 90 % is allocated to the so-called technology facility for SMEs .
It concerns sub-sectors which chiefly employ highly-qualified people .
This kind of support should go hand in hand with investments in education and professional training ; if it does not , we might see an increase in the shortage of technologically-skilled people .
Today the papers are reporting that the Belgian government is looking for 5 000 computer specialists , and that in Great Britain Tony Blair is looking for 20 000 to tackle the millennium bug .
These people are simply not on the market at the moment .
We need further training .
Secondly , I am pleased with Amendment No 3 which aims to extend this initiative to the third sector , especially to sectors such as public health , education and culture .
These social angles have great value in themselves , and could lead to numerous jobs , which will not so much affect highly-skilled , as semi- and unskilled workers .
The fight against structural unemployment should be introduced in this environment above all .
My last comment , Mr President , is that we must take care that we are not dealing with the phenomenon of the cuckoo in the nest , as when important subsidies are passed on to SMEs with jobs being not the main , but the secondary concern .
That explains why it is so important that this initiative is implemented , and more specifically that jobs are created .
Mr President , I would like to pay tribute to Mr Pronk on the preparation and presentation of a very fine report .
I am particularly pleased that small and medium-sized enterprises have now been placed at the top of the European agenda , recognizing their important job-creating role within the Union .
SMEs are the backbone of industry , commerce and the service sectors throughout the Union , with one third of all jobs in the private sector within the Union in enterprises employing fewer than ten employees .
Coming from an almost ultra-peripheral region in the north-west of Ireland and representing the constituency of Connacht and Ulster , which has a high rate of unemployment and a per capita income less than 75 % the European average , I can very much identify with enterprises with less than ten employees and fully appreciate their importance .
We must create an economic climate which is conducive to investment in such small enterprises .
The creation of an enterprise culture within the Union is absolutely essential .
It is not the responsibility of the Commission or indeed Member State governments to create employment .
However , it is their responsibility to create conditions conducive to investment and job creation .
Favourable economic conditions , terms of competitiveness and labour market flexibility are an essential prerequisite to job creation .
Therefore , in conclusion , I welcome Parliament 's decision to provide additional financial resources of ECU 450 million and also welcome the proposal for a Council decision to assist SMEs .
Mr President , advertising is dominated by the big companies and multilateral corporations .
Their presence in this sector establishes them firmly in the minds of the people .
Just think of Coca-Cola , for example . Every child , no matter where , knows the name .
However , the real mainstay of our economy is not the handful of big businesses but rather the many small ones , the SMEs .
These account for 66 % of total employment in the EU and are marked by a strong gross employment growth .
I therefore welcome any initiative which enables us to provide financial assistance to these highly efficient businesses , for one of the biggest problems facing small entrepreneurs is the generally poor availability of own capital .
Only by subsequent assessment will it be possible to establish whether or not the aim of the programme , namely to create more jobs , has actually been achieved .
The earlier we carry out this assessment , and the greater the detail of our reporting , then the greater will be the success of the programmes and the effectiveness of the financial resources used .
I therefore fully support the adoption of Amendment No 10 .
Mr President , this report on financial assistance for innovation and job-creating SMEs carries the promise that resources will be made available to encourage the sort of entrepreneurship which will provide for sustainable growth in employment .
Regrettably , however , the Commission 's proposal for a Council decision fails to mention the role that women entrepreneurs might have in this process .
This is a serious omission because women probably represent the greatest potential in this field .
Currently only 30 % of SMEs are run by women but those businesses , according to the relevant statistics , are the ones most likely to be successful .
The excellent Mr Pronk has kindly agreed to my suggestions in this regard .
Amendment No 8 draws attention to the need to secure the wide dissemination of information concerning financial assistance , especially to women entrepreneurs , and Amendment No 11 calls for an assessment of the schemes which takes into account equal opportunities .
I hope that the Commission will listen to us on this point and will truly mainstream opportunities for women within this financial assistance .
Mr President , the report we are examining is certainly positive , as well as a reversal of the trend in speeches by the European Community .
But I have the impression that it is like a drop of water in the desert , totally inadequate , all the more so as now , with the entry into force of monetary union , the difficulties of SMEs will increase .
We are faced with a situation where a certain amount of flexibility will no longer be permitted and where the lack of democratic control by an elected Parliament over measures taken by the governments and by the European Commission makes this problem even more difficult . It is made difficult by the serious discontentment felt in the world of real production .
Take Italy , for example , where I have been elected , a country which has got its accounts more or less into order , intensifying the tax pressure on SMEs and planning to do so even more in the future ; the European Commission should pay a great deal of attention to that need .
There are instabilities . There is an area in the north of Italy , where SMEs are concentrated , that will certainly become unstable , precisely because of these policies .
The Italian state has not yet entered Europe . It is already thinking of diverting resources to the south , taking inspiration from the usual practice , that should certainly favour the great capital , that has deindustrialized the north and which creates virtual businesses in the south where there is no independent growth , because the slightest real business activity is suffocated by the Mafia world .
It is therefore right for the Commission to allow the idyllic visions to be dispelled and realize that great instability will be caused by the Italian state , particularly owing to the revolt of the SMEs in the north of the country .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Members of the House , Mr Pronk 's report follows on from the " growth and employment ' initiative which you mentioned , and which Parliament approved by making the necessary resources available during the 1998 budget procedure .
This very clear political signal from the European Parliament made a very substantial contribution to the success of the European Employment Summit last November in Luxembourg .
On this basis , the Commission was able on 21 January to present its legislative proposal , and is both delighted and thanks you for the speed with which your committee has handled the matter .
There is no miracle response , no simple solution to the challenge of employment .
The strategy recommended by the Commission is the continuation of a healthy macroeconomic policy at Community level and the strengthening of the coordination of national economic policies and employment policies .
Within this framework , the growth and employment initiative intends to develop specific actions in favour of small and medium-sized companies which create employment , as Mr Chanterie and Mrs Ghilardotti have just pointed out .
No sector is excluded ; all sectors are admitted .
The SMEs are the reservoirs of employment in Europe .
I would remind you that in the United States , it is estimated that 3 % of companies - those working basically in biotechnology , telecommunications and in the cutting edge sectors , have created 80 % of jobs in that country .
Hence the Commission has adopted the mechanisms which are the most efficient in terms of the creation of sustainable employment , and they aim in particular at lightening the financial burdens placed upon SMEs .
In response to your questions , I will look briefly again at these three programmes , which are parallel but complementary .
Firstly , we have the European Technology Force " start-up initiative ' which is a venture capital mechanism run by the European Investment Fund .
The EIF will invest in specialist risk capital funds , and the proposed arrangement will strengthen the European Technology Force - the ETF - which has already been implemented by the European Investment Bank ( EIB ) , but this will take place exactly where the EIB cannot intervene .
This new mechanism will set great store on the market segment for venture capital which finances the establishment and start-up of small and medium-sized companies , and where the need for finance is higher and the risk greater .
The ETF start-up is purely an initiative for job creation , irrespective of the field or type of small or medium-sized enterprise - Mrs Ewing , I reply to you on this point - and of course , for the smallest companies , companies which are set up or run by women , there are no constraints or limits in this field .
We nevertheless note that , in spite of recent efforts , risk capital is underdeveloped in European countries , in particular as regards start-up risk capital .
That is why we drew up this proposal .
Why is it not possible to change the name ?
This is because it is a complementary initiative to the EIB , hence the marketing , by which I mean the advertising and communication which focus on this initiative .
A moment ago , Mr Harrison , you pointed out that it was particularly difficult for SMEs to know when these schemes existed . Accordingly , we have paid special attention to efficiency in our marketing .
That is why this initiative , associated with the EIB , will be implemented in accordance with the EIB .
Moreover , in our opinion it was unnecessary to add the term " Euro ' and call it ' Euro Start-up ' , as this did not add a great deal .
That is my response to your comments on the first initiative .
With regard to the second initiative , the joint European venture , which was less frequently mentioned by Members of the House , I would say that it will help in setting up transborder SMEs within the Union , enabling them to make better use of the opportunities offered , in particular , by the single market .
This programme provides for contributions to a maximum amount of ECU 100 000 per project , for expenditure on market studies , development of corporate plans , and for subsidies which may cover up to 10 % of fixed capital formation .
This mechanism is based on a pilot initiative which was adopted by the Commission in 1997 .
I would add that a similar programme - namely the JOP - is intended for the Eastern European countries , and has already shown its capacity to create new business and jobs .
The third and last mechanism is the SME guarantee facility , managed by the European Investment Fund .
This facility is intended to increase the volume of loans available to small or recently formed companies , on the basis of shared risk with existing guarantee systems .
The Commission is relying on the leverage effect of such an instrument , which will add to the capacity to raise real credit for the relevant small and medium-sized companies .
Overall , these three mechanisms could add up to some ECU 9 to 10 billion of extra investment in Europe , and will be rapidly made available .
In this respect , the Commission has taken up your request for a rapid and in-depth evaluation of the efficiency of these measures .
Mr Pronk , there are no supplementary conditions .
We accept , like you , that the agreement should last three full years , of course , and I would say to Mr Schiedermeier that we are in fact trying to ensure more transparency and accessibility for this proposal .
The Commission has already made a certain number of things available for venture capital .
This programme is limited , but it will significantly improve the availability of own or quasi-own capital to small and medium-sized enterprises .
Having said that , it is not enough simply to provide them today with what they need most .
We have to exploit all the advantages offered by the single market .
In this respect , institutional and regulatory barriers , market fragmentation , taxation and obstacles to as the development of a vast single European capital market will persist , and we will need to tackle these questions too .
I do not think that the growth and employment initiative is , on its own , enough .
That is why the Commission will , this very afternoon , set up a special committee on risk capital , with a view to the 1998 Cardiff European Council , which will , therefore , play a fully complementary role .
In conclusion , allow me to add my congratulations to Mr Pronk on this report , and to say that this is an excellent example of successful institutional cooperation .
In this respect , I can tell you that the Commission can take over most of the rapporteur 's amendments , sometimes with certain changes in the wording .
However , it cannot support the amendments relating - as I said a moment ago - to a change in the name of the action itself , nor those which discriminate between the beneficiary enterprises .
Mrs Ojala and Mr Wim van Velzen , any enterprise is acceptable , as any job is worth creating .
In other words , the second part of Amendment No 3 , Amendments Nos 4 , 5 , 6 , the second part of Amendment No 11 and Amendment No 15 cannot be accepted .
On the other hand , to Mrs Boogerd-Quaak , I would reply that we can accept Amendments Nos 16 and 17 and Amendments Nos 8 and 10 , which were tabled , I believe , by Mrs Raschhofer .
I have a final word about the budgetary aspect , in response to Mr Ghilardotti .
The formal position of the Commission is that shown in the financial statement of the proposal , in other words , ECU 420 million for measures of financial assistance for SMEs .
This amount in entered in the lines B 5-510 and B 5-511 ; these two lines which correspond respectively to the SME technology initiative and to the joint European venture .
Mr President , I would simply like to ask Mr Commissioner - whom I thank for his replies - whether I have properly understood that Amendments Nos 3 , 4 , 5 , 6 and 11 have not been taken over .
Amendments Nos 3 , the second part of Amendment No 5 , Amendment No 6 and the second part of Amendment No 11 have not been taken over .
Could you please explain to me what you mean by " not the second part of Amendment No 3 ' , because that is our own amendment .
May I point out that the collective nature of this project meant that , in addition to the SMEs we also wanted to incorporate innovative actions in the labour market and in the third system ?
We added Amendment No 3 so that the original character of the deal would be restored .
I would like to point out that this is not just some marginal discussion .
If Amendment No 3 is a problem to you , then the interpretation we gave to the original accord must have been a problem to you .
If this is the case , then you are making it very difficult for Parliament to approve this proposal .
I therefore urge you to be extremely careful before you cast Amendment No 3 aside .
I understood the Commissioner to say that the Commission is of the opinion that as it stands at present the proposal by the Commission makes it possible to provide finance for the things mentioned in that paragraph which he does not want to be part of the legal base .
Is that not correct ?
Yes , it is covered .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Follow-up to the world summit on social development
The next item is the report ( A4-0105 / 98 ) by Mrs Schörling , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Commission 's communication on the European Union 's follow-up to the world summit for social development ( COM ( 96 ) 0724 - C4-0142 / 97 ) .
Mr President , as you just said , this report is about the Commission 's communication on the world summit on social development in Copenhagen in 1995 when heads of state and government from 117 states and from the EU signed the Copenhagen Declaration .
They thus agreed that the overriding objectives on which people should cooperate were the eradication of poverty , an increase in employment and the fostering of safe and just societies .
In just over a month , in May , the UN 's Economic and Social Council is to hold a meeting in New York at which the question of the implementation and follow-up of the Copenhagen summit will be discussed .
It is therefore particularly important that we in the European Parliament have the opportunity through this report to give opinions before this meeting .
As we know , a new General Assembly is going to be meet concerning these issues in the year 2000 .
It will then be time for people to show what they have done to live up to what they have agreed .
I therefore welcome this communication from the Commission and think it is good that we have had the opportunity to discuss it in committee , including with the Commission 's presence .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank my colleagues on the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs for good cooperation and for their valuable points of view .
At the same time I regret that , unfortunately , the opinion from the Committee on Development and Cooperation came a little too late for me to include anything from it .
However , I believe that most of the points of view of that committee are still covered in the report .
In addition , I would like to say that the main responsibility for the implementation of measures falls primarily to the Member States .
However , EU policy and the EU as an international player have of course a special responsibility .
This may concern the negative environmental and social effects of the single market .
It may , for example , concern the effect of EMU on employment and cutbacks in the public sector , economic convergence but no social criteria , and it may also concern the EU 's role as an aid donor .
When I read the commitment which the Copenhagen Declaration entails , I am , to say the least , surprised that in the summary on the first page the Commission writes that at both national and Community level we have implemented a policy which corresponds to the commitment in the Copenhagen Declaration .
I must ask how we are going to get to grips with social and environmental problems if we close at least one of our eyes to reality ?
Considering how many unemployed and how many poor people we have in the EU today , I think it is a bit of a joke for us to say we have done so well .
In addition , there is not a word about the poverty action programme which has yet to be adopted by the Council .
I am also looking for a strategy from the Commission to encourage and exhort the signatories of the Copenhagen Declaration to really adopt concrete targets for social development and to involve the citizens in decisions and priorities about measures .
It is good that there is such a heading , but unfortunately there are only eight lines of text concerning this important extension of the debate and the involvement of civil society .
An involvement of civil society is in some way fundamental to the success of the policy .
That applies not only at EU level , but , of course , also at international level .
In developing countries we must establish a partnership , a cooperation with the local population in a totally different way .
We must replace the old donor / recipient mentality with the idea that we have to solve the world 's future problems together .
One disappointment with the outcome of the Copenhagen Summit was that we did not put sufficient emphasis on the necessity of debt relief for the poor countries , and that we did not succeed in arriving at a code of conduct for financial markets and world market trading .
At some stage the rich countries will have to take the initiative to break the trend whereby the gulf between rich and poor just keeps on growing .
In recent years the world 's total aid has fallen to its lowest level in modern times .
That is why I am so anxious that we really vote in favour of paragraph 14 which concerns a global tax on international currency speculation , which has been proposed by Nobel Prize winner James Tobin . The income would go into a fund to be administered by the UN 's Social and Economic Council .
I think it is time that we accepted such a fund , and time that we in this Parliament repeated yet again that it is now time for the rich world to really take a big step .
Mr President , Mrs Schörling has presented an excellent report .
On behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists I wish to recommend it to the House , for there are clear loopholes in the Commission 's communication on the European Union 's follow-up to the world summit for social development .
The Commission maintains , and indeed Mrs Schörling also confirms this , that the policies of the EU and of the EU Member States have always been compatible with the commitments of the Copenhagen Declaration and action programme .
Proposals for initiatives within the EU have therefore been of correspondingly meagre proportions .
It is certainly right for the EU to advocate the philosophy of unemployment reduction , social integration in the positive sense and the eradication of poverty .
But as far as real action is concerned , we have had nothing but vague declarations .
We demand that the fight against poverty and social exclusion be given top priority within the EU .
Measures must therefore be taken within the framework of the European Social Fund .
For many years the programme to eradicate poverty has been put on hold because the German government was opposed to any EU initiative .
This German blockade must be broken .
We call upon the Commission to interpret the new article in the Treaty of Amsterdam as a means to combat social exclusion , that is to say , we require a definition of the legal instruments so that after ratification of the Treaty , measures can be taken for the benefit of the long-term unemployed , the poor , the disabled and the elderly .
The Commission 's proposal deals in much greater detail with the priorities which have been laid down at international level .
EU policy in the area of development cooperation is actually directed at the eradication of poverty .
We have repeatedly endorsed our call for programmes aimed at debt reduction , after we have fulfilled the commitment to provide 0.7 % of GDP for official development assistance , and after compliance with ILO standards for basic working conditions and with the UN declaration of human rights and the UN child convention .
But we have also called emphatically for a global tax on international currency speculation , the so-called Tobin Tax , in the form of a Parliamentary resolution to the Copenhagen Summit .
Using taxes obtained from this source to create a fund for debt reduction for the poorest countries is without doubt a very practical move .
My group cannot therefore support Amendment No 10 as proposed by the Group of the European People 's Party , for we believe that this tax should be imposed .
Mr President , I am standing in for Mrs Glase who has dealt with this issue on behalf of our group and has prepared it in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , but is sadly unable to be present here today due to illness .
Mr President , what we have here is a good statement from the European Commission .
I would like to thank Commissioner Flynn most sincerely for this . I believe that what the statement says is very good in itself , and that it tries to resolve a number of issues which have landed on the European Union 's plate .
The suggestions by the rapporteur , Mrs Schörling , whom I would also like to thank for what she has written , contain a number of useful and important additions .
But Mr President , that is about it .
I would have preferred it if we had stayed closer to what the Commission had given us as a statement , and had not gone too far .
Because now we are dealing with a strange situation .
Mrs Schörling , a representative from Sweden , takes a rather anti-European Union view .
She is fully entitled to that , but this view implies that her country should remain as independent as possible .
That is also her right .
But now we have the strange situation in which we are going to include a text from Ms Tongue in this report , dealing with very centralized , harmonized measures which encroach on the Member States ' autonomy to raise taxes .
Mr President , if you understand this , than I must congratulate you .
At the moment it is hardly comprehensible .
It is not possible to do two things at once .
You cannot resist European union , whilst at the same time proposing all sorts of measures which lead to the type of harmonization that really goes one step too far .
And that is a very major problem with this report .
I understand that the Socialist group let this pass rather more easily than we do , but we are not able to accept this under any circumstance , Mr President .
Should we for some reason come off the worst , then we will not be able to support this opinion , primarily on account of this point .
There are a few other points on which we have submitted amendments that attempt to make some improvements to the opinion .
But as to the point in the text by Ms Tongue , there is no room for discussion .
We would have to make a complete volte-face .
In fact , Mrs Schörling has made a complete volte-face herself by suggesting this .
Mr President , one of the most important tasks we have at national , European and international level is to prevent poverty and exclusion and to create social , economic and sustainable environmental development .
We shall do that at EU level together with Member States which also gave their support to the Copenhagen Declaration and its ten detailed commitments .
Parliament also supports this and welcomes the Commission 's communication on a more detailed and concrete follow-up of the commitments of the world summit .
However , things are going too slowly and the commitments are too weak .
I think that in her report the rapporteur sums up in a very worthwhile way a proposal which goes further .
Poverty must be tackled through a combination of measures .
There is not one measure alone which prevents poverty , but several , including trade , aid , partnerships , positive economic development , employment programmes , more companies , skilled work and family life on equal terms .
We have now prioritized three measures at both national and EU level .
Firstly , as regards trade and reduced tolls and taxes , the EU has a special responsibility .
Secondly , there must be joint arrangements , such as the 20 : 20 initiative combining development aid with social programmes in the recipient countries .
Thirdly , we need social and ethical rules or regulations in international trade , including WTO rules .
The Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party largely supports this report .
However , a majority of the group is opposed to a Tobin Tax and wants to reduce the number of references to ethical regulations in paragraph 17 . In other words , we support Amendments Nos 9 and 10 .
Personally , I have no difficulty accepting a Tobin Tax , and I believe both the demands the rapporteur is proposing are worth trying in order to get a bit further with the commitment to partnership and the eradication of poverty in the world .
Mr President , the latest United Nations report on human development defines poverty as a denial of the choices and opportunities to lead a tolerable life .
It also says there are 1 300 million people in that situation , surviving on less than one dollar a day .
One thousand million people are illiterate , and even more have no drinking water .
It seems to us that in recent years , not only has the situation not improved , but it has not even stabilized ; in fact , it has deteriorated .
That same United Nations report says that , whereas in 1960 the poorest 20 % of the population had a 2.4 % share of world income , today that share is 1.1 % .
Furthermore , whereas in 1960 the difference between the richest 20 % and the poorest 20 % was 30 to 1 , today it is 78 to 1 .
So the situation is not improving or even stabilizing : it is getting worse .
This is why we completely agree with the Schörling report , including the controversial Tobin Tax .
We especially agree that all countries should comply with the United Nations resolution calling for 0.7 % of GNP to be allocated to development cooperation .
Only four European countries comply with that resolution .
In recent years , not only are donations from these countries not increasing , but they are going down .
This year 's average is 0.27 % .
We think that for there to be a proper follow-up to the Copenhagen Summit , it is essential for all those countries which do not yet comply with this demand to come to a decision in that respect .
The United Nations study contains a very interesting sentence : " Economic globalization is advancing very rapidly with no compass or map , and all it does is favour a very powerful minority of the world ' .
Decisions need to be made . For example , we need to approve the fourth programme to combat poverty , although we do not know where it has got to , and it is being held up by problems .
Decisions have to be taken about making the 0.7 % compulsory , and about cancelling the debts of the poorest countries .
Of course , we also have to think about a tax like the Tobin Tax , which would affect currency speculation .
Just a 0.5 % tax on this currency speculation would be enough to cancel the debts of all poor countries .
We appreciate that the Right has problems accepting this suggestion , but if we do not make all these decisions today we will be talking here for ever , and never make any progress towards eradicating poverty .
And in ten years time , we will be debating poverty here again and still talking about the thousands of millions of people still in the same situation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if my memory serves me well , social justice is the central concept of the Christian doctrine .
I believe that Plato was absolutely right when he said that one cannot build a community without justice .
We are now living in a state of globalization and the world is now a global community , even though we may not always be as mindful of this as we should be .
To stand up and say that the world market will take care of this , that the technological development and deregulation actually taking place will somehow solve the problems , is simply unchristian , and what is more it is foolish .
I am therefore simply astonished that those on the Right of this House are saying : no , we cannot do that under any circumstances , particularly since I would like to remind you that even in the run-up to Copenhagen this Parliament agreed by majority vote to do and to call for this very thing .
What matters is whether we succeed in actually using the process of the UN Summit to reverse the trend of blind globalization and ideological globalism , and whether we succeed in steering towards social justice , ecological sustainability and democratic co-determination , even for those living in the poorer countries .
The Copenhagen commitments must be realized .
The Commission has played a very positive role here , though Mrs Schörling has indicated , and quite rightly in my opinion , that there is still work to be done here .
In this respect , we would like to support the Commission , in full recognition of the work which it is doing , but also with the intention of promoting and accelerating this work , for the decision which is at stake will affect the future of the planet .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I feel as if , with the opportunity of this debate , the European Union as a whole is undergoing a kind of test , a trial .
I believe we talk about globalization every day , we talk about the world society , about the global village , and we must finally grasp the fact , declare and demonstrate what we mean by it all .
Could it be that globalization of solidarity lies beyond and outside this view ?
Perhaps that is what we , the EU , ought to stress .
Among globalization 's many aspects and dimensions , there is also and predominantly the aspect of globalizing solidarity .
I think the great debate that began in the world - and I am being literal , not exaggerating - with this Conference must represent an opportunity for the EU to adopt a responsible stance , to claim the role it rightly has in world society and demonstrate , by its own example , what it is capable of and what it is doing .
As an example by which we will be particularly judged , let me mention too the fourth programme on poverty .
I have no hopes that the programme will eliminate poverty .
It is , however , a sample , an indication , through which we can demonstrate to ourselves first of all and then to the world community what the EU says and does , and I believe that with other similar examples , such as those mentioned in the excellent report by Mrs Schörling concerning what we , Europe can do , that emphasis will indeed be given .
Commissioner Flynn , I consider that the EU now has a real opportunity , with Parliament 's support , and I should like to hope that Parliament will express that support unanimously , without small-mindedness and without counting the pennies .
Let us hope that tomorrow the European Parliament will give the European Union the support it needs at this historic time .
Mr President , we believe that economic and social development is not an abstract concept but is combined with the fundamental concepts of peace , safety , respect for the environment and , not least , respect for human rights .
The Luxembourg Summit on employment , in addition to trying to respond to the consequences of the globalization of the economy , emphasized the need to draw up suitable policies to combat the resulting social exclusion and poverty .
We support the Commission 's proposal when it hopes for the ratification by the Member States of the UN Convention on the situation of migrant workers and their families , recalling , however , that within the Union itself , workers who have emigrated from the Community countries still do not fully enjoy fundamental rights - which are the " buttonhole ' of the Union - and experience real situations of exclusion that need to be rectified .
I am referring to the more than five million Italian workers in the world who still cannot exercise their fundamental right to vote .
Mr President , poverty can above all be tackled through economic growth , with rising real wages and growing tax bases .
Economic growth is based on technical development , not least by saving on resources , and so also provides new opportunities for growth with environmental improvements .
For the members of the Green group who see economic growth as something objectionable and technical development as a threat , the only thing left is to cling to the idea that you can eradicate poverty through declarations , conferences , resolutions and conventions .
Mrs Schörling 's report is characterized by this idea .
The report does not contain a single word about economic growth as a condition for economic improvement .
The rapporteur 's efforts are praiseworthy , but this way of approaching the problem is risky , especially since it awakens the general public 's hopes which are frustrated by disappointment over false commitments and declarations which lead to nothing .
In paragraph 14 Mrs Schörling urges the Commission to take the initiative for a global tax on international currency trading .
For a person who represents a party which believes that its own country should leave the European Union , it is surprising to put forward a proposal which means that the EU should introduce such a gigantic and bureaucratic project as a tax on all currency transactions .
The fact that a well-known economist has previously talked about such a system is not a guarantee for the idea 's political wisdom any more than that of the person who has an exaggerated respect for the games an advanced theorist plays with reality .
The proposal is also an example of a common finance policy which the rapporteur opposes in other respects .
If you dislike currency trading , you should also be a keen supporter of EMU , since when this currency union is created on 1 January 1999 , the scope for currency trading between the eleven Member States will disappear .
However , because Mrs Schörling is an opponent of EMU , this idea is not mentioned in the report .
Mr President , I would have liked the honourable Member to provide the proof that monetary union would effectively give us what all the other commitments have given us .
The social summit of Copenhagen ended in March 1995 with the adoption of ten commitments which fixed as priority objectives the fight against poverty , support for full employment and social integration .
The ink of the signature at the foot of the joint declaration was barely dry when the OECD countries began negotiations on the MAI , which totally contradicts the Copenhagen commitments .
The secrecy of the negotiations made the MAI negotiators blind and deaf to any other concerns than those of the multinational firms , and they have only taken into account the legal , political and moral commitments made in bodies such as the United Nations and the ILO .
They have just received a big slap in the face from the European Parliament .
Following on from the Copenhagen Summit , we have to call into question the heavy trends of current economic and social system of organization and tackle the domination of the financial markets over all human activity , a domination which has not really its progress .
This is what was said in the report on the resolution on the respect of human rights voted through here on 17 February , which considered that poverty and unemployment were indeed violations of human rights .
We also support the principle of the Tobin Tax , and we are happy that Mrs Schörling shows determination , unlike our colleagues from the PPE .
We have time and again called for this within the group .
The governments of the Member States have got better things to do today than to undertake secret negotiations aimed at satisfying the interests of a few investors .
They must implement , as they have promised , the decisions of the social summit of Copenhagen , and take effective measures to fight unemployment and poverty .
And that is a matter of figures , sir !
Mr President , first of all my thanks to the rapporteur , Mrs Schörling , and to all of her colleagues who have contributed .
We welcome the Parliamentary resolution , which identifies a number of concrete priorities both at European Union level and at the international level to follow up the Copenhagen Declaration and Programme of Action .
The Commission shares these concerns to a very large extent . The Copenhagen summit has given a strong impetus to governments , to the Community , to NGOs , United Nations bodies and a lot of others to develop and strengthen their actions in the field of social and human development .
A lot certainly remains to be done but since the Copenhagen summit a great number of actions have been launched and they should be referred to here .
Allow me just for a moment to make the following specific observations , particularly referring to points 2 and 4 , dealing with the people-centred approach and the environment .
I should remind the House that the Commission did not wait for the Copenhagen recommendations to adopt the human-centred and environment-conscious approach to development cooperation .
The 1992 Council regulation on cooperation with the countries of Asia and Latin America already stated that ' the aim of the Community development and cooperation policies shall be human development .
The human dimension of development shall be present in all areas of action . '
The same regulation regarding environment issues also stated that ' protection of the environment and natural resources and sustainable development shall be long-term priorities . '
So these efforts , strengthened by the declaration , are being maintained .
All this is absolutely consistent with Article 130u of the Maastricht Treaty which emphasizes sustainable economic and social development , the campaign against poverty in developing countries , and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
Moreover the Community has committed itself to the implementation of the new Development Cooperation Strategy for the Twenty-First Century presented and adopted by the Development Assistance Committee of the OECD in 1996 , which particularly emphasizes people-centred development .
I would like to refer to point 5 , the fight against poverty , because the matter has been raised by virtually all of the contributors today .
Yes , we agree that the fight against poverty and social exclusion should be a top priority for the European Union because it remains a serious problem for so many of our European citizens .
The European Union 's single main tool for fighting against exclusion from the labour market is the Integra Community employment initiative within the Structural Funds .
The aim of Integra is to promote measures to improve access to the labour market and employability for those who find themselves excluded from it .
After two project selection phases , one in 1995 and the other in 1997 , 1 600 Integra projects have been selected .
One of the principal objectives of the tabled proposals for the new Structural Funds is to combat and to prevent unemployment and exclusion .
Point 6 , dealing with the legal instruments for combating poverty and exclusion , should be referred to .
The Amsterdam Treaty , once ratified , will create new legal bases for action at Community level to combat exclusion , which can complement the present actions which have a labour market focus .
The Commission will discuss how to make best use of this with all the relevant actors and specifically with the Non-Governmental Organizations .
Mrs Schmidbauer gave this as a top priority and I agree wholeheartedly with her comments there .
The Commission is also actively involved in the work of the DAC to strengthen coordination and coherence amongst donors as well as the work in the Commission for Social Development of the United Nations ECOSOC and other multilateral organizations and bodies .
Some reference was made to debt reduction .
This is point 12 in the document and the Commission has strongly supported the World Bank and IMF Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative which was launched in 1996 , and has proposed new measures at the EC level to reduce the debt of these countries .
Given in particular the Asian financial crisis the Commission is concerned by possible effects of instability in world financial markets and the damage which can be caused through it and believes that proposals such as the Tobin tax are worth examining .
I noted the difference of opinion on that particular matter between Mrs Schörling , Mr Pronk , Mr Lindqvist and others .
The difference of opinion is there .
However , the point is that it is worth examining what is involved .
As far as labour standards are concerned , the Commission attaches very great importance to core labour standards and their application worldwide .
We firmly believe that public support for increased trade liberalization will be threatened if we fail to address the public concerns on this important issue .
Our new GSP scheme provides for special incentive arrangements starting on 1 January 1998 in the form of additional preferences which may granted to countries implementing core labour standards .
On 29 October 1997 , the Commission adopted a proposal for the introduction in the GSP of a social clause on compliance with ILO conventions on child labour and freedom of association , of the right to organize and collective bargaining and of an environmental clause on sustainable management of tropical forests as defined by the International Tropical Timber Organization to ensure that these special incentive arrangements operate effectively .
The proposal for a regulation lays down the methods of monitoring application .
Finally , the Commission fully supports the current ILO proposal for a declaration on workers ' fundamental rights and , especially , the need for a mechanism to be put in place to guarantee these rights .
With regard to cooperation with NGOs , I have one final comment .
The Commission greatly values the contribution of non-governmental organizations and citizen-based organizations to the development process and has an ongoing programme of support and cooperation .
Mr Wolf and Mr Amadeo made the very important point about social justice , i.e. that it was needed not just in the EU but also in the global economy .
I share that view and have been saying for many years , as Mr Wolf knows , that it is not just an economic development .
It has to be matched and parallelled by the social dimension .
That is important for the Union and it is also just as important in the global economy of the future .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Horizontal state aid
The next item is the report ( A4-0100 / 98 ) by Mr Berès , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation ( EC ) on the application of Articles 92 and 93 of the EC Treaty to certain categories of horizontal state aid ( COM ( 97 ) 0396 - C4-0512 / 97-97 / 0203 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission 's proposal on which we have been consulted at one reading relates to regulations enabling the Commission to adopt individual rules for the exemption from the obligation to give prior notification of certain classes of horizontal state aid , which amounts to 83 % of total state aid in Europe .
This is the first truly significant use of Article 94 of the Treaty .
This tool enables the Commission , enriched with the experience it has acquired in this field , to exempt certain aid from the notification procedure .
The Commission 's idea is to achieve in this area a procedure similar to that applicable to the control of concentration , which relies on revisable intervention thresholds , and the participation of third parties in the consideration and establishment of a consultative committee .
We fully approve of the Commission 's approach , which focuses its attention on the cases of state aid which truly do require consideration , and to accelerate the granting of aid where there is no dispute as to the validity of the cases .
Such an approach is all the more necessary as 11 Member States are going to go into the euro , which will increase competition between territories where unfair practices were an incentive to out-sourcing .
The aid covered by the regulation concerns the aid for SMEs , where it is as effective as it is diligently allocated to research and development , environmental protection and employment and training .
In terms of education and training , the exemptions mechanism should give priority , in our opinion , to the best possible implementation of the conclusions of the Luxembourg Summit .
It appears that we should add to this list local public services , which have only a minor effect on competition policy , and a strong impact in terms of social and economic cohesion within the Union .
The Commission 's proposal also stipulates that the Commission will be able to adopt a regulation which allows aid under a certain threshold limit to be exempt from notification .
This would provide a legal basis for a practice which is already longstanding .
We must be pleased about this , although we recognize that the impact of this regulation will vary according to the practice of the Member States .
As rapporteur , I nevertheless wish to make four general observations .
The first relates to the general line followed by the Commission in the field this text comes under , the aim being an undifferentiated reduction in state aid in the European Union .
Such a position might a priori be an obstacle to achieving two fundamental objectives , namely the strengthening of industrial policy , and the search for greater efficiency in public expenditure .
In other words , would it not be better in this field to give priority to a qualitative , rather than a purely quantitative approach , the latter being , it would seem , that which the Commission is seemingly proposing ?
The Union should be thinking about a positive approach to aid , be it from the state or from the Union itself . Aid is becoming an effective and appropriate tool for an innovative industrial policy .
A final assessment of aid as used and applied as part of the ECSC Treaty should be drawn up . The Union 's approach with regard to state aid as an economic policy instrument should be drawn up and explained .
The assessment of how far aid is compatible with the rules of the internal market should take into account general objectives of Community policy , relating to industrial competitiveness and economic and social cohesion within the Union , but also paying attention to the practice of our major competitors on the global market .
As a second comment , we need to be careful not to pick the wrong target in terms of the inspection and control procedures that we introduce for this aid .
The Commission 's proposal can give rise to two sorts of reaction .
The Commission is calling for more powers , or the Commission is accepting the consolidation of the power that it already has in its hands .
It is absolutely clear that the second approach is the one we should follow .
We are not giving the Commission free rein , but providing it a posteriori with a measure of control .
Having said that , in the procedures for implementing this control , we should be aware not to excessively weigh down the conditions set on advertising , as this would run the risk of making for unwieldy control procedures and encouraging a plethora of litigation which would be detrimental to the safety of enterprises before the law .
It would be paradoxical if we were to end up with an obligation to give more information concerning this aid , which a priori does not pose any problems , than is required for far larger amounts of aid .
My third observation relates to the importance of the Commission 's proposals with regard to the application procedures of Article 93 of the Treaty .
We will have the chance to return to this when we consider , in this House , the aid procedure .
My last point , Mr President , relates to the place of our Parliament in the implementation of enabling regulations to be proposed by the Commission .
In our amendments , we ask to be involved in this procedure .
I believe this is important , and I hope that the Commission will support our proposals .
We are also calling for the enabling regulations to be more adaptable , and we hope that this regulation is reviewed after three , and not five , years .
Mr President , I would first and foremost like to thank the rapporteur for an excellent report .
I agree with all her proposals and conclusions .
In particular I would like to point out one amendment which did not achieve a majority on the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , Amendment No 11 , which proposes that block exemptions should also be granted to local public companies .
I believe it is necessary to make such a point .
I can say that in Sweden we have a large number of companies all over the country which employ disabled people .
I believe there are between 30 000 and 40 000 such companies in Sweden which sell their products on the open market and so compete with normal companies , but they are subsidized by almost the whole wage cost .
It is obvious that these companies receive a lot of public aid , but it is also obvious that they make an enormous social contribution .
It would be very important , I believe , to include the fact that this type of company belongs to the group which is granted exemptions .
In the same amendment , No 11 , the rapporteur also removes two categories proposed by the Commission , namely export credits and export credit guarantees .
I think that what the rapporteur is proposing is good because there is doubt that export credits and export credit guarantees really are aid which falls under Article 92 and that they belong in this context .
After this I would still like to say a few words about the fact that the rapporteur and I differ on one point , that is , our attitude towards state aid in general .
I think it often seems in this House as if state aid just means that one country goes and steals work in some way , but that is only one side of the coin .
If the USA , for example , were to subsidize its car exports to Europe , it would mean above all that Europe received cheaper cars from the USA , in other words that Europe 's consumers benefited from it .
In this respect there is no difference between state aid and , for example , the USA cutting the wages of the car workers .
It is the same in other areas . For example , if Spain wanted to subsidize wine exports to Sweden , Swedish consumers would just get cheaper wine .
I do not actually see any great harm in that .
The rapporteur points out that state aid amounts to 1.7 % of the Community 's GDP .
That may sound like a lot of money , but we should be aware that the socio-economic costs associated with this aid are perhaps a tenth or a hundredth of that amount and so amount to a few tenths or hundredths of one per cent .
I would therefore like us to have a somewhat less rigid view of this state aid .
However , my main point is that this is an excellent report which I hope will be approved by a large majority tomorrow .
Mr President , I want to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Berès , for her report .
Certainly , the control of state aid is a big responsibility for the Commission .
We have on the table today a Commission proposal for a regulation seeking a more practical formula for controlling such aid , by exempting one category of aid and transferring responsibility for it to the Member States , because of a shortage of Commission resources .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has taken a very clear stance on this .
We agree with the Commission 's approach , but great care must be taken . We must not forget that it is the Member States who provide this aid , and to transfer control to them is - excuse the expression - like setting the fox to guard the henhouse !
So , we agree with a practical approach , we agree with the list of categories and aid proposed by the Commission - and our group is not in favour of either lengthening it or shortening it , as the rapporteur suggests - but we have made two comments which have been taken up by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
The first point is that production can be integrated , which means that by giving small amounts of aid to integrated businesses , the added value of the final product might be over-subsidized .
For example , aid might be given to the research sector , then to another company collaborating in the manufacture of the same product , and so on all down the line .
Integrated production has to be monitored , otherwise we are going to run into serious problems of very large subsidies in terms of a product 's final added value .
For that reason , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has included an amendment that I myself presented to them , and I think the European Commission should study it .
The second comment is that this procedure - this new focus - requires the Member States to be monitored at a global level .
As we lose specific control of each type of aid , there has to be more global budgetary control over the total aid given by each country .
This theory has already been approved by this House with regard to the general report on competition policy , and it becomes increasingly important the further we progress with monetary union .
We cannot cease to exercise control over the possibility that a certain budget might in total devote more than a certain percentage of GDP to state aid .
That can and will happen .
Even today there are large differences between the Member States , and once monetary union comes into effect , if the Commission fails to take account of the risk that each Member State might devote a large or very significant part of its budget to helping its businesses , we will have competition problems within monetary union .
Mr President , today we have to decide which type of direction to give to state aid in the future , how to involve the territory and categories as well as the controls and exemptions to be applied .
As we know , the distortion of competition is the most obvious disadvantage of state aid , but it is not the only one .
Just think of the cost for public finances or the cost resulting from the loss of competitiveness for businesses used to state aid , at a time in which it is being reduced or is disappearing .
The globalization of the market and the arrival of the euro will result in totally new scenarios .
In the immediate future , the EU will support the entry of new states , including financially .
Agenda 2000 will then oblige us to give preference to choices of quality over quantity . So aid will no longer be provided if it is not targeted and the result of projects and programmes based on actual requirements and resulting opportunities .
We obviously do not want to say that all state aid is counterproductive , as clearly maintained by the rapporteur , whom we thank for her work .
Aid can , in fact , favour an industrial policy where it is exists and is correctly applied .
However , it should not just be aimed at large businesses and the industrial sector any more .
We should be looking in particular at small and medium-sized businesses and at new sectors : tourism , trade , services , crafts , the environment and research and development are sectors that are integrated and connected to each other , as recalled by the Spanish Member .
We believe that the Commission , as the body which supervises competition , will adopt decisions and measures in the medium term that will facilitate balanced growth .
For this purpose , we call on it to reassess the sectors and business sizes we have just mentioned .
The future of the Union 's economic and social growth inevitably lies with the SMEs .
State aid cannot fail to take them into account .
Mr President , state aid is of course an exception to free and equal competition .
Therefore , it is important to adhere to regulations on state aid , and transparency is especially important in order to enable third parties , namely competitors , to see what is being given by way of state aid .
The Liberal group is delighted that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy has supported us in requiring these subsidies to be made public .
Therefore , I hope that the Commission , too , will be in a position to support the committee 's Amendments Nos 4 and 5 , in which we emphasize the requirement for making public the various subsidies , and in particular Amendment No 5 , where we urge the Commission to publish details of subsidies given to the individual countries in the Official Journal of the European Communities to ensure that the average business has access to this information .
Finally , on behalf of the Liberal group , I have to say that we cannot support Amendment No 11 , which the rapporteur touched on , and nor can we support the amendment tabled by Mr Wibe of the Socialist group .
Nonetheless , I look forward to hearing the Commission 's response on the question of transparency .
Mr President , I agree with the Commission 's view that , on the one hand , state aid must be made more public and controlled more effectively , but , on the other , the Commission must be given the opportunity to focus on more important and larger-scale cases , where group exemptions can be considered properly .
But this should not mean that complete transparency must not prevail , as state aid can seriously distort competition .
State aid should also be examined in connection with normal EU Structural Funds because it is awfully difficult at the moment to know what individual projects are being subsidized either through state aid or through EU structural funding .
It is a very serious matter that meagre public resources are causing grave problems , and we should ensure , as best we can , that the EU 's basic purpose in public subsidies is being realized .
I can thus give a great deal of support to the rapporteur in her desire to make the state aid process more open .
In fact , I believe there should be a centre in every Member State where every citizen could have access to information on aid for each individual project , and not just state aid but Structural Funds .
This would have a far-reaching influence on the relocation of companies .
As we know , many firms have learnt to get Member States and regions to compete , and this has an exceedingly unfavourable effect on the public economy .
Mr President , I hope my voice is going to hold out .
Let me say that I understand the general thrust of this report is to ensure that we prevent distortion of competition while achieving a fair and level playing field .
I very much commend the work that Mrs Berès has done on this report , but we are talking about transparency .
Let me raise an issue with you in the Commission .
We in the Committee on Regional Affairs are very concerned at the lack of transparency in the document that you have adopted , the draft communication about the coherence of structural policies and competition .
I understand that Commissioner Van Miert has already signed an agreement with Commissioner Wulf-Mathies on making sure that these two maps are indeed coherent , and I wonder when you will refer that document to Parliament .
I believe it is our right to look at issues involving the Structural Funds and I understand you have also written to Member States .
I would like to know which legal base you are using to consult Member States on these issues .
Is it not the case that you will predetermine the national priorities of the Member States on where they wish to spend their structural fund money and state aid under Article 92 ( 3 ) ( c ) ?
Why , therefore , is it the case that we in Parliament are not looking at that ?
I want to know what flexibility exists for a Member State to defend its own national priorities on state aid and whether you can legally enforce these issues .
Or is it simply a case of a voluntary agreement that you hope to have with Member States ?
Finally , I would like to say to the Commission that I do not honestly see the logic behind this .
I believe the Structural Funds have a very different objective to state aid and I would simply refer to the case of rural areas .
In my own constituency in the Peak district , I do not think that we want to attract Siemens actually to come and re-establish itself in an area which is environmentally sensitive , where we are looking to establish small businesses .
The issue is not about actually attracting state aids in those kinds of regions .
I would therefore ask you to decouple and de-link these two areas and let Member States decide on their own priorities on structural fund eligibility maps .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , state aid is one of the main causes of distortion in the single market .
Not only is it costly and an inefficient way to use public funds in the Member States , but it is also delaying an essential structural change which affects not only the individual region , but also the EU as a whole .
It is quite clear that several Member States are currently breaking or behaving in a very suspect way with regard to the rules we have on state aid .
The Commission is now trying , on the basis of existing conditions , that is , in spite of a lack of resources , to improve and monitor compliance .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Berès on her report which increases the chances of better compliance and control of state aid because it makes transparency and greater openness possible .
This is a credibility issue , not least in relation to third parties , that is , companies and their employees who are affected by unhealthy competitive disadvantages .
I would like to warn against Mr Wibe 's enticing tones when he thinks that local public businesses in Amendment No 11 should be approved .
Today , local authorities and regions have a lot of different opportunities to exploit the system which means that we get more monopoly and less competition .
I think it was very good that we removed the amendment in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
The Commission 's credibility now depends on sharpening the supervision of state aid which is talked about a lot in industry .
Since no-one else can monitor our compliance with competition on equal terms , I think the Commission must ensure that it approves the amendments which have now been added to this report .
Otherwise it will be difficult to ensure that we are complying with the demands which are rightfully made on the EU system .
Mr President , on a point of order .
I did not ask about the policy .
I asked about when you intend to consult Parliament .
I understand that the Commission has exclusive competence for competition policy , but in my opinion you are wandering into an area where Parliament has a view on whether it is necessary , in all cases , to have complete coherence of maps .
We would like some flexibility .
Therefore , I would like to know when you intend to consult Parliament and , if you intend to force this , what is the legal base for the Commission to enforce the coherence of state aids and structural fund eligibility maps ?
I now understand the precise point of your question .
First of all , I am always available to Parliament to discuss this although it is an exclusive competence of the Commission .
As you know , the Commission has this responsibility for state aids on the basis of Articles 92 and 93 , unless we make a proposal , as we are doing today , on the basis of Article 94 , when the Council has to take a decision .
As I have already said , the Commission has already taken a decision as far as regional aid is concerned because it is the Commission 's responsibility .
But I am readily available to Parliament or the relevant committees to discuss this matter and explain to you why we think this coherence between the Structural Funds map and the regional aid map is important .
It is up to you .
If you would like to invite me to a committee meeting , I would be happy to attend .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 : 00 noon .
Shipbuilding
The next item is the report ( A4-0101 / 98 ) by Mr Sindal , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation on establishing new rules on aid to shipbuilding ( COM ( 97 ) 0469 - C4-0527 / 97-97 / 02499 ( CNS ) ) and on the Commission communication to the Council , the European Parliament , the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions entitled : " Towards a new shipbuilding policy ' ( COM ( 97 ) 0470 - C4-0548 / 97 ) .
Mr President , may I begin by congratulating the previous rapporteur on the general discussion on competition policy .
Now that we are embarking on a more detailed debate on shipbuilding , the waters are parting , for it is very easy to agree on a general plan .
For this we owe Mr Van Miert our grateful thanks .
The report is excellent , but as soon as we go into detail , the waters begin to part .
The subject under debate today is fraught with emotion and history .
All of us present here today are aware of why this regulation has gone to consultation .
We are missing one single signature on an OECD agreement - that of the USA .
Now we are venturing a new regulation , perhaps the eighth in the series .
The discussion and the problems are partly internal to the EU and partly external , in that they concern how the EU relates to the world-wide competitive situation .
To my mind , the key elements in this debate are that our future internal policy must not distort competition for shipyards within the EU , and our aid policy must not cause social listing in some Member States and regions , as we have just heard .
There has to be a fundamental belief that the EU would be best served if the OECD agreement were to come into effect .
The OECD agreement is the best way forward for the Community 's shipyards to be able to compete on a level playing field .
Since this is not happening , we are best served with an aid policy that is as restricted as at all possible .
We must strive for equality of opportunity for all and avoid creating a situation with competitors losing simply because they do not qualify for aid .
The new aid policy must avert creative book-keeping and speculation in aid systems .
That is not what it is intended for .
But the new aid policy is supposed to create jobs in the EU .
Unemployment is the biggest problem today , and in my opinion regional aid to shipyards is not part of the EU 's social policy - nor should it be .
It would be naive to believe that would create more jobs .
That would be throwing good money after bad .
In shuffling jobs from one area to another , we would antagonize citizens who perceive this to be unfair - worse still if jobs are moved out of the EU altogether .
Therefore , at a time when the citizens of Europe are discussing confidence and belief in the European project , it is vital that our aid policy should avoid prejudicing citizens ' understanding of justice by giving better opportunities to some than to others .
What is needed is a policy to ensure equality of opportunity .
What we need today is a long-term , visionary employment policy .
The new aid policy , which I support , Mr Van Miert , must not amount to featherbedding .
We must avoid giving support to such an extent that the shipbuilding industry forgets to think for itself .
Strong support may well be beneficial in the short term , but long-term it could turn European shipbuilding into a loser in the global marketplace .
Let me emphasize four things in the Commission 's proposal .
Firstly , I support development , innovation , etcetera .
This is extremely positive .
It is the way forward .
Secondly , I find regional aid dissatisfactory .
I find it impermeable and prejudicial to competition .
But if we can agree on regional aid , we should decide whether to change the extent of such aid .
The third point is that we are concerned about how monitoring should be carried out .
That is embarrassing .
But history shows that we must be committed to one another .
The fourth point is the situation in the Far East and the massive aid given there .
This must not be allowed to lead to Korean shipyards becoming more dominant players in the market than they are already , for example .
Finally , Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to say that the three statements from the committees concerned and the statement from the Economic and Social Committee all point towards the need to think twice before implementing this plan unamended .
Mr President , the object of Mr Sindal 's report is to reform the complex network of aid schemes in place for the European shipbuilding industry , so that the EU will become more competitive with regard to third country dockyards .
The largest area of current aid is dedicated to shipbuilding itself , which has in fact distorted competition in the common market .
The idea of getting rid of aid , which Mr Sindal mentions in his report , is thus correct .
The ultimate goal of EU policy must be that the shipyards recover naturally through market demand .
The European Community has to guarantee Member States equal conditions for competition , promote research and development in shipbuilding , and motivate industrial cooperation .
The conditions for competition among shipyards in EU countries cannot be distorted by aid action which is different for every country .
I hope the Commission understands this .
The shipbuilding industry employs about 130 000 people in the EU .
Securing these jobs is important .
At the moment the EU share of the world market for shipbuilding is around 20 % .
In recent years , despite improvements , as far as competitiveness and productivity go , many shipyards have fallen behind greater competitors , such as Japan and South Korea .
Furthermore , new shipbuilding nations have begun to come into the world market .
The market share these countries have , with their cheap labour , is also in the region of 20 % .
The EU countries have much scope for research .
The European shipyards should follow the Japanese model and concentrate resources on research and development in order to improve the design and production process and produce safe and efficient vessels .
The development of the shipbuilding industry is closely linked to developments in other sectors of technology .
The use of computerization and telecommunications , in particular , should be regarded as an essential part of developing a modern shipbuilding industry .
Mr President , as we are now debating Mr Sindal 's report on the shipyards , I would also like to turn our attention to debating customs and Europarliamentarianism in general .
And why ?
Well , when the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs was discussing its report , it had , in accordance with good practice , asked for the opinions of others , such as the REX committee .
But what happened ?
The committee voted in the morning and only received the opinion it had asked for in the afternoon , at least as far as the REX committee was concerned .
I do not know if the committee was in too much of a hurry to adhere to its timetable or if it was a case of the REX committee coming late with the two opinions it had formulated .
My own was actually ready the week before .
My question is : what is the point of asking for opinions unless they can be relied upon to materialize and taken notice of ?
We should consider this here to ensure that the work of Parliament is actually appropriate at all times .
But that is not all .
When we vote on the report in tomorrow 's sitting , COREPER will have already started its debate on the issue ; it did so last Thursday , to be precise .
It is still going on , and COREPER 's view will be discussed by the Council , but the question remains : should a Parliamentary report not be ready when COREPER starts its own debate ?
Otherwise , it seems as if each and every body makes its own resolutions without hearing the opinion of others .
The situation is an irritating aspect of Parliamentarianism , especially as it has happened again and again and will happen , I suppose , in the future also .
I wish the Bureau would look into this seriously .
It is a matter of the European Parliament 's prestige and credibility .
As to the issue we are debating here , I will briefly state that shipyard aid has come to the end of the road .
This view is in agreement with the Commission 's proposal and Mr Sindal 's report .
Now that the main shipbuilding nations of Asia are in the grip of an economic crisis , and devaluation of their currency has increased their competitiveness in exports , it is a most opportune moment to embark on global measures to end aid .
The USA , for its part , must accept the OECD agreement .
All interested bodies must set about ending shipyard aid as a condition of Asian financial aid .
The countries of Europe have to get their act together in their affirmation of the fact that we cannot go on supporting a lame duck forever .
Mr President , the opinion I have prepared on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism related only to the Commission 's communication to the Council and the European Parliament .
The Committee on Transport never discussed giving an opinion on the proposal for a Council Regulation , with which , however , Mr Sindal 's report is mainly concerned .
Consequently , I am here to echo what the last speaker said : why were we asked for an opinion ?
Because I have found that almost nothing has been taken into account by Mr Sindal 's report .
This of course , does not mean that my group disagrees with very many points in Mr Sindal 's report .
At the same time , however , we are very worried about why this process has taken place , which is quite unusual , at least during the three years or so that I have been a Member .
At the same time , I heard all the speakers and the rapporteur talking about support and competition , saying that state aid for shipyards must stop , and talking about the globalization of the economy .
Ladies and gentlemen , that is all very well , but we ought not to remember it only when America , Japan or Korea are asking us to bear in mind the globalization of the economy .

The European Union has an obligation , and this is very rightly addressed by the Commission and Mr Sindal 's report , to put its own house in order : to care first and foremost for the existence , preservation and if possible the strengthening of Europe 's shipbuilding industry , to retain jobs and above all , from now on , to secure a better future than before .
In conclusion , Mr President , I would like to ask the Commissioner and Mr Sindal what impact the euro is likely to have from 1 January 1999 on Europe 's shipbuilding industry .
Will there be consequences or not ?
And if so , what ?
Will they be good or bad ?
Thank you very much , Mr Sainjon .
Ladies and gentlemen , having heard Mr Sainjon 's speech , we must now suspend the debate on Mr Sindal 's report .
It will resume at 9.00 p.m.

Question Time ( Commission )
Mr President , on a point of order .
It is on the same issue .
I have a copy of the document you are referring to and I am absolutely astounded by it .
I find it an affront to democracy in this House .
I have been a Member here for 14 years and have taken a great interest in Question Time .
I know we have had problems , and we have had changes .
I remember when we tried to change it before : Mrs Dury put forward a long report from the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities and there was a great deal of debate and discussion by Members .
What the Bureau seems to be resorting to here is diktat from on high , and it is very anti-democratic .
One of the benefits of publishing the names of the Commissioners who were going to answer questions was that if Members had , for example , an environment question , they could table it well in advance , knowing that they would receive a straightforward and knowledgeable answer from the Commissioner for the environment .
They would be unlikely to get someone else who had simply been handed a dossier , who was unacquainted with its contents and would just give a completely unsatisfactory off-the-cuff answer .
If you knew in advance that the individual Commissioner for that portfolio was going to reply , that would be advantageous .
So I feel this is a very retrograde step .
There has been no discussion on this in the political groups nor with the Members , and I take great offence at the dictatorial and high-handed attitude the Bureau has adopted .
I will raise this in my own political group and would urge other Members to do the same .
Mr McMahon , please listen to me .
I know you can understand Spanish but I would prefer you to listen to me in your own language , through the interpreters . I must inform you that what I have just read in no way suggests that Question Time is going to be altered as far as the Commissioners are concerned .
All these recommendations are trying to do is introduce a degree of order . In other words , questions are not to be tabled way in advance , but within the period established by our Rules of Procedure .
The second aim is to avoid the situation where the President of the sitting already has lots of supplementary questions even before the start , and Members who request to put a question but cannot be allowed to do so because somebody else has already asked .
What is being said is that from now on people will only be able to request the floor once the main question has started .
So these are small rules , Mr McMahon , intended to improve our work .
If in practice we find it is no improvement , I can assure you we will revise them .
I will convey that to the Bureau straight away , but at the moment I would ask that we do not start a debate on the matter , because these rules are designed to help us work better .
If they do not have that effect , we will change them again .
But let us start by respecting them .
It is not a question of being dictatorial , Mr McMahon , but it is the Bureau 's responsibility to try to organize the work of this House in the best way possible .
Several people wish to make points of order , but I must point out that all these points of order will detract from the time available for questions to the Commission .
Mr Crowley wishes to speak on a point of order .
Mr President , I should like your guidance .
I have also received the same notice as Mr McMahon and I agree with him fully .
In the second part of paragraph 2 , it says : ' It is up to the President of a sitting to rule on the admissibility of supplementary questions which must relate directly to the subject of the main question . '
Surely we as political representatives of the European people , must be able to decide whether a matter is related to a question or to an individual Commissioner , or to upbraid a Commissioner or the President-in-Office of the Council when they refuse to answer the question directly and we have to try another tactic to get around this .
I ask you to use your discretion in interpreting that aspect and to give us clear guidance on what latitude you will allow us .
Mr Crowley , you will be able to test out the amount of latitude I am prepared to allow during the course of our work .
But I should warn you that Annex II of our Rules of Procedure states : " The President shall rule on the admissibility of supplementary questions and shall limit their number so that each Member who has put down a question may receive an answer to it ' .
In other words , the President is not being given any new power . This is simply a reminder that the President has that power .
You will have noticed , Mr Crowley , that given the existence of that rule , the President has been exercising the natural flexibility which the liveliness of our Question Time demands .
So nothing new is being suggested - it is all there .
Mr Wijsenbeek wishes to speak on a point of order .
Mr President , you mentioned me as the person who initiated the changes to Question Time .
I would like to point out to you , Mr President , that I wrote a report for the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , Verification of Credentials and Immunities . It was approved by that committee four months ago , and the Bureau is refusing to put it to the partsession .
The objections by Mr Crowley and Mr McMahon could at least have been discussed in the groups and in the part-session .
Now the Bureau is misusing my report to propose new rules on its own authority , instead of through the usual democratic procedures . But you and I agree on one thing : if we look around we see that we have managed to kill Question Time , which in most parliaments is a lively affair and the climax of the parliamentary week .
We are sitting here surrounded by a handful of people , whilst the Commissioners and Presidents-in-Office dish out prescribed answers and are not able to enter into a debate with us .
The long and short of my proposal , Mr President , is that we call the questions in random order , so that those who tabled a question six months ago do not have the first turn , but that everyone gets an equal chance to speak .
Secondly , we should have a true debate , in which questions are responded to succinctly .
If you would be so kind as to submit my proposal to the part-session , than we would at least be able to join in the discussion as Members and as backbenchers , rather than be told what to do by a group of vice-presidents who think they always know better .
Question No 41 by Concepció Ferrer ( H-0301 / 98 )
Subject : Policy in favour of small and medium-sized enterprises
The results of a survey carried out by the Court of Auditors show that of 33 enterprises considered small and medium-sized , 11 actually corresponded to that category while the remaining two-thirds of the enterprises investigated belonged to consortia , and in one case a business classified as a small enterprise had 2000 employees .
Does the Commission not believe that , in view of these results , the concept of small and medium-sized enterprises should be revised in order to bring it into line with the actual situation ?
I have learnt a great deal , I am much more knowledgeable now , and I thank you for allowing me to participate in your debate .
When describing SMEs , the Commission applies the definition set out in the recommendation of 3 April 1996 to the Member States , to the European Investment Bank and the European Investment Fund .
Under this definition , the purpose of which is to put a little order into the situation you have described , a company must have less than 250 employees , a turnover not exceeding ECU 40 million , and total balance sheet value not in excess of ECU 27 million to comply with the definition of an SME .
To meet the definition of " small , ' a company must have fewer than 50 employees , a turnover of less than ECU 7 million , and a balance sheet of less than ECU 5 million .
Also , small and medium enterprises must be truly independent , which means that they must not be more than 25 % owned by another company .
The thresholds for turnover and balance sheet will be regularly adjusted , normally every four years , to take account of the economic changes in Europe .
Having said that , in certain specific research and technology development programmes , and in the 1994-1998 fourth framework programme , different and other definitions of small and medium-sized enterprises have been used .
But for the implementation of the fifth framework programme , that is , for 1998-2000 , the Commission is proposing that the new definition that I have just given to you should be applied with an exception to allow the inclusion of companies with up to 500 employees .
Among the various criteria for this new definition is that of independence , and the Commission is aware of the fact that this criterion has , unfortunately , not always been respected .
As you note , Madam , with regard to the database on the participants in the technological research and development programme , the Court of Auditors ' annual report states that of the 33 companies selected for the audit it carried out , 11 did not meet the independence criteria and one even employed more than 2 000 .
Nevertheless , the Commission is intent on reassuring you and your House : the quality and the reliability of the databases is constantly being improved and updated .
This improvement will continue , in particular with the introduction in stages of financial and legal viability checks , which will also cover parent companies .
We will also continue our improvement by verifying the criteria applicable to SMEs on the basis of documentary evidence .
The Commission will certainly continue to insist that , in the future , the SME definition criteria are scrupulously respected .
I just want to thank the Commissioner for his explanation , which I think was needed .
It has been very useful because just this morning , in approving the Elles report , we stressed how many gaps there were in relation to the aid available to small and medium-sized enterprises which has not been used .
This is a waste , maybe not of resources , but of the chance to improve not just the situation of SMEs , but above all their job-creating abilities .
I would call on the Commissioner to ensure that , in accordance with what he has just said , the Commission is very aware of this , and turn his words into reality .
I completely agree .
I have taken note of Mrs Ferrer 's wish , and I am all the more in agreement with her because it is important that the Commission be able to target these measures at ad hoc companies , for if not , we will see aid being scattered , and allocated less efficiently .
I can , therefore , assure you that the Commission agrees with your analysis and will act along these lines .
With regard to the actual situation , could I ask the Commissioner to look at certain areas where companies of fifty are really large companies and where the concept of a small company is nearer ten .
In areas like my constituency of the Highlands and Islands , it is often these companies that one looks to for job creation .
Would it not be possible for the Commission to consider an additional approach to give even more favourable treatment to the micro-small business ?
This question is always a delicate one . On the one hand , we must take into account the need for a more or less harmonized approach at European Union level , for the sake of efficiency , and on the other hand , we must take into account specific situations .
My response to Mrs Ewing is that the Member States have introduced more flexibility than we have .
However , we are introducing flexibility , as we have fixed thresholds for micro-companies , employing less than 10 people , which must be precisely adapted to the situation in the islands you mentioned .
I would even say that in some Member States , flexibility is even greater , as the thresholds given are for maximum limits , and the criterion concerning the number of employees may be applied alone , without reference to turnover or balance sheet figures .
That therefore goes in the direction which you appear to wish .
I want to thank the Commissioner for his response .
I have just two very brief questions to ask him on this point .
Firstly , can he give a guarantee here to us that this Court of Auditors ' survey will not be used to try and reduce the amount of money which is being appropriated for the SME sector , and in particular for the employment-creation aspect of it ?
Secondly , I may have misinterpreted what he said in his original answer , but am I right to understand that the criteria for the definition of SMEs and micro-enterprises will be updated and evaluated every year ?
Very rapidly , my answer to Mr Crowley is yes for both questions .
With regard more precisely to the second question , I would point out that we plan to have an update of the criteria at least every four years , and sooner , if necessary , according to the change in economic data .
Question No 42 by Nikitas Kaklamanis ( H-0314 / 98 )
Subject : Increase in subsidized quantity of olive oil
Commissioner Fischler is reported as saying on a recent visit to Spain that the ceiling on the production of olive oil subsidized by the EU will be raised by 300 000 tonnes for Spain and Greece .
Will there in fact be such an increase in the ceiling on olive oil production , and how will this quantity be divided between Greece and Spain ?
In parallel to the Agenda 2000 exercise , the Commission , on 19 March last , examined the file on the reform of the common organization of the olive oil market .
In this respect , the Commission has very largely taken on board the comments made by the European Parliament .
The reform of the common market organization should come into force for the 2001-2002 campaign .
Until then , and in order to do something to offset the management difficulties of the current CMO , the Commission has proposed urgent modifications to the current regime .
These modifications , as well as the elements that must be taken into account when proposing to reform this sector , will soon be part of a specific debate within your Parliament , and my colleague , Franz Fischler , will answer precisely all your questions on this subject .
I can say to you today that the proposed increases include , among other things , a rise in the maximum guaranteed quantity of 212 400 tonnes , and among the modifications , it is proposed to distribute the increase among the national guaranteed quantities of the producer Member States .
This distribution , among these Member States , of the new maximum guaranteed quantity of 1 562 400 tonnes is as follows : Spain , 625 210 tonnes ; France , 3 065 tonnes ; Greece , 389 038 tonnes ; Italy , 501 172 tonnes ; and Portugal , 43 915 tonnes .
The increase in the maximum guaranteed quantity is due to the change in the Community market take-up capacity .
It takes into account the potential for new plantings made recently in Spain and Portugal , and also corresponds to the savings made in the Community budget by the eliminating the regime for small producers and eliminating aid for consumption .
Thank you very much , Commissioner . I think perhaps I ought to be pleased by what you told me in your answer , but because we do not have to hand here all those figures you mentioned , at the end of the day I understood quite clearly that , indeed , what I asked about in my question is true , is it not ?
In other words , I am not so interested in the figures - I am sure that those you have quoted will be correct and I believe them - but is it really true that what has applied to Spain and Greece until now might be increased by 300 000 ? Yes or no ?
Because I have heard the figures but I do not know what the situation was before .
So are they the same , or more ?
I just want to remind the Commissioner of two things .
Firstly , he mentioned that the change to the maximum guaranteed quantity is based on five seasons , with the worst and the best being ignored .
However , in the specific case of Spain , the 1992-93 , 1993-94 and 1994-95 seasons were all catastrophic because of drought .
That means that if those data are used to fix the amount for Spain , we are being penalized .
The second , very important thing is that the maximum guaranteed quantity for the whole of Europe will also be affected by these unrealistic Spanish data .
It is important for the Commission to realize that , so they can correct the data at some point , even during the Council phase .
If that is not done , the whole of Europe will be penalized , especially the Spanish production .
I have taken note of your remark .
It reminds me of the debate in the Commission when the proposal was drafted .
We had to attempt both to achieve a number of objectives , which can appear contradictory , and to consider the problem caused by the drought in Spain at the time .
The file is now in the hands of the Council .
The comment that you have raised is very much in Mr Fischler 's mind , and he will be heading negotiations .
However , it is the Commission 's job to submit a proposal on the basis of objective and traditional criteria .
Now the negotiations are in the hands of the Council and I have no doubt but that all points of view will be heard and defended .
Commissioner , having heard your replies , I would like to know whether the Commission actually realizes the damage this will do to employment levels in Spain .
If the Commission continues to refuse to increase substantially the maximum guaranteed quantity - as I see it does - employment will suffer .
The fact is , apart from the drought problem which has been mentioned , the latest figure for Spanish production was 947 000 tonnes , which is very different from the maximum being set for that country .
If that difference is not subsidized , there is bound to be more unemployment in Spain , which is the very country with the highest unemployment rate in the whole of the EU .
There is not much point preaching about employment at the Luxembourg Summit if work is being thrown away , and if this threat hanging over Spain 's olive groves actually materializes .
I shall make the same reply as before : this matter is still being discussed .
I have explained the basis of the Commission 's proposal .
I had explained also that the Commission was proposing to raise the maximum guaranteed quantity , as compared to the current quantity .
I know that , for a certain number of countries , this raises economic problems , and also problems , which we cannot overlook , in terms of market disposal of the olive oil .
However , I believe that all these elements are in the minds of the negotiators . You have done well to emphasize them .
They will now become part of the negotiation which is to take place within the Council .
Thank you very much , Mr de Silguy .
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo wishes to speak on a point of order .
Excuse me , but which Rule does your point of order come under ?
Mr President , I should like to point out that in the public gallery , all the way from Granada ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mrs Izquierdo Rojo , that is not a point of order .
I would ask you to please sit down and allow me to proceed with my work properly , with the following question .
Question No 43 by Phillip Whitehead ( H-0321 / 98 / rev. 1 )
Subject : Consumers and the euro
Will the Commission state whether it maintains the view that all bank charges that are compulsory should be free ?
If so , how will this principle be implemented ?
Can the Commission confirm when it will decide whether or not to propose legislation on the question of dual pricing ?
What does the Commission believe is the final date for such a decision , given the time taken by the codecision procedure ?
Can the Commission indicate the timetable for the development of codes of good practice between professionals and consumers ?
What will be the role of the Euro observatories , and where will they be located ?
Thank you for allowing me in with this question .
I am also glad Commissioner Bonino is here now to hear her colleague 's answer .
Can I ask two brief questions ?
Firstly , how long will the Commission pursue the recommendations for good conduct , which Commissioner de Silguy has just described , before deciding whether they are effective or not and whether it needs to make mandatory provisions given the time for codecision and the 2002 deadline which means that we have to make some judgement on this well before 2002 ?
Secondly , on the question of banking charges , what has been the response of the banking community thus far ?
How does the Commission itself propose to ensure continuity of contracts during the switch over from national currencies to the euro ?
I shall be very precise on this point .
The Commission will make its recommendations in around two weeks , around 15 April , I hope .
These recommendations will be sent to the governments , with the hope of being able to include them in the conclusions of the European Council of 2 May , in order to give them a major political impact .
These recommendations will be sent to the various professional organizations , and to the consumers ' organisations , with the instruction to work together , and draw up codes of good practice .
In the light of the various problems , we shall then consider what to do .
It is more urgent to look at bank charges , as from 1 January 1999 a certain number of questions will be raised in this respect , which means that we will have to move faster .
For questions of dual pricing , we have a little more time . We should therefore not determine precise dates .
However , we have fixed the date for a meeting with the banking community in Autumn 1998 . This will enable us to make take stock of this banking aspect .
I can tell you that the negotiations and reactions are rather positive since the banking community , prior to the round table of 26 February , had sent a letter to Emma Bonino , which I had a copy of , showing that they were willing to work in this direction .
We are now involved in a process which is fairly encouraging , and which operates on the basis of consultation .
We shall then make an assessment of the results .
As regards the continuity of contracts , all the information at our disposal leads us to believe that the current status of regulations is adequate and satisfactorily meets this legal obligation .
Thank you very much , Mr de Silguy .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have now used up the time allocated to Part I of questions to the Commission .
Question No 44 will therefore be dealt with in writing .
Question No 45 by Marialiese Flemming ( H-0227 / 98 )
Subject : Transport of animals
In June 1995 the Council adopted Directive 95 / 29 / EC on the protection of animals during transport .
At the same time the Council requested the Commission to employ more Veterinary Inspectors to monitor the implementation of these new rules .
In view of the increased resources available to the Food and Veterinary Office would the Commission say how many inspectors are presently monitoring the transport of animals and what plans are in place to increase the number to the twelve inspectors thought by the Council to be the minimum necessary ?
As Mr Flemming knows , today the Food and Veterinary Office has a vast range of responsibilities in monitoring the implementation of Community legislation on veterinary , food and plant health matters .
At present , the Food and Veterinary Office has 46 inspectors .
Some of the resources available for veterinary inspections are already specifically intended for controls relating to monitoring animal welfare , to which the Member is referring .
However , in relative terms , these activities still represent a small proportion of all inspection activities .
The Commission is currently increasing its personnel seconded to the Office to enable all its duties to be conducted .
However , the assignment and training of personnel will inevitably take time .
The Commission is certainly aware of the importance of animal welfare and this aspect will be taken into due consideration when implementing future decisions on the allocation of the resources required by the Office to perform its duties .
We also wish to point out to the Member that the Office is currently introducing a system of establishing the priorities of tasks , and this will ensure that the programmes of tasks can reflect a balanced assessment of the various control and inspection requests made to the Office .
The Commission must say that , at least once , all the Member States have been inspected with regard to animal welfare and these inspections are far from satisfactory .
Unfortunately , the current situation of employees and human resources is such that only two of the 46 inspectors deal with this sector .
The Commission therefore considers that a list of priorities should be drawn up , as is compulsory .
Thank you very much , Mrs Bonino .
Sorry , Mrs Flemming , I will let you speak , but Mrs Jensen wants to make a point of order and the Rules of Procedure say that I must give her the floor .
You have one minute , Mrs Jensen .
I was wondering whether the President could see me over here .
I asked to speak because naturally enough I find it extremely dissatisfactory not to have my question answered .
But , on a point of order , what I really want to be sure of is that I will be the recipient of the response .
My name is not Kirsten Jensen .
My name is Lis Jensen .
I would like to appeal to the administration to make this change when sending me the written response .
I cannot blame the administration for this mistake , because half of Denmark is actually called Jensen , but I find it unsatisfactory not to be able to receive a response today , because the actual question of the regulation on restraint of trade is of great interest to us in Denmark , not least in the run-up to the referendum coming up on 28 May .
I find this extremely dissatisfactory and I feel the President is being inflexible here .
Mrs Lis Jensen , I am sorry your question could not be answered but I have no control over the clock .
I am its slave , just like you and the rest of the honourable Members .
As regards your name , I have noted your comment , but I should point out that Parliament 's services have already made the correction .
So you can rest assured that if I had allowed anyone to speak it would have been Mrs Lis Jensen .
Mr McMahon , you have the floor on a point of order .
Mr McMahon , ladies and gentlemen , I would warn you all that spending time on points of order means there is less time left for questions to the Commission .
You have your rights , but it is my duty to remind you of that .
I should also point out to you all that Question Time is governed by rules , and when the clock shows that time is up , the President is obliged to go on to the next section of questions . It is not possible to change what has already been established .
I apologize to Mrs Bonino for our having interrupted her interesting remarks .
I also apologize to Mrs Flemming , but please understand that I am governed by the Rules of Procedure .
You now have the floor for a supplementary question .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , I am sure that the two previous speakers have just as much interest in the welfare of animals as I and that their points of order do not portray indifference to the well-being of animals .
Directive 95 / 29 on the transport of animals lays down rules for the provision of food , water and rest-breaks when transporting different categories of livestock , and these regulations came into force on 1 January 1998 .
In addition , all Member States are committed to the setting-up of officially approved stopping places which comply with the requirements of the directive .
The question which I would now like to ask you , Madam Commissioner , is this : can the Commission tell us here and now how many of these stopping places actually exist at this moment in time and whether veterinary inspectors - and I learn to my astonishment that you have 46 of them - are also actually checking that these establishments are being properly run , which is part of their function ?
As I said to the honourable Member , every Member State has been inspected at least once and the results are available .
We have discovered that some of the rules in the directive , which was implemented on 1 January 1998 , are far from satisfactory .
Problems have been found at the following sites : livestock markets of national importance , border inspection posts , ports where animals are transferred from lorries to vessels , slaughterhouses and so on .
I can provide more details in writing .
I would like to tell the honourable Member that I have two inspectors out of forty-six .
There are emergencies such as BSE and classical swine fever and hygiene deficiencies in meat plants .
There are also legal obligations arising from other directives such as third countries requesting approval for exporting fisheries or for exporting fresh meat to the European Union .
I can make available to Members in writing all the obligations , emergencies , what we have done on animal welfare , what we have found and why the Commission itself is not satisfied with the situation .
I am pleased to note that the Commissioner is not satisfied with the existing situation and I am grateful to her for being so honest and open with Parliament about the unsatisfactory nature of the current situation .
I would like to put one further point to her .
Another role of the veterinary inspectors is to monitor the export of trade of live cattle to third countries under the export refund scheme .
Could the Commissioner say what instructions have been given to the team of inspectors regarding monitoring duties when cattle arrive in third countries ?
Will any liaison be established with those animal welfare organizations which so far , apparently , are the only ones to have exposed the cruelty of this trade ?
It is a serious point and some of the Commission 's problems could be helped a little by closer collaboration with animal welfare organizations working in this area who , I am sure , would be only too grateful to assist .
This is an exercise we are trying to conduct in an informal way .
As you can imagine , the Commission can only have official relations with Member States authorities .
On top of that , many third countries - even the groups you are referring to - are not very strong .
So , we are faced with these two problems : firstly , the animal welfare groups are not very strong and , secondly , our formal counterparts are the Member States alone .
Nevertheless , I hope that the organizations dealing with animal welfare in the European Union will forge closer links with their counterparts in third countries so that we can establish another form of contact between the people who have to implement the law .
Mr President , Mrs Bonino , I should like to ask you a question , though admittedly you have answered most of it already : what is the situation in the countries of central and eastern Europe , particularly in Poland , where conditions are still pretty dreadful ?
Is the Commission engaged in direct negotiations with these countries with a view to achieving a commitment that what they are exporting is treated as we would like to see it treated ?
If this process does not work there from the start , then it may well not work for us either .
I have already partly answered the question .
In the larger process of negotiation and enlargement due to the acquis communautaire , evidently this rule will be taken care of .
Of course , it is a long way ahead , so we need to find a quicker way of ensuring that the directive is implemented .
Question No 46 by Robin Teverson ( H-0281 / 98 )
Subject : MAGP IV : Beam trawler length
The Commission has allowed the Dutch MAGP IV implementation plan some credit for complying with a change to the Dutch national regulations .
A 1986 rule required that the maximum aggregate length of beams should be reduced .
Priority under MAGP IV is for those Member States , like the Dutch , who failed to meet MAGP III targets , to remove the overhang from the previous programme by the end of 1998 and allowance for this change to the rules would make a significant contribution to the Dutch MAGP position .
Does this mean that the Commission believes that technical conservation measures should be allowed to contribute to MAGP IV compliance , and have other Member States ' fleets been similarly credited for national conservation measures ?
This is a very technical question but I think it has a political more than a technical meaning .
I think Mr Teverson wanted to know if technical measures have to be counted in the MAGP .
I must be very clear .
A reduction in beam lengths reduces efficiency rather than increasing selectivity , and , as such , would not be considered as a technical measure .
I can confirm that technical measures cannot be taken into account for the achievement of the MAGP IV objectives , as their effects on fishing efforts are considered to be additional to those of the MAGP .
No credit was given in terms of capacity for the reduction in beam length in the Dutch fleet .
It was accepted that the reduction in beam length resulted in a decrease in the efficiency of the vessel .
But it was noted that there was an increase in activity during the previous MAGPs , which compensated for any reduction in efficiency .
I hope that is clear .
Since this compensatory effect was recognized and calculated , account was taken of the reduction in beam length by reassessing the appropriate base-line level of activity for the MAGP for this part of the Dutch fishing fleet .
There was then no net increase in the fishing efforts base line for MAGP IV .
No Member State has therefore benefited from national compensation measures in the context of MAGPs .
We understand that it decreased efficiency but they increased their activities , so the result was equal .
For this reason , there was no compensation , and the technical measures cannot be taken into account for the calculation of MAGPs .
I thank the Commissioner for that reply and although , as she says , it is a technical subject , it is more a question of the interpretation of how we fulfil MAGP requirements .
I take it from that - although not necessarily agree with the point - that when technical measures mean selectivity they cannot be used towards MAGP targets .
That is understood .
However , from her reply it seems that somehow , even if it is a counter-compensation , measures that might be technical in nature , though not technical measures that reduce efficiency , could and therefore do have an effect on effort , and would actually then be seen as contributing towards MAGP targets .
That seems to me what actually happened .
The Commissioner mentioned that there was a trade-off in the Dutch fleet on beam length which was used as a compensation against increase in effort , which is within the MAGP target .
That seems to suggest to me that we can use decrease in efficiency methods or physical methods to actually achieve MAGP targets .
Is that true ?
Maybe I was not clear .
I must confirm that there are only three elements to calculate MAGP which have to reduce overcapacity as a first target .
The three elements that are taken into account are activity , tonnage and power .
The special case that you are referring to , because it was compensated was not in fact taken into account .
They have to reduce the activity , in any case .
This is the result of what I am saying .
They reduced the length of the beam but they increased their activity .
For us it was a non-starter .
Our request is that they reduce their activities .
Is that clear now ?
Technical measures are additional but cannot be included in the calculation of MAGP IV .
Question No 47 by Carmen Fraga Estévez ( H-0286 / 98 )
Subject : New Argentinean fisheries law
On 12 January 1998 , Argentina adopted a new fisheries law which will come into effect three months after that date .
Pursuant to various articles of that law ( Article 4 et seq . ) , Argentina has assumed the right to regulate fishing outside its EEZ , which is clearly a breach of general international law and the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea . It also represents a further serious precedent in the wake of the 1994 Canadian fisheries law and that country 's new draft law on the same subject , which is currently going through Parliament .
What legal or other action is the Commission preparing in response to the threat which that law poses to international law and to the legitimate activities of sovereign states in international waters ?
At the meetings held recently between the Commission and the Argentinean authorities , both before and after the adoption of the new fisheries law in that country , the Commission raised the points mentioned in the Member 's query as points of great concern .
The Commission also expressed its concern that several provisions of the new law , particularly those relating to the measures the Argentinean authorities can take with regard to transzonal stocks in the sector adjoining the economic area , are contrary to international law , and the Commission pointed out that , in particular , they are contrary to the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea .
According to the Commission , conservation measures applicable to international waters , such as those provided for by the new law , can only be taken within the scope of regional or international organizations .
The new Argentinean law on fisheries , as the Member knows , is now being considered by the Council , but at the same time the Commission has received the mandate to negotiate the creation of a regional conference or a regional area for the South Atlantic , if necessary , because the type of conservation measure proposed cannot be applied unilaterally .
This is the Commission 's formal interpretation of the UN Convention .
I am grateful to the Commissioner for her answer but I would like to ask a couple of specific questions .
This question of the fisheries law is related to the notorious law on baselines for maritime zones , which gave rise to protest in its day .
As you know , that law contravenes the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea .
A few months ago Argentina made an amendment , and I would like to know whether or not that amendment is in accordance with the UN Convention .
My second question refers to something you mentioned : the famous South Atlantic Fisheries Organization .
Mr Provan is here , and he produced a report on this subject some time ago . I would like to know what stage that project is at , and what Argentina 's position is .
I understand that since the fisheries law that country has displayed opposition to this international organization , the so-called SAFO .
With regard to defining the borders of the area , the Commission is studying the first documents forwarded by Argentina on the establishment of those borders .
It remains understood , however , that any amendment , accepted by the Commission or otherwise , should be communicated to the United Nations , which , in the cases , or at least in one case we are aware of , was not applied .
So in answer to the first question , I can say that the Commission is studying the new definition of borders and may in the short term say whether the definition is consistent or not .
With regard to the second question , the Council has just given us the mandate to negotiate and we are exploring Argentina 's true intentions to determine how the new fisheries law could fall under the terms of this new mandate .
Finally , I have to say that we have worked towards this negotiating mandate for a whole year , because the idea goes back to August 1995 .
I think the time has come to confirm the actual availability and the actual willingness of the Argentinean authorities .
Thank you very much , Mrs Bonino .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Fraga Estévez ' question marks the end of the time allotted to this block of questions , so Questions Nos 48 to 52 will be dealt with in writing .

Ladies and gentlemen , you often cannot help expressing your feelings but , as I said earlier , the clock is in charge here , not me .
Question No 53 by Jens-Peter Bonde , which has been taken over by Mrs Lis Jensen ( H-0276 / 98 )
Subject : National compliance with social directives
Will the Commission guarantee that the Member States may comply with directives in the social field by transposing them as collective agreements , even where trade union representation is below 50 % ?
Article 2 ( 4 ) of the agreement on social policy provides that a Member State may entrust management and labour , at their joint request , with the implementation of directives adopted under the agreement .
In such a case the Member State must ensure that no later than the date on which the directive must be transposed in accordance with Article 189 of the Treaty , management and labour have introduced the necessary measures by agreement .
This is done in accordance with national law and practice , with the Member State concerned being required to take any necessary measures enabling it at any time to be in a position to guarantee the results imposed by the directive .
This provision is similar to those already incorporated into several directives in the social field and , furthermore , this principle was already acknowledged in the case law of the European Court of Justice prior to the adoption of the social protocol to the Treaty .
As a positive example of how the social partners have been associated with the implementation of directives , I would like to refer the honourable Member of Parliament to the agreement on the implementation measures concluded between the social partners ' organizations in Denmark .
I would like to ask Commissioner Flynn a slightly more specific question , if he would kindly expand on the response he has already given .
A survey carried out by the School of Economics and Business Administration in Denmark shows that 50-60 % of employees in the private sector labour market have collective agreements .
The question applies equally to conditions for those in a situation where no collective agreement has been drawn up between the parties to the labour market .
How can implementation be assured for this remaining segment ?
Unfortunately , the answer is not quite straightforward .
According to the notification we have received in a specific instance in so far as the Danish authorities are concerned , the working time directive has been implemented by a combination of both statutory provisions and collective agreements .
The services of the Commission are currently undertaking an examination of the implementation measures in the light of the detailed implementation of the directive under both headings .
So we are talking about a global implementation report .
We cannot do that just yet because six Member States have yet to notify us of the implementation measures .
As soon as they do so the Commission will be able to proceed .
The matter is delayed for that reason .
Thank you for the information .
The working time directive is precisely what the question is aimed at since , as the Commissioner points out , the situation is such that the Danish government has announced that a relatively large segment of private sector employees are not covered by any agreement and , thus , the working time directive is not in effect for approximately 40 % of private sector employees in the Danish labour market .
The Commission has been informed of this , and although what the Commissioner states is obviously correct about no notification yet having been received from a number of other countries , it should nonetheless be possible for the Commission to take a stance on the issue and confirm that this level of implementation is not acceptable .
These questions are of enormous fundamental importance in Denmark , where many of us believe conditions in the labour market should be regulated by means of collective agreements , but on the other hand we do not believe that the current level of implementation can be considered adequate when the Danish government has announced that approximately 40 % of private sector employees are not included in any agreement whatsoever and are therefore simply not covered .
I would like the Commissioner to confirm that this level of implementation is inadequate .
I think it must be underlined that different directives sometimes have different aims .
That being said , some of them fall within the sole competence of the social partners , while others are regulating issues and would be the exclusive competence of public authorities .
In other words you have to be quite careful how you analyse the context of the particular directive that is involved .
We cannot take a decision until we have all the information available as to implementation .
Unfortunately we do not have it yet , but I would like to think that if the Member States comply with what we seek from them and we get the information , we will have the implementing report early next year , at which time we will be able to give you a complete answer to the basic point you have raised .
Thank you very much , Mr Flynn .
As the author is not present , Question No 54 lapses .
Question No 55 by Brian Simpson ( H-0296 / 98 )
Subject : " Star ' Alliance
Does the current " Star ' Alliance within the aviation sector fall within the scope of the European Works Council Directives ?
If so , what action does the Commission intend to take ?
If not , why not ?
The ' Star ' Alliance is essentially a marketing arrangement whereby the members of the alliance have agreed to promote the services of their alliance partners through code-sharing deals .
Code-sharing enables an airline to market seats on a flight operated by the partner airline .
The alliance does not involve any exchange of ownership or control between the members of the alliance .
They continue to act as independent companies .
The alliance therefore falls outside of the scope of the Works Council Directive .
Some or all of the companies which are members of this alliance may themselves fall under the scope of the European Works Council Directive if they meet the relevant requirements .
If this is the case , it is up to the individual company and its employees to develop the information and consultation mechanisms provided for them therein .
The Commission has neither the power nor the wish to interfere in the way that the concerned parties define these mechanisms or apply them to particular situations within the context of the Works Council Directive .
As a supplementary , I should like to ask the Commissioner if he is saying that , basically , if this ' Star ' Alliance starts to diminish the working conditions and contracts within that particular alliance the Commission will not act ?
I am particularly concerned about those members of the ' Star ' Alliance from the Far East who seem to have lower conditions of pay and service compared to their partners in the EU .
At this stage , the ' Star ' Alliance comprises only the pooling of the frequent-flyer programmes - you probably know that - i.e. common use of some lounges , check-in facilities and a better scheduling coordination .
The agreement is not binding and , in any case , it does not fall under Regulation 397 / 87 which applies to international transport outside the EU .
If the matter changes , perhaps you might wish to come back to the question at a later date .
Thank you very much , Mr Flynn .
As the author is not present , Question No 56 lapses .
Question No 57 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0319 / 98 )
Subject : Strengthening the family
In the light of the EU 's latest demographic report and the alarming facts it contains , how does the Commission propose to strengthen the family as the basis of all effective social policy , and does it feel adequately supported in these endeavours by the Council and the Member States ?
The Commission is aware of current demographic trends and what they indicate about changes in family structures .
However , the European Commission has a limited competence in the area of policies on the family .
Our actions are based on the conclusions of the Council of Ministers responsible for family matters that took place in September 1989 .
Since then the Commission has been active in promoting exchanges of information on family matters , monitoring measures taken for families in the Member States and financially supporting the promotion of family-friendly initiatives .
The exchange of information between the Member States is done through a group of national senior officials responsible for family matters , meeting several times a year at the Commission 's invitation .
The next meeting will take place on 16 and 17 April .
The monitoring of measures for families in the Member States is conducted by the European Observatory on National Family Policies that the Commission set up in 1989 .
A European network on family at work established by the Commission in 1994 has also been engaged in promoting family-friendly employment policies .
Innovative projects , studies and networks in relation to family-friendly policies have received support from the Structural Funds , mainly under the NOW initiative and from the action programmes on equal opportunities .
In the field of employment policy , all Member States have recognized the need for a substantially increased participation by women in the labour market and the 1998 employment guidelines state that Member States should translate their decision to promote equality of opportunity into increased employment rates for women .
At the same time it is explicitly recognized that this must be accompanied by family-friendly policies for reconciling work and family life and policies facilitating the return to paid work after an absence .
I would like to refer to the 1992 directive on pregnant workers , the 1996 directive on parental leave and the 1997 directive on part-time work in particular .
They are the main elements of the legal framework at European level which reconciles family and working life .
Parliament has been particularly supportive in its upholding of budget line B3-4108 , that is measures in favour of family and children .
Although it is quite modest , the budget line enables the Commission to cofinance the promotion of familyfriendly practices and measures as well as comparative studies between the Member States .
Within the budget line 's remit , the Commission performs demographic research analysis such as the demographic report which allows us to link demographic evolution and changing family patterns .
Finally , the Commission 's intention is to continue the analysis of demographic trends and deepen the debate on their implications .
We are going to have a major European symposium on demographic change under the Austrian presidency .
We will do that in the latter part of the year .
Mr Commissioner , thank you for your detailed answer .
I should just like to put two short questions to you .
You spoke primarily of working women .
I just wanted to ask if there were any studies or programmes - though particularly studies - which relate to the financial support of women or men , though it will mainly be the women who decide to devote themselves to raising children ?
My second question is this : are there any studies or programmes which deal with the provision of old-age pensions for this particular group ?
Briefly , some work has been done on that matter .
Mostly it is done by national authorities but there is a certain element of coordination between what they do and what we are doing at Commission level .
Perhaps there is a need to go a little further in establishing the points you have made .
Thank you very much , Mr Flynn .
Mr Posselt 's question rounds off the time allocated to this series of questions .
Questions Nos 58 to 62 will therefore be dealt with in writing .
Question No 63 by Mark Watts ( H-0033 / 98 )
Subject : Proposed abolition of duty-free concessions in 1999
Is the Commission aware that the proposed abolition of duty-free sales in 1999 is estimated to result in the loss of 9 000 jobs in Kent in the United Kingdom , and a total loss of 140 000 jobs across the EU ?
In the light of these independent forecasts , will it at least agree to a full study being carried out urgently to examine the social and economic impact that ending duty-free would cause ?
Could it also elaborate on its proposals to cushion the impact of abolition ?
In recent months , I have set out the Commission 's position on duty-free sales within the Community on numerous occasions .
In particular , I was able to explain this position at the public hearing held on 27 October 1997 and at the sitting in November 1997 .
Today , I am taking the opportunity given to me by Mr Watts to confirm that the position has not changed .
The deadline agreed back in 1991 by the Council for all those involved in the duty-free sales sector to adapt to the requirements of the single market was an exceptional measure .
This unanimous decision took financial concerns into account , which certain Members had expressed at the time .
As things stand , the Commission has also stated very clearly that it has no intention of undertaking a study into the social and economic consequences the expiry of the transitional regulations agreed by the Council could entail , thereby establishing the definitive nature of its decision .
I thank the Commissioner for his answer , but unfortunately he did not address the particular point regarding the proposals to ameliorate the impact of abolition which he put to the public hearing that he earlier referred to earlier .
Perhaps he could answer that particular point .
Secondly , as regards preparing for abolition , perhaps he could come to my constituency , speak to the company P & O Stena and suggest which particular members of staff they lay off and which ships they suspend from service .
That would be particularly helpful .
Thirdly , on the study , would Mr Monti confirm that , if ECOFIN vote for a study in May , as is possible and I think likely , he will enthusiastically implement that decision .
If I can start with the last point , I have every reason to expect that the ECOFIN Council will not ask for the Commission to conduct a study .
As a matter of fact , the issue did come up at the ECOFIN Council on two occasions , in November 1996 and again in March 1998 , and as the President-in-Office of the ECOFIN Council , Mr Gordon Brown , said publicly on a recent occasion , there is no evidence of an emerging consensus within ECOFIN for any reconsideration of the decision taken unanimously in 1991 .
In relation to the other two points , I can say that if we compare the solution and the problems sometimes aired by the categories concerned to the solutions provided for other professions affected by internal market legislation , customs freight forwarders , for example , did receive funds for reconversion of about ECU 30 million .
A seven year period allowing for an annual turnover of about ECU 6.5 billion does not appear , if I may say so , to be disadvantageous treatment .
Finally , I have repeatedly stated that , while the Commission is certainly not prepared to propose to the Council that the 1991 decision should be reconsidered , if there were to be proven and specific problems in certain regions or on certain transportation routes connected with the abolition of duty-free , then it will be possible for Member States , in a transparent way , to consider forms of state aid , which would of course have to be proposed by the Member States and in line with Community norms .
Thank you very much , Mr Monti .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is now 7.00 p.m. , the time at which Question Time was supposed to finish . However , in view of the fact that we lost several minutes on points of order , I have asked Parliament 's services if they would be kind enough to allow us to extend Question Time by ten minutes .
So we will finish at 7.10 p.m ..
Mr Monti , I have two supplementary questions on the question we have just heard .
The first is from Mr Corbett , who may speak for one minute .
Does the Commissioner agree that a study might be useful for a purpose other than that for which many have been asking it for , namely , to reassure the public that some of the wilder claims of job losses that will result from the loss of dutyfree are in fact perhaps an exaggeration ?
A study would certainly help to clarify that .
A study might also identity the areas of specific problems that the Commissioner mentioned in his answer to the previous question .
Whereas I agree with him entirely that it is very unlikely that the Council , even if the Commission put forward such a proposal , would wish to reverse a decision taken many years ago and introduce a further tax break for the alcohol and tobacco industries - a tax break that is conditional on it being sold to international travellers , which seems preposterous - nonetheless a study would be a useful weapon in furthering this debate .
A study would be counterproductive .
I believe this very sincerely because it might well give false expectations and delay further the adjustments that might well be needed .
In fact , a very long period was given for adjustments , and it would be rather paradoxical and counterproductive if , when less than 15 months are left to the date of expiry of duty-free on intra-Eu travel , we were to engage in a study .
It is for Member States to indicate to the Commission whether they consider , on the basis of studies or any other elements that they might have available , that there is a need for a specific intervention .
Finally , it does not take a study to understand what is increasingly being perceived by public opinion , namely that duty-free is , in fact , a hidden , regressive subsidy , favouring the consumption of alcohol and tobacco to a large extent .
It is hidden because it is passed on to the general taxpayer , who is hardly aware that he is subsidizing duty-free consumption by others .
It is regressive because the ordinary taxpayer is normally less well-off than those benefiting from duty-free purchases ; and , to a large extent , it sustains artificially and in a non-transparent manner the consumption of alcohol and tobacco .
In view of his last answer , would the Commissioner close down the duty-free shop in the Commission for Commission staff such as himself ?
Seriously though , my question is : what confidence will European citizens have in the Commission , given that Commissioner Scrivener promised away back in 1991 to carry out a study ?
As the Commission has reneged on its promise , what confidence is this going to give the European Union in the Commission 's honesty , integrity and determination to listen to elected representatives of the European population ?
I understand Mr McMahon 's question but I would submit to you that the Commission and the Council , following the Commission proposal in 1991 , gave much more than a study .
It gave a more than seven-year adjustment period , something particularly long in terms of any adjustment .
I hardly dare touch on the subject of the confidence of European citizens in the Commission but I am sure that European citizens would hardly increase their confidence in a Commission that was to propose the continuation of a sort of hidden regressive subsidy at the expense of the general taxpayers in Europe going to a large extent into subsidizing forms of consumption that Community policies , if anything , tend to discourage .
Question No 64 by Bernie Malone ( H-0228 / 98 )
Subject : Abolition of duty-free sales in 1999
Mr Michel Vanden Abeele , the Director-General of DG XXI recently commented , in a letter to one of my constituents , that the Commission 's policy of liberalization within the single market had promoted the increased competition that low cost carriers bring to the market .
An independent study by Symonds Travers Morgan has revealed that the abolition of tax- and duty-free sales will damage an otherwise healthy single market in air transport , causing a 20 % reduction in the number of routes that could otherwise expect the entry of low cost airlines by 2003 , a reduction of 5 million in expected passenger levels , as well as massive job losses .
How can the Commission reconcile its professed concern for the competitive participation of low cost carriers within the single market at the same time as it presses forward with legislation which will obviously cripple these carriers , costing approximately 3000 jobs ?
The expansion of the air transport sector has certainly favoured the development of cut-price flights and , like all others , these flights will feel the effects of the abolition of the duty-free concessions as from 1 July 1999 .
In any case , the tax benefit deriving from these sales is relatively small if it is compared with other data .
One aspect that should be pointed out , in fact , is that air passenger transport has seen an increase of around 7 % and this increase certainly cannot be attributed to duty-free sales , but to other causes such as the liberalization of air transport as from 1 April 1997 .
It is therefore presumed that this increase in passenger transport will continue and may give rise to broad compensation after the abolition of duty-free sales .
In other words , we want to have and we have got the benefits of the creation of a single market and , in this case , that of air transport , and it is difficult to try and gain the benefits of the single market and maintain archaic structures , which are totally incompatible with the single market , as are duty-free sales .
We also need to bear in mind that , at the moment , air transport benefits from an extremely favourable tax system , in terms of which the duty-free benefits are marginal .
In fact , total VAT exemption applies to all aircraft and the relevant equipment and intra-Community passenger transport is not yet taxed ; moreover , supplies on board are currently tax-free and , unlike other means of transport , aircraft fuel and kerosene are not subject to either VAT or excise .
To conclude on this point , the Commission is aware of the fact that air transport is the means of transport which is growing fastest , and in which duty-free sales play a very marginal role .
Any restructuring of the sector should therefore be considered within the framework of the strategies for achieving ever greater efficiency and profits and not just as a result of duty-free sales .
I accused the Commissioner of being obstinate and arrogant at the public hearing which Parliament held .
Today , I have to tell you , Commissioner , that I find you are totally out of touch with people .
In your answer to me you say that the fiscal advantage to the air traveller will be very small .
A study that was carried out in Ireland just recently and published yesterday by SIPTU , a trade union organization , and by IBEC , representing business interests , shows quite clearly that between £ 15 and £ 17 will be added on to the cost of an airline ticket for the average traveller .
To an ordinary person that is a lot of money .
In the same letter I received from my constituent , your office said that there are a range of measures that the Commission has at its disposal to deal with any threat to employment .
Could you please define these measures , provide an estimate of the total cost of them , specify how they could be applied and outline the criteria for the allocation of these yet undefined measures ?
After what Mary O 'Rourke our Transport Minister has achieved in the Transport Council , you should be more optimistic about the outcome of the Ecofin meeting .
With the pressure on the various Member States from ordinary citizens , the Commission will just have to concede that a study will have to be done in this case .
I wish to thank Mrs Malone for her supplementary question .
I am not sure that the Commission is out of touch with the population .
Of course it holds a view that is different from that maintained by the duty-free lobbies but there are , of course , numerous positions taken recently by - may I say - broader representative institutions and the last one I have here is that of
COFACE , the Confederation of Family Organizations in the European Communities , notes that the current system is of virtually no interest for consumers .
Only a small percentage of consumers have the possibility of regularly buying from duty-free stores .
Furthermore , with the exception possibly of tobacco products , the advantages in price terms are often only apparent , as the competitive advantages of exemption are not always passed on to the final consumer .
( EN ) And to the extent that the present duty-free system contains an element of subsidy that enables transport fares to be lower than they would be otherwise , that is the best proof that the present duty-free system implies a subsidy which is hidden and regressive , as I hinted .
In the case of transportation , as my colleague , Commissioner Kinnock , recently stated in response to one of the many letters on this point , no Member State subsidy in the form of continued tax-free sales would be possible .
He went on to say that Community rules provide Member States with the means to pursue legitimate public service goals in cases where no commercial operator will be able to meet these goals without public assistance .
This was the case in the Community guidelines on state aid to maritime transport .
I believe this would also be valid for other forms of transportation .
Finally , I stress that the Commission is certainly not insensitive to problems that might materialize from the abolition of duty-free on intra-EU travel , but it will insist that the appropriate instruments be used to tackle any such problems without re-opening an issue which , as I have stressed several times , simply implies having ordinary citizens bear the burden .
Commissioner , it appears that you have set your face against the retention of duty-free sales .
It is interesting that in Brussels airport , at the moment , they are constructing a totally new duty-free shop in the middle of the airport .
I wonder why ?
Respecting your request , I understand that the Commission is undertaking a report on commercial and retail activities in US airports .
I find it very difficult to understand when the Commission has consistently refused to undertake a similar assessment of EU airports .
Will you therefore make available to us the study done about the US airports ?
I am picking up Mr Cushnahan 's question here because , unfortunately , he had to leave .
I would be grateful if I could have an answer to this supplementary .
There is no such study .
The Commission is looking at the situation in Europe and elsewhere .
We are interested in the shopping malls at US airports although there is of course no duty-free on domestic flights in the US .
We can look at those without any particular studies because they do open up encouraging possibilities for the former duty-free industry in Europe .
Although there will no longer be a duty- and tax-free system there will be captive customers around the airports and on other means of transportation and therefore a substantial demand .
Research by consumer organisations has confirmed that the duty-free prices for many goods are no more advantageous than in other shops .
There is a large captive market , even apart from the duty-free element and it is there to stay .
I have no particular axe to grind .
I have nothing against duty-free but I have a duty to implement the single market .
When we are working hard , with the support of this Parliament , to try and eliminate tax havens around Europe and promote employment , it would be illogical for me to crusade against tax havens and at the same time propose -or even consider - the continuation of localised tax havens connected with particular forms of transportation within the single market .
Thank you very much , Mr Monti .
Since the time allocated to questions to the Commission has now expired , Questions Nos 65 to 106 will be dealt with in writing .
That concludes Question Time .
Mrs Hardstaff wishes to speak on a point of order .
I would ask you if you could look into the procedure by which the questions are put into the order they are on the order paper .
For example , every question in the first part of this session was tabled after my own question , which is being dealt with much later .
This is even allowing for the fact that it was actually tabled at the beginning of February and got lost .
The same is true of Council questions : at least nine questions which were tabled after my question are ahead of it .
I think there is quite a lot of resentment among Members on this issue and I would ask that this be sorted out , so that questions appear in the order in which they are submitted and there is some fairness .
Thank you very much indeed .
Mrs Hardstaff , I will make sure your comment is taken into consideration .
However , I can tell you now that the first five questions are chosen by the President of Parliament , with priority being given to those considered to be most important . In other words , the choice is of a discretional nature .
The remaining questions should follow in order , as long as they relate to the specific Commissioners due to attend Question Time .
In any case , Mrs Hardstaff , I will give your comment some thought and let you know in due course .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.22 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Shipbuilding ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the report ( A4-0101 / 98 ) by Mr Sindal , on aid to shipbuilding and a new policy on shipbuilding .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , after 9.00 p.m. in the evening , I am almost inclined to greet everybody individually .
I am speaking on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists and have no wish to conceal the fact that I am , of course , also a Member who comes from East Germany . I still remember with gratitude the vote in this Parliament and the proposals by the Commission aimed at rectifying the problems neglected by the East German shipyards and in this respect I shall express myself in very moderate terms about the proposal .
I think the Commission 's proposal is very good .
We live in an age when we must consider whether industrial policy can be ruled by means of subsidies alone .
Nevertheless , I have also made it known to my group that I - and subsequent speakers will no doubt go into this - have my difficulties with some of the amendments tabled by Parliament and the committee .
Basically it has to be said that productivity in the European shipyards has increased in recent years .
Of course it must also be pointed out that this was often due to numerous closures , lay-offs and reductions in capacity .
Unfortunately the OECD agreement was neither signed nor ratified , and I have the impression that some Member States are not angry about it at all .
In view of the crisis in Asia and the devaluation of the currencies there , the shipbuilding industry will come under increased pressure .
This has to be withstood and the Commission has submitted proposals which reduce the extent and amount of subsidies , albeit a moderate reduction .
To that extent , this is a reaction to the progress sought in productivity .
I have difficulties with some of the amendments tabled .
I am specifically concerned that in so-called Objective 1 regions , the local shipyards should not be disadvantaged in comparison with other industrial sectors in the Objective 1 regions .
We are strenuously pursuing this matter .
It is not an honour for any Objective 1 region to be labelled as underdeveloped , but more help and some regulations are still needed in order to extricate ourselves from this situation .
In this respect , I consider the proposal which has been submitted to be a good one .
All Members should examine critically the amendments tabled by the committees and other Members .
I nevertheless request that some consideration be given to the fact that our East German shipbuilding industry still has difficulties , and my colleague , García Arias , will certainly also bring up the subject of Spanish industry .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we still share your hope , Commissioner , that the OECD agreement of 1994 will still come into force .
We also appeal to the Commission and to the Member States to try again to exert pressure on the USA , so that this agreement is ratified .
Even if we succeed in this we have a further difficulty .
We really must insist that the new shipbuilding nations , such as the People 's Republic of China and Poland , endorse the OECD agreement , as it is no use having only some of the countries sign up to the OECD agreement , whilst the People 's Republic of China and Poland continue with their own shipbuilding policies .
We must probably now say , however , that the prospects for the OECD agreement coming into force are very slim and it is somewhat questionable whether the new shipbuilding nations will sign up to comparable regulations .
We therefore need , as the Commission proposes , a new shipbuilding policy .
But it is very important to have a shipbuilding policy which is both inward and outward looking .
I myself come from a shipbuilding city .
It is the very last time , as the Commission says , that there will be a special five-year arrangement for shipbuilding .
After that , the shipbuilding industry can no longer say " another five years and another five years ' ; that cannot go on indefinitely .
It is right to propose one more special arrangement now .
We also share the view that order-related subsidies should be abolished by 31 December 2000 , even if some amendments tabled in this House still seek to shake our conviction through more and more new studies .
We know what the situation is , Commissioner ; we do not need any more studies .
If we look at the shipbuilding programme , there are still subsidies for lay-offs and restructuring , for innovation and environmental protection ; that is enough subsidies to apply over five years . And , I should like to say to the previous speaker , you in Mecklenburg really have no need to complain at all that your subsidies are too low .
I say to you and also to my Spanish colleagues , and I mean it very seriously : it is time for change .
Therefore , we also support the original proposal from Mr Sindal - and I hope Niels can listen and will not be diverted by the women again .
So , Niels , listen !
Commissioner , we in the Christian-Democratic Group support his proposal to delete paragraph 7 .
There must no longer be a loophole for additional subsidies , because it is so difficult in the regions .
It is a sector-orientated policy which we are deciding upon and there can be no new distortion of competition within the European Community .
We regard that as very important , and I hope that tomorrow there will be a majority in this House for it .
Commissioner , I believe we need a clear external shipbuilding policy , because unfortunately there is no guarantee that the other countries will end their subsidies .
At present we are in agreement , and I hope the Commissioner will say something to us on this matter . The whole House is of the opinion that , if the European Member States now help the Asian countries in overcoming their financial crisis , those countries must not be allowed to abuse this in order to create advantages for their shipyards over ours , by ridding themselves of their shipyard debts and through other protectionist measures , especially when it is our taxpayers ' contributions which are helping them to overcome their financial crisis .
We cannot allow that .
We must , however , also consider - and Commissioner , I should be very interested to hear your view on this subject - whether we might use the WTO or the instruments of the Union 's trade policy to bolster our own position slightly , and add to our ammunition . We cannot indefinitely allow the unfair competition practices of other states to put our shipyards out of business .
I believe - in fact I insist , Mr President - that in this area of the Union 's foreign policy we need a new concept , and I hope that the Commissioner will say something to us on this matter .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to reflect on a few points .
After the difficult situation and painful reorganization of the 1970s , today I have the impression that we believe that the European shipbuilding industry , which today accounts for 21 % of world employment , is , at first sight , well positioned in the world .
In reality , in my opinion , the situation is not as bright as we might think , which is clear to those living in shipbuilding cities .
The European shipbuilding industry is experiencing a revival with a great increase in demand and has at least a couple of years ' work ahead . However , if we in fact analyse the actual information on the sector and the medium-term projections , we realize that the sector is characterized by surplus supply and by surplus production capacity , owing in particular to the irresponsible doubling of plant engineering capacity in the last four or five years by the Koreans .
This has happened to such an extent that today Korea alone is able to produce more ships than all the European shipyards put together .
The fact that supply exceeds demand is shown indisputably by the fact that the prices of the new constructions have fallen or , when things are going well , stagnated in all sectors .
In current dollars , a new ship today fetches the same price as it did seven or eight years ago .
Along with this worrying situation of structural imbalance , there is the currency storm that has affected many Asian countries , particularly South Korea .
The 50 % devaluation of the Korean won has led to a situation that risks having particularly serious consequences for the Community shipyards and for employment in Europe .
In fact , it has been calculated that the Koreans could reduce the prices of their ships to 30 % , with their current internal margins remaining unchanged .
In this context , I believe it essential for the EU to apply a policy that enables the European shipbuilding industry , which is appreciated throughout the world for its high technological content , to be able to compete with the same weapons with the industries of the other countries in a system of transparent and balanced competition with the same rules for everyone and without any distorting intervention by the states .
Consequently , before the OECD agreement comes into force , before deciding to end the aid , the Commission should check the state and prospects of the sector in 1999 , taking appropriate measures , if necessary , to protect the sector so that the European shipbuilding industry can face up to the threats that could undermine its survival .
To conclude , the loan granted to Korea by the IMF should be negotiated with the condition that Korea undertakes to limit its ship production and operate within a system of fair and transparent competition .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are debating shipbuilding policy . This is a real hot potato , because everyone has an opinion on it .
It is almost as bad as agricultural policy . If you get five farmers in a room , there will be seven different opinions .
I think it is important to realize that we must strive towards the adoption of an OECD agreement .
I am also aware that we in Europe are working hard to achieve this .
Until such times as it has been adopted , I welcome the Commission 's proposal to establish some ground-rules for a transition period in the run-up to the OECD agreement .
We must remember that state aid to shipbuilding is an exception , and we must ensure that we allow the minimum acceptable level of aid , just enough to put our shipyards on an even playing field with shipyards outside Europe .
That is the balance we must strive to achieve .
Thus , we have to examine the Commission 's proposal to see whether it fulfils this , and it does .
I am in agreement with the Commission on many points .
What really matters to the Liberal group is point 1 , namely the need for monitoring to ensure that the rules are adhered to .
That is of the utmost importance .
Point 2 basically outlines the need for transparency with regard to where aid is being given , and reference could once again be made to the report we debated this afternoon - the Berès report - when we also touched on the question of transparency .
That is an extremely important aspect of state aid .
A third aspect is also crucial to the Liberal group and that is the question of combining the various types of aid , which actually results in a very high ceiling for support .
I am concerned about the need to prevent shipyards from gaining aid through regional areas .
Thus , I would very much like us to support Amendment No 29 in order to avoid unfair competition within Europe so that shipyards will not in future be located only in areas that are eligible for regional aid .
Mr President , the Commission 's new policy on shipyards is not in fact all that new .
It operates within a framework we are already familiar with , and which has had dramatic impacts on Europe 's ship repairing industry .
The Commission proposes to place yet more restrictions on the production capacity of European shipyards , with the consequent loss of still more jobs , the complete abolition of operating aid in 2000 , but allowing aid to be given for closures and to facilitate the further concentration of production in the few , powerful shipyards that are left .
All this is proposed while ignoring the fact that demand in coming years is forecast to be high and that the European Union 's international competitors are continually increasing their production capacity and adopting support measures .
For countries like Greece , such a policy means abandoning and selling off a strategically important branch which has already sustained irreparable damage with incalculable consequences for the fabric of society and for the country 's economy .
The European Union has learned nothing , either from the dramatic consequences of its policy or from the stance of the United States , which reserve for themselves the right to use only ships built in the USA for internal schedules .
Unfortunately , the rapporteur too is proposing that aid should be restricted still further , competition should be intensified to extreme levels , and essentially , that shipyards should continue to wither away .
Ultimately , what do competition and the existence of a shipyard industry and jobs mean for us ? We cannot accept these proposals , whose implementation would complete the destruction that began long ago .
On the contrary , we call on the Commission to adopt measures to support the European industry , if necessary even ignoring the OECD agreement , so that shipyards can survive the annihilating and unfair competition from third countries .
We ask it to undertake specific initiatives at international level for the adoption of measures which will compel renewal of the ageing fleet - an essential prerequisite for improving shipping safety and bringing recovery to the shipyards - and to have ships checked by the state in which the port is located . It should also ban the entry of low-specification vessels into its ports as a way to bring about their withdrawal , and tackle the problems of taxation and social dumping in the field .
Mr President , we realize that these subsidies are necessary to create a level playing field on the world market .
They can , however , only be accepted if such aid is also transparent .
For this purpose the Commission must , in our view , procure its own right of verification .
It can be seen that there is worldwide over-capacity in the shipbuilding industry and it would therefore be absurd to further subsidise these existing capacities .
It would be much more sensible to subsidise innovative projects in this field , to give more intensive support to research and development and in this way to create an opportunity for genuine future markets in shipbuilding .
I should like to give an example from a very poor region in Sachsen-Anhalt , where a small shipyard , Roszlau on Elbe , had no chance of further contracts . It initiated a crucial innovation , namely the building of flat-bottomed boats , which do not require rivers to be widened for their use .
The environment creates jobs - that is all I can say - and in this case it succeeded !
We are talking about a new market which is urgently needed throughout Europe , which needs to be provided for , which will also be of global interest and which , at the same time , can secure jobs which had already been written off .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , what is the context in which we are considering the Sindal Report ?
As has been emphasized by our colleague André Sainjon in his opinion , the OECD agreement whose aim was to eliminate direct aid to shipbuilding was stillborn .
In effect , it had to be so , as the United States Congress did not ratify it . This was only to be expected , as the American authorities have no reluctance whatsoever in subsidising their own shipyards .
At the same time , South Korea , which is going through the economic turbulence that we all know about , is preparing for a future as an even more formidable competitor .
The ' Challenges ' newspaper this month emphasizes however that the financial crisis is temporary .
The country should soon return to normal , thanks to IMF funds .
The shipyards will work hard to catch up on lost time , and their sales people will once again be going around the globe to put spokes in the wheels of the Japanese and Europeans .
This is the context in which the Commission is apparently persisting stubbornly in doing away with direct aid in Europe , and strangely enough is sticking to the line which was defended at the time of negotiations on the OECD agreement , although these negotiations foundered .
The position is all the more astonishing since the aid from the IMF , in the final analysis , does in fact boil down to a subsidy paid by Japan , the United States and Europe to begin a high risk economic policy .
We therefore completely agree with the general comments made by André Sainjon and the amendments proposed by the Commission on External Economic Relations .
We believe indeed that it is extremely dangerous to commit to a date to end aid to orders , without prior analysis of the market situation and of whether or not there are non-competitive practices afoot .
Similarly , we are in favour of eliminating any regional aid which would risk introducing unacceptable distortions in competition .
In conclusion , once more , the Commission appears show either an strangely naive commitment to free trade , or an overwhelming ideological blindness .
Industrial policy and commercial policy , on the contrary , require realism and pragmatism .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Sindal for his splendid report .
I agree with its main message that the shipbuilding industry should be left to recover in the longer term without state aid .
Mr Sindal 's report , however , is turning into something that is unfortunately dividing the southern and northern European states .
Many of our friends in Spain , for example , have been very concerned about possible cuts to aid , and that is quite understandable .
We in the Nordic countries have already cut shipyard aid though , and we have noticed that the shipyards have actually been coping better since the cuts were introduced .
We have lost some , but the sturdier ones have remained , and they are competitive .
The policy of support had actually been distorting the picture in this sector .
I agree with Mr Sindal that the prompt implementation of the OECD agreement is especially important for the normalization of world ship markets .
The Commission , in its estimation , however , is rather gratuitously optimistic .
The USA , as you know , does not seem very willing to ratify the agreement .
The Commission should put more pressure on the USA as , if the agreement is not ratified , we will have to produce yet another directive on shipbuilding when the old 7th Directive comes to an end at the end of the year .
The present jungle of aid to shipbuilding has led to unfair competitive advantages between one European shipyard and another .
The EU must therefore aim to guarantee similar benefits to the industry both in Europe and overseas .
In this we must obviously be prepared for competition from countries where production costs are low .
Aid that differs from country to country and region to region , like regional aid and aid for structural change , is now making the status of the different European shipyards a variable factor .
I myself proposed an amendment to this report , in which I suggested the checking of the overlapping of aid and variable aid systems for the years 1999-2000 .
The Commission has not itemized its aid programme meticulously enough for the years to come and this might lead to overlap instead of cuts .
My proposal for an amendment did not , however , get any response , even from my own group , and thus I did not consider it wise to present it to you here .
I assume that modern vessels are very intelligent .
They thus call for much technological development .
They are high-tech products , and that is what we Europeans have to face up to .
Shipbuilding contracts have to be made in the knowledge that the industry in the Community is being assured of reasonable and uniform conditions for competition .
The ultimate aim of the EU should be that the shipbuilding industry in the longer term recovers without aid .
That would be consistent with the OECD agreement .
Mr President , for a long time shipbuilding has been subject to strong commercial pressure from third countries - such as South Korea , China and others - which are causing serious complications to the market due to , among other things , the competitive devaluations of their currencies , with the passive consent of the International Monetary Fund .
Furthermore , there already is a suitable framework designed to realign the market , born of consensus and backed by the OECD .
Of course , it would be better if the United States and China were to sign it , but as a framework it is good .
In that context , we Spanish Members of the People 's Party believe we should oppose any regulation which directly or indirectly might allow a reduction in the current system of aid to shipyards .
In the current market situation , we think it would be irresponsible to commit to withdrawing contract-related aid from shipyards from the year 2000 .
We also disagree with the Sindal report 's criticisms of any regional aid which the shipyards might currently be receiving .
Everybody knows that if a shipyard closes in a depressed area with a high unemployment level , the consequences for the workers are far worse than when a shipyard closes in the prosperous countries of the north , where there are jobs .
In addition , the Maastricht Treaty states that all the Union 's policies should take their inspiration from the principle of economic cohesion .
Those arguments , and others , lead us to oppose the Sindal report .
We cannot support the proposed reduction in aid to shipbuilding , especially in the international context we have just been describing .
The OECD agreement should form the framework for regulating our aid in the future .
Moreover , every time a shipbuilding job is destroyed in Europe , another one is created in South Korea .
This is not the time to commit to any reduction in aid , unless in the context of the OECD agreement , which is good for Europe and good for all shipyards .
So it makes no sense for us to want to be more demanding than the established framework . We will vote against a possible toughening up of the 7th Directive , and we think it would be a very good thing if it were prolonged .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , on several occasions the Parliament has drawn attention to the vital importance of adopting common standards for the shipbuilding market which is , after all , the ultimate objective of the OECD agreement .
We share this view and agree that the European Union should not submit proposals that might jeopardize the agreement 's ratification .
On the contrary , every effort should be made to ensure that it enters into force .
Meanwhile , since it is impossible to achieve that objective , principally on account of the United States ' protectionist measures , we welcome the Commission 's proposal to extend the 7th Directive and to draw up a new shipbuilding policy .
We would , however , like to make two comments in this respect .
We consider the 31 December 2000 deadline for operating aid to be inappropriate and premature , particularly if competition is further distorted , for instance , by dumping or by the Far East crisis .
Before a decision is taken to eliminate aid , the most thorough possible analysis should be made of the situation of Community shipyards .
Our second point , briefly , relates to the rigorous compliance , application and monitoring of the new legislative framework .
The regulation should contribute to ensuring that the existing inequalities in competition between European shipyards do not increase .
Professionals in this sector frequently state that the playing field is not level , on account of local subsidies and aid which infringe the rules of competition .
We feel that the Commission has an important role to play in this respect .
Mr President , over the last twenty years , the number of employees in European Union shipyards has fallen from 280 000 to less than 80 000 .
In France , the number of employees has fallen from 32 000 to less than 5 000 , and many yards have closed .
This situation , which is already catastrophic , would have been aggravated still further if the OECD agreement of July 1994 had been applied , as its aim was to eliminate aid while maintaining the American protectionist legislation arising from the Jones Act and reserving a monopoly to the American merchant fleet shipbuilders .
The proposal for a regulation from the Commission aimed at banning operating aid from 31 December 2000 anticipates the OECD agreement , which has still not been ratified by the United States .
Our group favours neither the early application of the OECD agreement , nor the fixing of a date to get rid of aid .
Rather , it would be necessary to renegotiate the OECD agreement by taking into account changes in the world market , and more particularly the Asian crisis , which very much looks like leading to more dumping by Far Eastern shipbuilders .
Quite the contrary of what has been planned , we ask that measures be taken to promote the shipbuilding and maritime business in the Member States . We should give them a boost , by putting right the unfair competitive practices at global level , by maintaining the system of State aid , and introducing Community preference for shipbuilding , in order to promote the purchase of ships built in European yards .
Mr President , shipbuilding is a global industry and should be approached as such .
It should not be viewed from a regional or national perspective .
The relevant market is the global market .
The Commission 's proposal unfortunately does not take this sufficiently into account .
Moreover , it goes against agreements which have been made on cutting back subsidies for shipyards whilst reducing capacity .
The sector has been going through a process of reorganization for years .
This proposal increases the risk that capacity might creep up with the aid of government support .
This would wipe out in one fell swoop the organizational achievements which have already been made .
The Commission document does not mesh with European competition policy .
It even flagrantly contravenes the principles of the internal market ; one yard may get 3 to 9 % in aid , whereas another may get 60 to 70 % .
Paragraph 7 regarding regional aid should therefore be deleted .
The restructuring aid is also completely superfluous .
With these proposals the European Commission is killing off the best European shipyards , whilst lesser yards are maintained artificially .
A recent study by Ernst and Young highlights this conclusion .
The strategic importance of the European shipbuilding industry is evident .
We want to continue to be able to build our own ships , even if we are forced to help the sector .
But let us not create a mess with all kinds of obscure regulations within the European Union , and squander tax revenue .
It will not be of any help to the sector itself .
The ultimate goal must still be the abolition of all types of government support , so that every yard gets the price it deserves .
Mr President , the report on aid to shipbuilding which we are debating tonight refers to matters of great importance for the European Union and particularly for certain regions .
One such region is Andalusia , especially the provinces of Cadiz and Seville , where shipbuilding is virtually the only heavy industry still in existence , although it is experiencing enormous difficulties .
The shipbuilding sector is in crisis , as the honourable Members are well aware . Furthermore , it is a sector which is greatly exposed to competition , especially from Asia , as has been underlined several times this evening .
The production capacity and actual production of South Korea alone are greater than for the whole of the Community .
Furthermore , as has also been stressed tonight , that ability to compete is reinforced by the strong devaluation of the Korean won , caused by monetary instability in Asia .
For that reason it is important to call on the Commission to exert pressure on the US Congress , to get them finally to ratify the OECD agreement on competition conditions in the shipbuilding sector .
And not just in the context of the OECD agreement , either : there is also the World Trade Organization , where the Commission should make its voice heard in order to achieve fair competition conditions for the world market .
In its regulation , the Commission proposes that contract-related aid should cease on 31 December 2000 , but the recitals of the same regulation introduce a safeguard clause to cover that eventuality .
It specifically says : " Whereas , one year before that date the Commission will monitor the market situation and appraise whether European yards are affected by anti-competitive practices . If it is established at that or a later stage that industry is being caused injury by anti-competitive practices including injurious pricing , the Community will consider introducing appropriate measures ... ' .
Well , Commissioner , we are very worried that if this study were carried out , the conclusion would be that in fact anti-competitive practices are still being used in the world market . If that were the case , we hope the Commission would be up to the situation , and come up with suitable measures to solve this extremely serious problem .
So we are surprised that the safeguard clause I quoted from the recitals nevertheless fails to be reflected in the actual text of the regulation , and we are strongly in favour of it being formally incorporated into it .
We are also in favour of retaining Article 7 in the regulation . Several speakers this evening have said that this article distorts competition , but it does nothing of the sort .
It is founded on the principles of regional policy so it could be said that , even without being specifically mentioned in the body of the regulation , aid arising out of regional policy would still be applicable .
Lastly , Mr President , I listened carefully to the words of my compatriot Mr Pomés Ruiz of the Group of the European People 's Party , who expressed clear views on this regulation .
It just remains for me to say one thing : the Spanish People 's Party , to which Mr Pomés Ruiz belongs , currently has a seat in the Council of Ministers .
Let us Spaniards hope that the stance taken within the Council by the Spanish Ministry of Industry is as firm as the one we have heard tonight .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the House is today discussing the creation of a new Community legislative framework for the granting of aid to the European shipbuilding industry .
The objective here is to fulfill the principles enshrined in the Treaty by providing the shipbuilding sector with fair and uniform conditions of competition within the Community so that , subsequently , the sector may survive without state aid , in compliance with market rules and conditions .
In this connection , the agreement signed in 1994 between the European Union , Japan , South Korea , Norway and the United States , under the auspices of the OECD , which should have entered into force on 1 January 1996 , may today be said to be a dead letter in that , under constant pressure from US shipyards , the US Congress has failed to ratify the agreement .
This position may be understood in the light of the fact that , over and above the many millions of dollars allocated in aid to the opening of a shipyard in Philadelphia , the US authorities wish to add a new payment with which the US Navy may openly finance the construction of non-military vessels .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , shipbuilding today is undeniably a global industry and the European shipbuilding industry should enjoy the same conditions as its international competitors .
Therefore , steps should be taken to extend the standards in force within the European Union to a global level , preventing any distortion of competition .
It is essential to incorporate the existing instruments of economic policy , together with those to be created in the future , within a policy which seeks to achieve a uniform international shipbuilding market without distortions of competition and without dumping of any kind .
The United States ' protectionist measures , China 's total freedom to ignore commitments of this type , together with the crossed subsidy mechanisms made possible by the vertical and horizontal composition of the Japanese and South Korean shipbuilders undermine the objectives of achieving uniformity .
South Korea 's position , which combines its 25 % market share , which it clearly aims to increase , with a devaluation of the won in excess of 50 % , has had and continues to have disastrous effects on the world market .
For instance , the increase in the number of jobs in Korean shipyards in the last decade is equal to the number of jobs lost in my country 's shipbuilding and repair yards .
It is therefore urgent to force countries like South Korea to correct the imprudent industrial policy they have pursued and force them to eliminate their excess capacity .
Thus , the 7th Directive should be extended .
The Commission should maintain the 31 December 2000 deadline for eliminating subsidies if it ascertains that anti-competition practises do not exist .
If that is not the case , then it should be extended , until at least 31 December 2003 , the date on which this regulation expires .
Mr President , I am glad to see we are joined tonight by the two Commissioners dealing with this matter , in the contexts of industrial policy and competition policy .
It would have been nice if Sir Leon Brittan had also been here , because of the international importance of the subject .
I am not going to repeat here what everybody has been saying about the international situation .
What I want to do is put the following question to the Commissioners : what aspect of the world situation has changed , for there to be this change in attitude in the Community strategy towards defending the shipbuilding sector ?
So far we have been prolonging the directive while waiting to see what happened with the international agreement .
Also , there has been the crisis in Asia , and all the current phenomena we have just been talking about here .
The Commission now realizes , as we all know from the newspapers , that European companies have lost international contracts or tenders because obviously those devaluations , that excess capacity , and perhaps that indirect aid being diverted from the IMF aid , are having an effect .
So , what has happened to make us change our strategy ?
Is it because the Nordic countries have joined ?
That is what can be deduced from what we are hearing here in Parliament .
Is that the international change which has taken place ?
In the debate on this question , Parliament 's position is that we should not set a date for the prolongation of the directives , because as soon as we set a date we are adopting and announcing unilateral policies .
And now it turns out that we have here the regulation which announces that unilateral disarmament on the part of the European Union .
Mr President , in view of what we have been hearing I would like to say two things .
I go a little further than what has been said by my colleague Mr Pérez Royo and the Spanish People 's Party .
I would like to hear the Minister declare publicly that he is defending that position at the Industry Council .
I think it would be very interesting and very important for the shipyards and the Spanish regions to know that that position is being defended because , as we are hearing , that does not seem to be the case .
However , at this time of night I do not wish to go any deeper into the question .
I would prefer it if the two Commissioners here - and I wish Sir Leon were here too - would tell us what change has occurred for us now to find ourselves with a proposal for our unilateral disarmament .
Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , after having as is customary , thanked and congratulated Mr Sindal and the draftsmen of the opinions , and our two Commissioners for their presence here , I wish to begin my speech on the future of aid to shipbuilding by making three observations .
Firstly , in the course of the past five years , every time a job has been lost in the European shipbuilding industry , another job has been created in the Korean shipbuilding industry , and our sacrifices have therefore been perfectly useless .
Secondly , in Korea , it is neither low wages nor industrial organization which has made Korea dominant , but the cross guarantees of the conglomerates , supported by the Korean government , making actual financial backing unnecessary .
Thirdly , in Europe , every time aid is given to a shipyard in difficulty , the European Commission demands a reduction in capacity , whereas of course in Korea , Japan and the United States nothing of the sort happens .
The result of all this can be summarised in four points .
Firstly , Europe has imposed on itself measures which its competitors did not .
Secondly , tens of thousands of jobs have been destroyed with all that ensues in terms of social difficulties and misery .
Thirdly , Europe has lost a substantial market share .
Fourthly , contrary to what occurred in other industrial sector , in particular the steel industry , there is no guarantee that what is left of our production capacity will actually last .
Ladies and gentlemen , a few months ago , we nearly hit rock bottom in this area , as aid under the 7th Directive was about to disappear on behalf of an OECD agreement that our competitors had not even ratified .
For once , we all together were able to say no .
Today it is being proposed to us that the European Union should unilaterally apply , to itself , the principles set out in the OECD agreement , although it is not ratified .
And here I say once again that we must be more pragmatic .
If in the year 2000 , we see the market is sufficiently healthy for us to be able to do without aid , I will doubtless agree to it being done away with .
But today , who could say as much ?
The Commission itself acknowledges the need for appropriate measures although it cannot say what these are .
So now , I beg of you , do not shut the doors . But if we are to shut the doors , let us at least keep the keys , and between now and then we shall be able to study exactly the changes in the market before fixing final dates and taking definitive measures .
Shipbuilding is not an industry like any other .
That is why I call on our Parliament to be cautious , and I call on the Commission to accept the amendments which I hope will be voted through and which will allow us between now and the end of the year 2000 enough margin for manoeuvre .
Once and for all , in this sector , as in many other sectors , we should , Mr President , stop being masochistic .
. Mr President , as I listened to all these speeches , and this time there were many of them , you will have surely been aware , if you listened to one another , of the difficulties with which we are confronted , because the arguments go from A to Z. Some of you wish to stop aid immediately , and in particular operating aid , and a number of governments defend this point of view even today .
Others would like aid to be continued , using the same arguments as have been raised for the last fifteen years .
Everyone seems to forget that the only industrial sector , and I repeat the only industrial sector which has for a very long time benefited from operating aid is shipbuilding .
This is no longer the case for the steel industry , nor for other sectors ; shipbuilding is the only one left .
Taking the figures from 1990 to 1995 , did you know that in the European Union , more than ECU 5 billion of state aid was allocated to operating aid , and more than ECU 3 billion for restructuring ? That is a total of ECU 8 billion .
So those who claim that this sector has been let down are completely wrong .
In spite of this aid , which is at times massive , I knew of cases where the public authorities were paying one third and even more for ships - when I say the public authority , of course I mean the tax payer - often in order to be able to compete with shipyards within the Union itself .
Sometimes even more than one third of the aid was provided .
That was the situation .
So in effect , the question has now been with us for many years : can we continue like this ?
Increasingly , more governments are saying no .
We have tried to find a solution through the OECD agreement , at a global level , and we have not disarmed on a unilateral basis .
We have tried to find an agreement which everyone would respect , and provided this agreement was ratified , we were ready to immediately put an end to the 7th Directive .
Unfortunately , the Americans did not ratify the agreement .
The problem is not that the Americans are major competitors , because I am not aware that American ships are causing great difficulties to our own shipyards .
The Americans are protectionist , that is true , but in terms of global competition , the problem is not really there .
Our problem is that , as ships are becoming increasingly sophisticated , we need to act to ensure that we are at the cutting edge of technological development and of the development of modern ships .
I shall return to Korea in a minute , but I believe it is useful to go over the global context again .
Once again , more and more governments cannot or do not wish to continue giving operating aid .
Sometimes , from some of the speeches , my understanding was that it is no longer a question of giving aid .
That is wrong , as even in the framework of the OECD agreement , aid for research and development , for the environment and for social support measures and export finance arrangements continue to be provided for .
The OECD agreement allows all this to continue .
Our proposal allows more : it offers aid for the restructuring of companies and aid for innovation .
That is new , certainly , but that is precisely the reason why we have to try and innovate more to remain competitive .
That being the case , I do not understand why we are being criticised for including that in our proposal .
That is where the future lies .
We did this for the automobile industry ; why not do the same for shipbuilding ?
Let us now come to a highly controversial point , particularly among yourselves , which is aid to investment in eligible regions .
This is the logic of our regime .
Let us take the automobile industry , Mr Jarzembowski .
We can give aid to eligible regions , to compensate for the disadvantage that these regions have compared to non-eligible regions .
That is why a great deal of aid can be allocated to Saxony , as you know .
Not as much as Mr Biedenkopf would wish , but , even so , it is a substantial amount , whereas in other places , nothing can be given , not even a penny to Vilworde .
That is the logic of our regional policy .
Do you wish to keep this policy or not ?
The Commission believes that we should .
Where your argument does bite , is knowing whether the degree of aid that can be allowed for the eligible regions , be it region A or region C , would also be acceptable in the logic of shipbuilding .
I have just mentioned the automobile industry where aid can only be given for investment in order to make up for disadvantages .
But here I am ready , and I emphasize this , to consider along with the Council of Ministers how to limit regional aid , possibly even by combining it with certain other measures .
However , I believe we should in principle maintain the overall approach in terms of regional policy .
Of course , this investment must not be used to increase capacity .
It may be used to modernize , to increase productivity , but not to enlarge capacity .
From this point of view , this rule can be maintained and rightly so , I believe .
We shall see what the Council of Ministers decides .
I am not sure that it will follow this logic , but I maintain that it is right .
It is consistent with what the Commission does within the European Union in terms of regional policy .
Now I will look at Korea .
Of course many other comments have been made , but my time is limited , and clearly I have to speak on the question of Korea .
Furthermore , Martin Bangemann is here , and he may talk more about the report which was drawn up under his responsibility , in an attempt to contribute to the modernization of our shipbuilding industry .
Who can believe for a moment that the Commission is not in fact concerned about this ?
It only wants the sector to be able to support itself , as far as possible , through its own resources , receiving aid of course for research and development and for the environment .
All these instruments remain available , but we must , after a certain period , eliminate operating aid , that is , by the end of the year 2000 , as we have proposed .
Here too , we shall see what the Council decides .
However , before even the crisis in Korea , Martin and myself included in our proposal a clause stating that if something were to happen at a global level , somewhere in an industrialized country which was developing an aggressive dumping policy with regard to our shipyards , the Commission would reserve the right to come back on this .
We undertook , one year before the end of operating aid , to review this matter in order to make an assessment and present it to you and to the Council of Ministers , with a view to determining whether we should take new measures or develop other elements of our policy .
This door was not only halfopen in the aftermath of the Asian crisis , but was open before it , because that is what had been agreed .
In this light , I have no difficulty in accepting some of the suggestions which were made , with a view to studying extremely closely , as Martin does , as the Commission will do and as the Council will do , the consequences of the events in South Korea , where there is in fact a considerable degree of competition .
Contrary to what many of you have said , the crisis does make it possible for us to intervene .
Before , in practice , we could not .
Before the crisis , the Koreans would not accept a reduction in capacity .
Now , with the crisis , with the operation of IMF aid , we will also have our bit to say .
Although precautions have been taken , we will naturally need to ensure that they are complied with .
It so happens that in the wake of the Industry Council which is due to take place on 7 May , there will be a high-level meeting between Korea and the European Union , and believe you me , we will take stock of the situation there .
In fact , over and above the problem of the shipbuilding sector , South Korea and a number of other countries are facing a far more serious crisis , which also affects their industrial structures and massive aid systems .
Hence , at a time when those countries are in the throes of crisis , nobody is going to try and sell us a policy based on the South Korean model .
Let us take advantage of the situation to try and make some adjustments , since we were not able to do so with the OECD agreement , which provided no commitments from Korea to reduce its capacity .
On the contrary , South Korea continued to increase its capacity .
Now we have at least a possibility of saying to the Koreans that we want to enter into serious discussions about this matter .
Furthermore , the European Union is not the only one to act ; the Member States are also able to act through the IMF .
In my view , if anything it is a matter of good fortune that we can now get into a serious discussion with the Koreans and reassess the matter , instead of being in the situation as it was before .
I therefore yet again , make a commitment on behalf of the Commission to come back to this aspect , as well as to others , one year before the end of the regime , in other words , one year before the end of operating aid .
Specifically , this means that we shall continue to discuss among ourselves , but we must find a solution for the future , as the 7th directive comes to an end at the end of the year .
Last time , we were able to extend it for a limited period only , and barely gained a qualified majority to do this .
But now this will no longer be possible .
A blocking minority will certainly oppose the continuation of this regime .
We therefore need to find another way forward , another policy , and I believe that the if it is possible to discuss one element or another and the Commission itself is prepared to consider certain amendments here or there , that in this way an agreement will be possible within the Council of Ministers .
With that , ladies and gentlemen , I will conclude .
I have spoken at length , but I know how interested you are in this sector , which is still very sensitive , and as I look at some of you , I can immediately see behind you the region and shipyards in question .
I know this because I understand that because very often the regions are already facing difficulties .
When we speak about the difficulties in the shipyards , thousands of people are affected , and the situation is showing itself to be dramatic .
I therefore fully understand what you have said . But on the other hand , I think that our proposal is fairly balanced , and also aims to ensure that , in the next century , we will have a competitive shipbuilding industry , which will not only be a major industry at European level , but also at global level .
If I could have your attention , Mr van Miert - thank you for your reply and for contributing positively this evening .
This is a consultation procedure , and I think this process is in fact intended to help expose the problems facing not only the Commission , but also the citizens of Europe , and I believe we can all sympathise with one another .
However , I do also look forward to the Commission and the Council coming up with a workable solution .
That was one point I wanted to make .
I am actually speaking in response to criticism from some Members before the break to the effect that the procedure prevents the various opinions from those committees asked to give an opinion from reaching the corresponding committees in time , thus preventing them from being heard .
As rapporteur of this proposal , I would like to say that I have endeavoured to get this put back a little , but the fact is that British Presidency wants the matter settled in May , and the Commission did not want it to be postponed .
I am saying this with regard to the protocol .
At some point , we must learn to deal with matters in their correct order .
This is my response to criticism from my two colleagues this afternoon .
Mr President , I wish simply to make good an unpardonable omission .
I did not even congratulate Mr Sindal on his excellent report .
I deeply regret this , as I know how hard he has worked , and I hope that my omission now has been made good .
I was so keen to give a quick response to the comments of substance , that I forgot to congratulate you , but I do so , believe me , with all my heart and with conviction .
Our congratulations echo yours , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Passenger vehicles
The next item is the report ( A4-0113 / 98 ) by Mr Murphy , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on special provisions for vehicles used for the carriage of passengers comprising more than eight seats in addition to the driver 's seat , and amending Council Directive 70 / 156 / CEE ( COM ( 97 ) 0276 - C4-0545 / 97-97 / 0176 ( COD ) ) .
I welcome Mr Bangemann , who joined us during the previous debate .
Mr President , I should like to begin by putting on record my thanks to Parliament services for assisting with this very complicated dossier , the Commission for its assistance and , in particular , the bus builders of Europe , the bus operators of Europe and those people who use the buses of Europe , for their great assistance in drawing up this report .
Yet again Parliament is making one of its traditional errors .
We spent the whole of this morning contemplating our own budgetary navel .
That is important to us but here we are this evening , as a Parliament , talking about ship-building and buses and coaches which are very relevant to the citizens of Europe .
I know which reports my constituents in towns like Wolverhampton and Dudley would like to see us talking about in front of the media and not here in front of a few interpreters and a few hardy souls such as ourselves .
I welcome the Commission 's proposals .
They are an important step forward towards the completion of the single market .
They protect national and regional preferences in vehicles and in this respect , from the United Kingdom 's point of view , I am pleased that our traditional double-decker buses - and in London the Routemaster buses - are under no threat whatsoever from Europe .
I am pleased to be able to say that .
Also , very importantly , I welcome the mandatory provision for disabled accessibility to class I vehicles . This is very important .
As the rapporteur I have spoken widely to various interest groups , as I said at the beginning of my speech . Not all are going to be happy with my proposals but I can assure you that I did my best to meet all their main aspirations in a realistic , technical and cost-effective way .
There are a few key points from my report that I would like to bring to the Commission 's attention and to invite their support .
Firstly , we are widening the single market here .
But I would ask that instead of adopting a derogation approach to vehicles which are not typical throughout the European Union , such as double-decker buses and midi-buses - which are used in certain parts of the European Union , I think we ought to allow type approval for them all , provided they are safe and not a hazard to citizens .
We should grant them type approval .
Nobody has to actually use them but why separate them out ?
Why not have a complete market in buses and coaches ?
I would urge the Commission to look at my Amendments Nos 4 , 5 , 28 , 29 and 41 in that respect .
Secondly , we ought to widen the accessibility provisions to include class II vehicles .
The Commission is currently involved in a study looking at the technical feasibility of accessibility for class II vehicles .
It is my prediction that Commission study will report in favour of mandatory accessibility provisions for those vehicles before the Council has even adopted its first common position .
We , as a Parliament , ought to be looking at class I and class II vehicles because this is technically feasible .
I have seen the vehicles , I have been on them .
Included in that we ought to start a study into class III vehicles , coaches and class A vehicles and minibuses .
The key challenge to this House is to accept that we have a duty here to widen accessibility as far as is technically and affordably possible .
I say to my colleagues in the EPP group on this : please accept this challenge ; what I am saying is reasonable and achievable .
I am not coming forward with some super-fantastic idea here .
I would say to the EPP and the UPE groups : please , let us put this in at first reading ; let us test the waters .
I believe that by the time we get to our second reading , the Commission will be backing us on class II vehicles .
I would not want to waste what is a golden opportunity .
I myself know how difficult it is to get on and off buses if you have a slight disability .
I had a broken ankle a couple of years ago .
It is impossible to get on and off vehicles with high steps .
A friend of mine told me about a woman at a bus depot in Wolverhampton who had a child in a push-chair .
She had to wait for different vehicles to pass until the right one came along , with a low floor , so that she could actually get on that vehicle .
I am saying here , this evening : let us take this opportunity to widen the single market , to increase the accessibility provisions from class I to class II , with the various bits and pieces of technical amendments we require .
There has been a lot of fuss made about my report in the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
That has been based largely on a series of misunderstandings .
As far as I am concerned , this is an important piece of single market legislation ; it is an important report for the citizens of Europe .
But what is more , I can assure you it is technically feasible , undoubtedly affordable , and eminently achievable .
I think it is a good response to a good Commission proposal .
I ask the House to support it .
Mr President , Commissioner , the directive on the regulation of vehicles with more than eight seats in addition to the driver 's seat - generally known as buses - is aimed at standardizing the type approval system in the context of the Single Market and at the same time improving safety .
The whole report is very technical ; nevertheless , these technical details have considerable repercussions for the people .
The Commission has fortunately taken into account accessibility for people with restricted mobility , but it is the fine details which are causing the problems .
I have therefore mainly addressed this problem area in my opinion .
I thank the rapporteur for having incorporated to a large extent the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism in his report .
In its proposals on accessibility , the Commission concerns itself solely with wheelchair-bound persons with strong arm muscles .
We intend to extend the concept of " persons with reduced mobility ' to include not only all disabled persons , but also elderly people and those who , for various reasons , have difficulty in boarding ; for example , passengers with heavy luggage , passengers with pushchairs or bicycles and even pregnant women .
This new definition of the term will entail a whole series of technical changes which will , however , make it possible and / or easier for people to use public transport .
The second fundamental change which I propose is to stipulate accessibility for persons with reduced mobility for all types of vehicle .
We want to have this accessibility not only for local but also for long-distance buses .
Boarding aids should be available for at least one door .
We are not satisfied with a promise from the Commission that it will submit a proposal on this subject in the near future , because it does not want to make a decision at present as to the best technical solution .
We have waited years for this directive and have repeatedly demanded mandatory obstacle-free design .
We do not want to be put off any longer .
In non-binding declarations , demands for the integration of people with disabilities are made repeatedly .
With the acceptance of the amendments tabled , we have an opportunity to make a start on integration , at least in the field of transport .
About 10 % of the population lives with some form of disability .
A large proportion of these people have difficulty in using the roads .
They are reliant on public transport .
Because of their reduced mobility it is important for them to be able to get out and about , to be able to lead an independent life .
Public transport must be designed in such a way that it does not constitute an obstacle for this group of people , so that they can reach their place of work , but also so that they can participate in leisure activities , reach holiday destinations or keep up family or social contacts .
Alongside people with disabilities , there are approximately 100 million elderly people in the EU , and this figure - as we know from demographic statistics - is set to climb even higher .
Elderly people are particularly reliant upon public transport .
It is estimated that about 50 % of these people do not have a private car at their disposal .
It must be made possible for all of them to gain easy access to public transport , thereby saving them from the threat of isolation .
However , it also makes sense , from the economic point of view , to invest in the additional costs of removing the various obstacles .
The assertion that this is too expensive is simply wrong .
According to the most recent calculations , it does not even amount to 10 % of the total investment .
Offset against this is a large number of potential new users , if obstacle-free design enables them to use the service .
I appeal to all Members to vote for the amendments to the report , in order to make integration something which is there for all to see and experience .
Mr President , I add my congratulations and approval of this report and I praise Simon Murphy for the assiduous and sensible way in which he has crafted this proposal .
At the same time I acknowledge the work the Commissioner has played in it too .
The details contained in the report , as has already been said , are the result of extensive consultation with all the key interest bodies .
The report has gained approval from very diverse organizations : from manufacturers and industry , trade union representatives as well as consumer and disability groups .
During the passage of this report through EMAC the depth of the research into detail that Simon Murphy had carried out was evident to all of us .
It is a proposal for a Council directive which takes a positive step towards the completion of the single market and at the same time provides a framework for the harmonization of construction standards between all Member States which in itself will engender and encourage trade between them .
Important though these aspects are , the prime reason why the citizens of Europe will recommend the Murphy report is the emphasis it rightly places on safety and accessibility for everyone .
Getting on and off buses is the point at which most accidents happen , especially to those who are vulnerable .
Alongside the recommendations of low-floor buses , buses which in effect kneel at the kerbside to give easier access , many other safety features are contained in this report .
All of these will make all of our travel , on coach or bus safer and more risk free .
Let me underline once again that this directive will only apply to new buses and will not threaten double-decker buses or Routemaster buses .
Tomorrow we vote in this House and I hope we will keep the integrity of the Murphy report with its focus on helping passengers with reduced mobility , disabled people , the elderly , small people , parents with children and pushchairs and - dare I say , Commissioner - nimble grannies-to-be who , in the very near future , could be the beneficiaries of this report and be grateful to it .
Finally , and unsurprisingly , need I remind the Commissioner that very similar transport modes already exist in my constituency of Northamptonshire and Blaby where buses have been pioneered with great success which do just what the Murphy report recommends : low-floor buses which kneel to let people on and off are already a feature of our local travel and much welcomed by the users .
The Murphy report is splendid and prepares the way for better and safer public transport in the future .
Parliament would be well-advised to give it splendid and resounding support tomorrow and I am confident it will .
Mr President , I would like to begin by saying that I am very impressed by Mr Murphy 's work .
He is dealing with an extremely complicated directive , but he has clearly mastered it down to the smallest detail .
I also appreciate the rapporteur 's clear main thrust for amendments , which is to make it easier for disabled people to have access to public transport .
However , I would still question whether this type of directive should really be dealt with in such a detailed way in this Parliament .
It is still an extremely complicated directive with a lot of diagrams and formulas which are extremely difficult to understand for people other than experts .
I wonder whether the best solution for any similar reports in future would not be to make a statement of principle and then leave it to the experts to work out the details .
I may be wrong , but allow me just as an amateur in this area to point out some things which surprise me a little .
These include , for example , Amendment No 54 from Mr Murphy .
It discusses the fact that the text on buses showing the destination should be white or yellow on a black background and at least 12 cm high .
It is possible that this is the most readable at the moment , but it is quite conceivable that a technology may be developed tomorrow which makes it best for the visually impaired to have a black text on a white background .
I wonder if it would not be better just to say that people should use the best available technology .
The same amendment also says that the destination should be announced by recorded voice , inside and outside the bus , when the bus stops at bus stations etcetera .
In the bus I can understand , but should the destination also be announced by a loudspeaker outside the bus too ?
I think that would lead to a terrible racket in many towns where there are a lot of buses .
In addition , it says that the voice should be recorded .
In Sweden we have buses which travel perhaps 300-400 kilometres and may stop only two or three times on the route because we have such large distances between towns and villages .
In that case it might be simpler for the driver to do as he does today , which is to say that we have now arrived at Burträsk or wherever it may be .
Another matter which does not relate to any amendment , but which is part of the directive itself and is mentioned in Amendment No 87 , concerns the fact that when buses have a wheelchair lift they should have three flashing lights and an audible signal when the lift is in operation .
With current technology such wheelchair lifts cannot be controlled remotely from the driver 's seat because it is too dangerous .
That means that the driver must go out and stand by the wheelchair when it is raised .
I therefore wonder again whether it is necessary to introduce a requirement for an audible signal when this happens .
Lights may be appropriate , but audible signals are perhaps a bit doubtful .
As I said before , I am an amateur on the question of such technical matters . They were just a few comments .
I would like to return to my initial point which is that I think that , given the difficult material , Mr Murphy has done an excellent job .
Mr President , it is now two years since we in this Parliament passed the lift directive which was setting a precedent that legislation for Europe 's single market could and must be used to enable access for disabled people .
That precedent was then enshrined by agreements within the Treaty of Amsterdam , the draft Treaty of European Union .
Tonight we face our next test in addressing the buses and coaches directive and addressing too an issue which is most campaigned about amongst Europe 's 35 million disabled people - the right to accessible public transport .
I congratulate Simon Murphy on this report and the amendments which he has tabled .
These are important amendments which everyone in this Parliament should support .
The amendments ensure that the definition of disability is not just one for wheelchair users but for all disabled people , including blind people and deaf people , and , as my colleague Mrs Schmidbauer has said , for pregnant women , people with children , people with heavy shopping , older people and others .
There are many people who will benefit from that amendment .
I call for support for the amendments which recognize specifically the needs of blind and partially-sighted people , including internal lighting and colour contrasts within buses and , for deaf people , to ensure visual displays for their information needs .
I support Simon Murphy 's amendment to extend the provision from Class 1 to Class 2 buses so that double-decker buses and tourist coaches also enable disability access .
Even if the Commission tonight opposes the extension of this directive to inter-urban services , it should give us a clear commitment in advance to implement the study which it has launched .
I hope the Commissioner will respond directly to this point tonight .
I call on Parliament to support our amendments to reduce the initial step height to 24 cm or to ensure a boarding aid .
These are the only standards which genuinely ensure access for disabled people .
After all , this is only consistent with the findings of the research on low-floor buses which was published by the Commission itself as long ago as 1995 .
I would appeal to the right of the Parliament , the Group of the European People 's Party , to join us in supporting the amendment but I look in vain for its presence here tonight and for its contribution to this debate .
Instead , I send a simple message to disabled people in Europe .
This proposal has been delayed in Brussels because of the long fight which has been engaged to ensure that all new buses in our towns and cities from the year 2001 will offer full rights of access for disabled people .
It is a very significant victory and one that I commend to the House tonight .
Mr President , many years ago the European Community introduced pan-European standards for tractor seats .
We are still waiting for a solution for the electric plug .
We have gathered a great deal of experience in the field of standardization , and we have also been punished very severely for a great deal of our standardization , for example the angle of curvature of bananas .
Today we are talking about standardization in the case of vehicles for the carriage of passengers .
This is a very important area .
At this point , I thank the rapporteur , Mr Murphy , for his impressive commitment and his understanding of the detailed solutions mentioned .
The Group of the European People 's Party largely supports these results , particularly as regards persons with reduced mobility .
I myself have proposed in committee that the definition of disabled should be made more specific and that it should be extended .
We are in favour of the use of boarding aids even for Class II vehicles , appropriate forms of handrails , entrances , luggage racks and special destination displays , in order to make the use of buses both possible and practical for disabled persons .
Our concerns lie in a different direction , however .
From today we are no longer regulating just tractor seats .
The European Parliament is about to design the perfect bus .
More than 100 amendments on technical details have been tabled .
There is mention of a radius of between 2.5 mm and 5 mm for corners , of retractable steps , of obvious markings on edges and even of hot drink vending machines and cooking equipment .
In our view , we must , however , distinguish between political initiatives and questions of technical standardization .
The latter should be dealt with by appropriate committees of experts , such as standards institutions - for example , the CEN - in other words , by specialists who build and / or use the buses .
We are therefore also convinced that some important political points must be addressed .
In this area , a SLIM initiative should also be implemented , which concentrates on the essential political aspects .
We believe that , above all , the proposals concerning the safety of vehicles and / or the accessibility of vehicles for the disabled , in Appendix 7 , which go beyond those of the Commission , are sensible .
However , we should have a debate where it makes sense to do so ; namely , in a technical committee .
That is also the reason why the Group of the European People 's Party will tomorrow propose that it should be referred back to the relevant committee .
We believe that the extent of the debate should be clearly reduced , but should be all the more specific , so that it can contribute further to a proper standardization of this area .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , when we speak today about a new bus directive which contains special regulations for the carriage of passengers with reduced mobility , we should bear in mind , particularly in view of the recent debate about increasing road safety - after all , 1.6 million people suffer often permanent injuries in accidents - that we could in fact ourselves be one of them tomorrow . We too would then have to cope with living as a disabled person .
At present there are about 37 million disabled people living in the European Union .
But it is not only they who often have problems with the use of public transport .
We must think of everybody : of elderly people with mobility problems , of small children , or of those in particular situations , such as , for example , pregnant women or passengers carrying luggage or pushchairs .
I therefore feel that the broad interpretation of the concept " persons with reduced mobility ' is legitimate and should be welcomed .
To that extent , I support the social aim of the directive .
It deals with the right aspect , namely that of safety , but in respect of certain detailed solutions goes much too far in its regulation .
We must not absolve companies from their own responsibilities to seek the best solutions .
Such solutions could be of a technical , but also of a logistical nature .
Bus manufacturers already demonstrate in fact their great capability in respect of safety .
I am at all times very happy to support demands for equality of opportunity for people with reduced mobility .
However , I reject nonsensical and exaggerated regulations on detail .
The responsibilities which lie with the European Committee for Standardization , business and , in terms of subsidiarity , even with local authorities , should not be brought together by us under the umbrella of the EU Commission .
I therefore consider demands for 4 metre ramps at the entrance and exit of buses to be completely ill-considered .
Political demands and objectives which call upon both manufacturers and operators of buses alike to seek , in equal measure , innovative solutions , seem to me to be more suitable for doing something for the disadvantaged than rigid European standards which apply from Finland to Sicily .
Although the problems of disabled people across the European Union are comparable , the Member States must take into account climatic , territorial , traditional and other specific conditions in their efforts to procure a real place in their midst for disabled people .
Mr President , I do not wish to make the same mistake as my friend Karel van Miert and I should therefore like to thank Mr Murphy very sincerely for his work , right at the start .
It has already been said during the discussion that this is a difficult report because it deals with a whole series of technical questions and an attempt had to be made to find a compromise in many respects .
I should , therefore , like to concern myself particularly with the questions which were directed at the Commission and from which it can be seen that a number of demands are being made .
First , I should like to refer to the fact that there are two different starting points for this directive .
One proposal is to create the Single Market by means of a type approval system .
For this we need precise regulations , because only such precise regulations can lead to the approval of a type .
Nothing can be allowed to remain unclear in such type approvals .
We need standardization of the technical regulations at Community level .
With undertakings like this a certain complexity sometimes cannot be avoided .
I am quite sure that our proposal is already being seized upon in the press as another example of over-zealous bureaucracy .
If we were to adopt all the amendments tabled - and I believe there are 120 - we would be at even greater risk .
In this I must agree with some of the speakers .
We can , of course , overdo this sort of specialization and attention to detail and then still not achieve what we actually set out to do .
A certain willingness to compromise is necessary here .
However , we also want to solve the safety problems .
Not only do we want to aim for the highest possible level of safety for vehicles in general , but we also want to guarantee that disabled people - however one wants to define this term , that is , persons whose mobility is reduced - can use these vehicles safely .
These are our aims .
If we now look at the amendments tabled , they can be roughly divided into three groups : firstly , there are the amendments which correct mistakes made by the Commission or propose better technical regulations .
That is , as ever , very desirable and we are pleased that we can adopt all 22 amendments here , without reservation .
I do not wish to read out the numbers of the amendments now .
We have them here ; if it interests you , you can look at them afterwards .
Then we have a group , which make alterations or additions to the proposed technical requirements and finally a third group , which proposes fundamental alterations in respect of sensitive points .
Here we may quote as an example the derogation provided for by the Commission for the special situation in the United Kingdom and Ireland .
I should like to thank those British colleagues who praised us for taking this exceptional situation into account . And what is more , against all expectations , according to those well-known serious British newspapers where alarm reports were published , after an attempt to ban fish and chips , we also wanted to ban double-deck buses .
We did not do so .
I hope that we shall be appropriately praised by this press .
However , I draw attention to the fact that this is also a compromise between a national tradition and safety requirements , regardless of how much I can appreciate the pleasure of our British colleagues .
Anyone would probably concede that a doubledeck bus is not exactly the safest kind of bus , and it is clear that this type of bus can only be accessed with great difficulty by disabled persons .
It is evident from this that with all these problems , we are always moving in a direction which represents a compromise .
We have in fact done so .
We did not go as far as Mr Murphy 's request , that we should , to a certain extent , recognise it as a type .
We therefore also provided for the possibility that other Member States might not permit this type of bus , which is approved in another Member State , in their sovereign territory , because they do not have this tradition .
We would like to continue to regard this as a derogation .
We then have two further amendments which we can adopt in part , and two amendments where we can adopt the substance .
What we cannot accept - and I want to say this here very clearly - are other technical proposals or an extension to other categories , as it is our opinion that what we have created here can hopefully go through in the Council .
We are not quite sure about that ; in other words , we are still talking amongst ourselves here .
I fully understand if Parliament says that at the moment , it should like to assess another position but does not wish to adopt this one .
Whether or not it is very wise to reject this proposal , I leave to the wisdom of this House , in which I have boundless trust , of course .
I should like however to note that we have already come a long way and what is more , after a very long time .
That has also been said .
If maybe the Commission 's proposal , apart from the amendments which we can accept , is approved without too many more additions , we shall make even more progress .
On the aspect of safety we have also reached a compromise , as a difference must be made between buses which are used predominantly on short routes , where rapid boarding and alighting is necessary for the bus to make reasonable headway , and other buses .
These buses stop very frequently , because of which accessibility is very much more to the forefront than with a bus which , for example , travels long distances , is mainly fitted with seats and does not stop very often .
Boarding this kind of bus may well require more time .
We want , however , to examine this class too .
I can confirm that we have already put this investigation in hand , so that we can perhaps deal with these further demands .
I would ask you to understand that in our case a role was played by our efforts to avoid imposing financial burdens , arising from excessive demands on the operating companies , particularly those in the public sector .
We must remember that we are not usually dealing with private companies here , but with towns or regions which have to use public means of finance and cannot therefore avoid cost pressures .
We are convinced that with this multi-level concept , we have proposed a solution which is acceptable .
We assume that it is realistic to prescribe access for persons with reduced mobility for all vehicles of Class I from the time the directive comes into force .
Without standardized regulations , there is an acute danger for the Single Market , as some Member States have already begun to put together their own regulations .
As far as the other classes of vehicle are concerned , we shall , as already mentioned , submit a proposal on the basis of the ongoing investigation as soon as possible to the European Parliament and the Council . The proposal based on this study also amends the directive , with technical requirements for Class II vehicles , which are used for both urban and scheduled long-distance transport .
That is our position .
I know that it does not meet all the requirements which have been expressed here .
I do not know what Parliament will decide tomorrow , but we are in the first phase here and we should really do what we always do .
If you believe , with a majority , that you have to adopt a different position , you can do so , but do not shoot the pianists , in other words , us .
We have to play this tune to the Council and hope for its applause .
I do hope , however , that we can then arrive at improvements during subsequent proceedings , which perhaps go more along your lines .
In any case , it should not founder in the Commission .
Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for his comments and I note in particular his comments on double-decker buses being less safe or less accessible .
If he has a couple of hours to spare he could come with me to Birmingham , which has the busiest route for buses and coaches anywhere in Europe , and join me on the only two low floor double-decker buses actually in operation in Europe which would meet these standards and more .
So if you have a couple of hours I will take you on a journey to the West Midlands .
Of course I accept your invitation .
My only point was that , if the situation is as you say , why are you asking for an exception to be made for these buses ?
Why can they not fall under the general rules ?
Mr President , I must just correct in that case .
Under my proposals the derogation would actually be removed and those vehicles would be treated just the same as any other because I happen to believe they are as safe and secure for passengers as other types of vehicle .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Trading of goods
The next item is the report ( A4-0102 / 98 ) by Mrs Lulling , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Regulation ( EC ) amending I. Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 3330 / 91 on the statistics relating to the trading of goods between Member States ( COM ( 97 ) 0252 - C4-0248 / 97-97 / 0155 ( COD ) ) andII .
Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 3330 / 91 on the statistics relating to the trading of goods between Member States , with specific reference to the nomenclature of products , SLIM and Intrastat ( COM ( 97 ) 0275 - C4-0257 / 97-97 / 0162 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , we all know here that statistics are somewhat unpopular , particularly in the eyes of those who have to supply the data .
In 1993 , when the Single Market came into force and border controls were abolished , the consequence was the elimination of the corresponding VAT declarations and of the statistics whose reliability was assured by the customs departments .
Intrastat was created .
Its main objective , for all those involved , namely the national and Community administration companies , is to supply , at least cost , reliable and up-to-date statistics on the transfer of intra-Community goods .
Companies , particularly small and medium-sized companies , were not enamoured with this .
The introduction of Intrastat gave rise to a consideration of the way in which the suppliers ' task could be simplified , of how to reduce costs for those on whom the burden of statistical information falls , as the smaller the company , the higher the relative cost of the administrative burden .
As regards reliability , it must unfortunately be said , five years on , that the operation of Intrastat is not satisfactory , in spite of the fact that the total annual cost for the 450 000 companies making declarations is estimated at ECU 500 million to which is added ECU 100 million for operations by national collectors .
This lack of reliability is illustrated by what in technical jargon is known as " mirror statistics ' , which comes from the high inconsistency of the results .
Thus , this simulation exercise , which involves replacing the incoming goods for each Member State with the amounts of outgoing shipments to the fourteen others , proved , that for 1996 for example , imports for Germany must be increased by ECU 19 billion , and for France by ECU 11 billion .
For Germany , this means that the balance of trade surplus is reduced to zero , and for France , its deficit increases from ECU 7 billion to ECU 18 billion .
We have before us , Mr President , two proposals which arise from the SLIM initiative .
Unfortunately , they do not represent all the proposals of the SLIM team , which is why it is all the more astonishing that these proposals were favourably welcomed by the Commission and the Council .
Furthermore , the Member States do not even seem to be ready to follow these proposals , which are less extensive in comparison to the SLIM results .
Throughout the drafting of my report I was approached by the lobbies of the major industrial federations who are concerned that the small step towards simplification proposed in the field of nomenclature might result in the loss of information which they believe to be indispensable for their commercial policy , and which they could only procure through a great many costly surveys .
I wanted to highlight these divergent , and even antagonistic interests of the various players . In other words , there is , on the one hand , the small and medium-sized companies who want significant relief in terms of the burden of making declarations , and on the other , the users of the statistics who want detailed and high quality information on intra-Community trade to be made available .
However , things being as they are , and after organizing in committee a hearing on these antagonists , I have proposed amendments aimed at reconciling their interests , amendments which the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs accepted , Commissioner , as a block and on a unanimous basis .
We wish to avoid completely the situation whereby these regulations end up having less of an impact in terms of simplification as compared to the Commission 's initial proposal .
On the other hand , we do have a great deal of sympathy for the federations and industries whose concern is that the simplification of the nomenclature might end up with a depletion of statistics which will no longer allow an analysis of the markets .
You know that I am very interested in viticulture , Mr Martin .
A reduction in the suppositions from 8 to 6 would no longer effectively give the necessary detailed information , namely the type of wine , red or white , or the region of origin .
What is important for this product , is not the same for others .
For example , for the centrifugal pumps , it is not absolutely necessary to know whether they are intended for aircraft , or whether they are submersible , single-stage or multi-stage pumps , and so on .
Our proposal therefore is to limit the burden of declaration by eliminating unnecessary data , such as the means of transport , and optional data , to limit the number of small and medium-sized companies required to supply detailed statistical data , and to simplify the use of the combined nomenclature , while preserving a single nomenclature for intra-Community trade and trade with third countries . We also propose establishing a partnership with national administrations and the representatives at European level of the suppliers and users of statistical information , as well as preserving , within the framework of this partnership , a sufficient time limit for the provision of information , in order to meet the special requirements of certain sectors , such as the wine sector which I illustrated .
We also clearly accept the need to preserve the level of information on intra-Community trade , and our action is satisfactory in the eyes of the Committee on Regional Policy .
We know that all this is not a true reform of the system .
It is a first step , Mr President , a first package of measures to be implemented pending more radical simplification .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for all of the companies and administrations in the Member States of the European Union , the entry into force of the single market has meant an upheaval for the administrative practices involving the trade in goods between Member States .
VAT declarations and statistics , which were previously dealt with by customs services have been changed . However , of course , the need for such information has not thereby disappeared .
In this report , Mrs Lulling points out that it is essential for the data to be reliable .
Hence the export figures of one Member State should normally equal the sum of exports from the other Member States to the Member State in question .
However , the total discrepancy is in the order of 4.6 % .
Depending on which figure you use , the French trade deficit of ECU 6.4 billion would be more than doubled .
However , given the need to simplify the administrative burden on companies , the Commission is presenting us with two proposals , which enable us to simplify these declarations .
With this goal in mind , we must certainly welcome the Commission 's initiative .
The amendments proposed by the rapporteur all go in this direction , and I support them .
However , along with several of my colleagues , I wanted to table a further amendment .
In fact , modifying the nomenclature must not reduce the information which is required , both for companies and professional organizations .
Changing the number of figures in the nomenclature from eight to six could lead to the elimination of an essential element .
In the case of wine , as Mrs Lulling reminded us a moment ago , it would no longer be possible to dissociate intraCommunity trade from one Member State to another Member State , be it Bordeaux , Burgundy , vins de pays , Champagne , etcetera .
The purport of my amendment is therefore to call on the Commission to ensure that these amendments do not lead to any such loss of information .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , I first want to congratulate Mrs Lulling on her constant work in the area of statistics which , as we know , is a fairly thankless task .
But those of us who follow her efforts are bound to appreciate them , because they provide something which will obviously be needed with the new economic and monetary dimension being adopted by the European Union .
As we have discussed in other reports on statistical matters , we obviously need to have reliable information in order to orientate activities and economic and monetary policies .
Mrs Lulling has the unanimous support of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy for the amendments she makes to the Commission 's proposals . Her report deals with a situation which she knows how to balance perfectly : eliminating excessive burdens on small and medium-sized enterprises ; maintaining the reliability of the necessary figures , so as not to lose the proper information ; and maintaining the other information we have at present - also referred to in her report - , namely the regional aspect of statistics .
In other words , as when we were talking about the wine sector , for example , we have to take account of the various grape and wine-growing regions of the European Union - and I could , for example , add Penedés to the list we heard earlier . In those regions , knowledge of the exchanges within the EU markets is obviously extremely valuable , not just in order to establish the appropriate EU trade policies , but also so that companies can decide on their commercial strategies .
So I repeat our support for the amendments tabled by Mrs Lulling , and congratulate her once again on her work .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.00 p.m )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of Tuesday , 31 March 1998 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I would like to refer to pages 20 and 21 of the English version concerning Question Time and the conduct of Question Time .
In particular , I would like to hear your views on this latest edict that has been passed down from on high regarding the rules governing Question Time .
It seems to me to be excessively bureaucratic ; it seems to me to be excessively undemocratic ; and it seems to me that it is imposing censorship on Members and their questions .
So I would like to know what was the rationale behind it , given that political groups have not discussed this ; and I am asking you , as the person in charge of the organization here , to make a clear and categorical statement of why you arrived at this decision and whether it will be kept under review .
It is very clear , Mr McMahon .
On the proposal of the Vice-President who chairs Question Time some rules - not new rules , but measures to organize Question Time better - were adopted by the Bureau .
The aim is simply to avoid questions being put months in advance , because then they lose their topicality .
The period fixed in the rules runs from the end of one partsession 's Question Time to some hours before the next part-session ; and we simply remind you that this is the period fixed , not some months in advance .
These are not new rules .
If anyone thinks there has been a change in the rules , which of course is not the case , I will submit the question to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
It is very simple : the intention of the Bureau was not at all to change the rules , it was simply to have better ways of dealing with Question Time , on the proposal of the Vice-President in charge , namely Mr Gutiérrez .

Mr Wijsenbeek , you are an expert on the rules : you ought to know that it is not the Bureau which places the reports on the agenda , but the Conference of Presidents .
There were many reports from the Rules Committee and two of them have been put on the agenda of this session specially to make up this delay which is due to the many items this House has to deal with .
So your report will come up as soon as the Conference of Presidents can find a place for it on the agenda .
There is no discrimination against any report , and this afternoon I will be seeing the chairman of the committee at his request , precisely to consider the best time for its inclusion on the agenda by the Conference of Presidents .
Mr President , I was interested in your reply to Mr McMahon when you said that if there was any alteration to the rules or the procedures you would obviously refer them to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
Given my interest in the voting in this Parliament during lunchtime , perhaps it is too late for that matter to be referred to the Rules Committee .
However , given that this is the last month that this will take place , can you give me and this House an assurance that any changes which are to take place regarding Members ' interests will be put to the Members of this House the way the change in the Members ' voting procedure should have been put to this House in January ?
Of course , if there is any doubt you may be assured that we will refer it to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities and we will await its decision before introducing any changes .
Mr President , I rise on another matter but it does concern the role of the Conference of Presidents .
This concerns the Pex report on information policy , which we tried to put on the agenda for this part-session and which was then going to be on the agenda for the part-session at the end of next month .
However , I understand that you , as President , have taken that off the agenda and have refused to have this circulated for translation so that Members can read what the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media has decided .
We in the Committee on Budgets are concerned because we need this report to release funds to enable the information policy to continue to operate .
I would like your guidance on what is going on , because , once again , it seems to be a suppression of the interests of the Members of this House .
Mr Elles , you have been wrongly informed .
I have not taken anything off the agenda because I cannot do so .
Simply , this report , like any other report , when it is drafted is examined by the services of the House .
As there was some doubt about its admissibility - taking into account that it was submitted rather late - the Conference of Presidents , the body empowered to take a decision , took the decision to wait until next month , May , so that it could examine it to see whether it was admissible or not .
My view is that this report goes against the rules of the House and the Treaties .
The Conference of Presidents will examine it tomorrow and take what decision it feels appropriate .
You know that no report is circulated until it is put on the agenda .
Until questions on admissibility are settled , reports are not circulated .
So this report has not been treated differently .
Mr President , out of respect for you I have kept quiet this week about this matter , but now that it is being raised I would like to make some comments , otherwise you might think I agree with you .
Firstly , this report was discussed openly ; a number of people from your services attended the discussions .
It is therefore extremely strange that its admissibility was not examined until a few days before this part-session .
Secondly , your Secretary-General told me on the telephone last week that the report presents no difficulties .
This was before the Conference of Presidents had their meeting .
Thirdly , I take exception to the fact that it was you who blocked the report , so that I was not able to defend myself as rapporteur .
If you are now saying in this sitting that the report goes against the Treaties , then I would like Members to be able to read the report , so that they can see for themselves what , according to you , is questionable .
Blocking my report makes it impossible for me to defend myself , and I do not think this is a procedure which befits a democratic organization .
I consider this censorship , Mr President .
Finally , the issue here is communication .
I have noted that the Bureau 's external communications are extremely poor .
My report therefore deals with improving this situation .
Some will find this very hard to take , but I have to say that I find the internal communications even worse , because everything you have just said I only hear from you today .
Nobody in your services consulted me over the past two weeks , and I find that deplorable .
Mr Pex , I can state categorically that I myself , in the presence of other people , warned you about this several months ago .
You carried on with your report without taking account of either the Rules of Procedure or the Treaties .
Furthermore , I do not need to tell you about the Treaties .
Just like any other Member of this House , you should know them , and the Rules of Procedure too .
However , this is not a question for me to decide on , Mr Pex .
It is a matter for the Conference of Presidents , and they will decide on it tomorrow .
This is not my problem .
All I have to do is advise the Conference of Presidents that , in my opinion , this is an infringement of the Treaties and the Rules of Procedure .
We shall see , that is all .
Your report has been dealt with , Mr Pex , and I am not going to continue this discussion because it is not a matter for the House to decide on at the moment , since it is not on the agenda .
Your report has been treated in exactly the same way as other reports - no more , no less .
No report is granted any privileges , whether it comes from your committee or from any other .
Every report is examined , and if there are problems relating to the rules they are studied and resolved by the appropriate body , which is not the President but the Conference of Presidents . Then , if there is a discrepancy , it is referred to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
That is all .
If you do not think it is good enough , then present the Rules Committee with a proposal to amend our Rules of Procedure .
You can do that , just like anybody else .
Mr Pex , I am going to let you speak because I do not want it said that I insisted on having the last word on this matter .
Thank you for your explanation , Mr President .
I would like to make one comment on what you have said .
You told me about your objections a few months ago .
I did take these into account .
The text we had , and discussed at the time , is nowhere to be found .
I changed the report , and subsequently 126 amendments were tabled .
That is why it so regrettable that the text is not public , because the report before us now is a completely different text to the one we discussed a few months ago .
So reproaching me for not having listened to you is not right .
Mr Pex , I am not reproaching you about anything .
I do not reproach any Member of this House who acts in accordance with their convictions .
I am simply trying to determine whether your report is admissible or not .
If it is , it will be published .
If not , it will be sent to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities so they can report on the matter .
In any case , the honourable Members can quite easily find out which of the amendments to your report have and have not been accepted .
Mr President , I wanted to comment regarding the vote on Mrs Theato 's report .
A large majority , virtually all of the House , voted for the report under what were perfectly satisfactory conditions and thus there is not the slightest question of challenging what has already been voted for .
However , it should be noted that the conditions under which this vote took place may raise questions regarding its future interpretation .
As there was some dispute regarding corrections of a linguistic nature , the President of the sitting , Mr Cot , understandably wanted to put those corrections to a vote as he considered they could pose a fundamental problem .
There was undoubtedly a fundamental problem and it would have consequently been preferable to have an oral amendment enabling harmonization of the different linguistic versions .
However , the corrections were put to the vote and rejected , with the result that there is now a significant difference between many of the translations on a point which , although certainly not crucial , is not negligible either .
The President did not use the powers bestowed upon him by Article 102 of the Rules of Procedure .
In the case of differences between linguistic versions , it is within his powers to determine which version should be considered adopted , either the original language version - in this case German - or one of the other versions .
We will therefore be faced with a problem in the future .
I would like to request two things , Mr President .
Firstly , that the question of whether the President of a sitting can or cannot put linguistic corrections of a technical nature to the vote be submitted to the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
Secondly , that the Committee on the Rules of Procedure be asked to clarify which linguistic version prevails when there are linguistic differences between the texts .
We cannot take texts to the outside world when they exist in different versions .
Mr Bourlanges , it says in the Minutes , and I quote , " the rapporteur withdrew the corrigendum ' .
Thus if the rapporteur withdrew the corrigendum , there is absolutely no reason to consult the Committee on the Rules of Procedure since we did not take a vote on it .
Mr President , I think you have covered the point I was going to raise but Mr Bourlanges is being deliberately , or otherwise , disingenuous in the point of order he has raised .
I was the person who raised an objection to dealing with a matter of substance by way of a corrigendum .
To change the words ' European Public Prosecutor ' to ' European judicial authority ' is not just a technicality , and I am sure you , Mr President , as a jurist understand the significance of those changes .
If the words were incoherent in all languages other than German , it shows how ill-prepared the debate was in committee because we have debated all the way through on the use of those words ' European Public Prosecutor ' .
But then , on the matter of substance , Mr Bourlanges is also wrong because it is in the recollection of everybody who followed it that Mrs Theato withdrew the corrigendum .
This incident is closed .
I am not going to give more time to it .
We have a heavy agenda , and I am not continuing something which was closed yesterday by the President in the Chair .
( The Minutes were approved )
Topical and urgent debate ( objections )
Mr President , I am only commenting as a matter of interest , given that the vote has taken place , but I was surprised that the code of conduct for arms exports was included within the issue of human rights .
It is not a question of human rights .
It could have been a supplementary point within the framework of a topical debate , but certainly not a point connected with human rights .
In the future , I would therefore like us to make sure that only questions truly relating to human rights violations are included in the category of " human rights ' .
Thank you very much , Mr Pasty .
Development policy - Cooperation Agreements with ACP countries - Decentralized cooperation
The next item is the joint debate on the following documents :
Statement by the Council on development and cooperation policy ; -Report ( A4-0085 / 98 ) by Mr Rocard , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the communication from the Commission on guidelines for the negotiation of new cooperation agreements with the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries ( COM ( 97 ) 0537 - C4-0581 / 97 ) ; -Recommendation for second reading ( A4-0096 / 98 ) , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a Council Regulation on decentralized cooperation [ C4-0008 / 98-95 / 0159 ( SYN ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mr Vecchi ) .
Mr President , I am very pleased to be here today to report on behalf of the Presidency on progress in international development policy .
I met the Committee on Development and Cooperation for a discussion in January and hope to meet it again to report on the outcome of the Development Council which will be meeting shortly .
One of the major priorities for our Presidency is settling the mandate for the Lomé renegotiation .
As you all know , Lomé is one of the major foreign policy instruments of the European Union .
It is the basis for the trade , development and political relationship between the Union and 71 African , Caribbean and Pacific countries .
The current convention expires in the year 2000 and the renegotiation is due to start in September 1998 .
There has been a process of considerable and very useful consultation which has started to build growing agreement about what the next phase of Lomé should be about .
The Commission produced some very useful proposals at the end of January .
The General Affairs Council has twice discussed the Lomé renegotiation and has agreed that there is a need to strengthen and revitalize the relationship , that there should be - and this is uncontentious - a new concentration on systematic poverty eradication .
There is a need to strengthen and revitalize the political relationship to work to create a new spirit of partnership , and a need to simplify the agreement and not have so many complex sources of funding but be able to programme resources , give priority to very poor countries and reward successful developments .
This is needed to simplify what is currently a very complex agreement .
There is also agreement that there needs to be more support for good progress on human rights , good governance and more emphasis on conflict prevention and resolution .
Most of that is broadly agreed across all the Member States .
Trade , as Parliament will know , is the most complex area and the area in which it is more difficult to reach agreement .
However , at the General Affairs Council on Monday of this week it was agreed by all Member States that we all wanted to help integrate the ACP countries into the globalizing world economy so that the benefits of globalization would be shared across the planet .
There was also agreement that we must at least maintain the current access of the ACP countries to the European market and that the agreement should seek to be World Trade Organization - compatible , that further work is needed on reciprocal free trade agreements on either a regional or a country basis , but we will also consider the possibility of enhanced GSP access for those countries that cannot or do not want to agree reciprocal free trade agreements .
It is also agreed that the least developed countries ' access must be improved in the way that the Council had previously agreed .
As Parliament will know , there are a range of opinions among Member States but , hopefully , we now have a broad agreement that will bring significant trade benefits to the ACP countries .
The next stage of these discussions will be at the ACP-EU Joint Assembly in April and my deputy , George Foulkes , will represent the Presidency there .
In May there is the ACP-EU Council and I will be there to represent the Presidency and have discussions with the ministers representing the ACP countries .
I reminded the General Affairs Council on Monday that the mandate is simply a basis for negotiations and that we need to take account of the ACP countries ' views before finalizing the mandate .
The second major priority of our Presidency is to seek to persuade the Union to shape our development strategy around the international poverty eradication strategy .
Members will know that , as an outcome of the great UN conferences of the past fifteen years , there are now internationally agreed targets and strategies for making very significant and measured progress on poverty eradication , the overall target being to halve the number of people living in absolute poverty by 2015 .
It is agreed by everyone that this is affordable and achievable if we can mobilize enough international political will to make significant progress .
Obviously , if the European Union embraces this strategy firmly , the possibility of mobilizing that international political will becomes much greater .
We held a seminar jointly chaired by Commissioner Pinheiro and myself on 17 March which was attended also by Commissioner Marín , ministers or high-level representatives from most countries , and we reached conclusions which will be brought to the next meeting of the Development Council that will push forward agreement on that framework to shape the efforts of the European Union in development cooperation .
Our third priority concerns the resolutions that have been passed previously on making the eradication of poverty and promotion of equality of women central to the European Union 's development efforts .
On both issues , both of which are absolutely key to progress in development , there is good policy and the problem is implementation .
In the next meeting of the Development Council we shall be reviewing progress on implementation .
Preparations are in hand for that .
Obviously , as you all know , getting the policy right is one thing , but if we do not follow through on implementation we will fail to make progress .
Beyond that , on humanitarian aid , a joint conference is being organized by Commissioner Bonino and the Overseas Development Institute in London , at which I shall be speaking about the ethics underpinning our humanitarian aid .
You will all know that following Bosnia and Rwanda , we need to look carefully at the ethical principles when we distribute humanitarian aid .
Otherwise , further errors will be made .
On micro-finance , I know that there are very strong views and support in Parliament .
Under the Luxembourg Presidency the Development Council set a path for further work and detailed work is taking place in the working party .
I hope there will be internal guidelines soon that will enable progress to be made on that issue .
In conclusion , the other theme for important work in the Development Council for our Presidency is to strengthen evaluation of the European Union 's development efforts .
Without strong evaluation one cannot get quality programmes .
We are also carrying forward that work .
I am optimistic that we will make major progress and that under our Presidency we will agree a useful mandate for the Lomé renegotiation and have broad agreement across the Member States and within the Commission for making the international poverty eradication strategy the framework for all our development efforts .
That will enable us to improve the quality both in terms of prioritizing poverty eradication and improving the implementation of those priorities in practice .
Mr Rocard , in future it would be a good idea to ask your group for a little speaking time as well .
Mr President , as you know , I am presenting this report , standing in for Mr Vecchi , who has had to leave for family reasons .
We have had to wait two years for the Council to establish its common position on the proposal for a regulation to provide a legal basis for the budget line with regard to support measures for decentralized cooperation , which was established in 1992 , at Parliament 's request .
Despite all this , the Council has not reached any positive conclusions . It has expressed a narrower view of the function of decentralized cooperation and has substantially worsened the proposal for a regulation , put forward by the Commission and partially amended by Parliament at first reading .
This is why the Committee on Cooperation and Development has unanimously adopted a package of 17 amendments which we are proposing to the House , in order to fully restore the position on which Parliament gave its opinion more than two years ago .
In accordance with what the European Parliament and Mr Rocard have confirmed , decentralized cooperation is not , and should not be considered to be , simply one more measure in the field of development cooperation .
Decentralized cooperation is a new vision of cooperation as a whole .
We want to involve more people in cooperation and the object is to involve those who are not part of the central governments so that the measures taken are closer to the local populations and contribute towards strengthening the structures of civil society .
This is the fundamental point .
It is a contribution towards cultural dialogue , in various situations , and also to the processes of democratization .
Owing to its characteristics , decentralized cooperation is very different from the usual methods of providing state aid for development , and yet the insufficient results obtained in this field have led us to consider new forms of cooperation .
It must be said that the Council does not seem to have accepted this strategic challenge .
It is in fact a question of moving the focus away from individual projects and towards those involved , in order to allow an adequate development of the human resources and the organizational capacity in developing countries .
It would be better to achieve the objectives of cooperation based on the pursuit of human development , participation and sustainability .
Achieving such cooperation includes the full involvement of those involved in decentralized development , such as the local authorities , people 's organizations , community groups , non-governmental organizations , etcetera .
This should lead to the development of an effective and widespread partnership between those in the North and the South .
We are thinking , in particular , of cooperation between cities and regions , but also of the development of relations concerning technology transfer , between business associations , cooperatives and centres providing business services .
To conclude , decentralized cooperation seems to be a privileged means of meeting the new challenges of development , particularly the fight against poverty and the development of the private sector , but also the protection of human and civil rights , which is so important .
Contrary to what the Council seems to maintain , it is a sufficiently tested approach .
We therefore believe that we need to move on from a marginal and experimental decentralized cooperation to its development as a priority , be it within the framework of external cooperation - Lomé Convention , MEDA Programme , and so on - or in the direct actions of the European Union .
In this connection , I believe it highly important for the MED programmes to be relaunched if we also want to contribute towards the relaunch of the Euro-Mediterranean partnership .
These are the considerations which have given rise to the amendments tabled , which are aimed at giving decentralized cooperation a central position in development strategy .
This is the reasoning behind this report and the amendments tabled .
- ( NL ) Mr President , the Committee on Women 's Rights has noted with satisfaction that the Commission 's understanding of issues can develop quickly .
Whereas the Green Paper on relations between the European Union and the ACP countries only makes an oblique reference to the issue of gender , the communication which we are now discussing says that gender issues must be incorporated into all macro-economic , sectoral and project assistance .
The Commission recognizes that there is a direct link between improving the position of women and the fight against poverty , that sustainable economic and social development cannot be realized without equality between men and women and that human rights are also women 's rights .
But the intention to incorporate gender issues into all policy areas is sadly not being realized .
In those areas which are given most priority in the Green Paper , namely economic , financial and technical cooperation , not a single word is said about gender .
This is unacceptable , and even a step backwards from the Council Resolution on Gender and Development adopted in December 1995 which used " mainstreaming ' as a starting point .
The new development cooperation agreements must promote equality between men and women in all areas , not only political and social , but also economic .
It must be clear to everyone that economic equality will exert influence over social structures and the balance of power within a country .
A fairer partnership should therefore not only deal with the relations between the European Union and the ACP countries , but also with the distribution of power within a particular society .
This means that we should have a coordinated and consistent policy of promoting equality between men and women , which is why the Committee on Women 's Rights has argued for the ACP Assembly to establish a standing " Women in Development ' Committee .
Mr President , may I first of all welcome the Secretary of State and thank her for her excellent overview and also , of course , thank Michel Rocard for his report .
There are very serious and clear messages in this report .
Although the political guidelines proposed by the Commission for negotiating the new cooperation agreements with the ACP provide a starting point for discussions on the renewal of our relationship , in too many areas I am afraid they are not much more than that .
I hope that the Commission and the Council will note in particular the serious reservations expressed in this report about the trade proposal as it currently stands .
We have used very strong words , ' is concerned that the Commission 's proposal to negotiate regional free trade economic partnership agreements may be premature , impractical and lead to increased poverty and social tension in the ACP states ' .
These reservations are expressed by the ACP themselves .
I fear that the critical poverty targets clearly identified by the Secretary of State could be undermined by the weaknesses of the current trade proposal .
Poverty eradication must , she says , be the overriding goal and should of course run through the entire agreement , including the trade section .
We cannot afford to forget that trade liberalization and economic growth alone are not sufficient to reduce poverty .
It is essential , therefore , that our commitment to poverty eradication , gender mainstreaming and conflict prevention should be fully integrated into the trade proposals , particularly in the context of the middle income countries .
It is all very well for us to argue as we do for integration into the world economy .
Of course we agree that this should happen , but we should also recognize that the preferred means of achieving this , namely WTO-compatible FTAs will carry with it very significant adjustment costs in what are , of course , extremely poor and vulnerable countries and economies .
It is just not good enough in my view to argue that FTAs will eventually stimulate economic growth .
Poor people live in the short term , in a day-today struggle to put food on the table .
We must not therefore promote a solution which puts their livelihoods in danger .
If by doing so we will be standing by the so-called commitment , we will not be standing by our commitments to attack poverty , to prevent conflict , as Michel Rocard says , and to promote gender equity .
That is why I have consistently proposed the idea of a ten-year waiver to cover the current trade arrangements , so I am very pleased that the Rocard report has taken up this point .
Mr Rocard also makes it very clear that the best solution is for the options currently on offer to be improved so that the ACP can be provided with real choices when any WTO waiver covering the current trade options expires .
I urge the Council and the Commission to take on board the issues raised in the Rocard report .
May I remind Parliament that today is 1 April , and as the Bureau has already received some very strange documents , may I ask Members not to start raising points of order concerning texts which , clearly , are traditional April Fool pranks .
Mr President , this very long and detailed report follows on from the Martens report .
For the first time the Commission communication allows Parliament to state its views on the guidelines put forward by the Commission for the negotiation of new cooperation agreements with the ACP .
Much praise is due to Mr Rocard for this superb and detailed report .
Even more pleasing is the fact that Parliament 's views are closely aligned with the Commission 's thoughts .
Parliament has to consider two major questions : should ACP-EU cooperation continue after 2000 and , if so , in what form ?
The answer to the first is a resounding ' yes ' .
There should be a new and different relationship which adapts to the new world challenges and is based on a proper partnership .
A number of areas have to be considered .
Firstly , the Council agreed that the political scope for the ACP-EU partnership should be enhanced .
This highlighted the fact that the development of ACP countries was first and foremost the responsibility of the peoples in those countries .
This should be based on human development sustainability with sound macro-economic policies , social justice and the rule of law .
The political consensus which has been reached on both sides is an understandable political choice in the face of the worldwide challenges of the 21st century .
Increasingly rapid globalization will steadily reinforce economic , political and cultural dependencies but at the same time there will be a move towards regional cooperation and integration , particularly on the African continent .
This in itself should lead to new forms of economic partnership .
Poverty alleviation , popular economy , micro-credits and gender matters : all lead to conflict prevention within the regions .
It is up to the ACP countries themselves to decide on the speed of change and their criteria for that change .
One of the original features of the Lomé Convention was , on the one hand , including trade and , on the other , upholding provisions in this area designed to encourage the diversification and development of the ACP countries .
The rules of the WTO were drawn up with complete disregard for the needs of developing countries , particularly the poorest , and this must be seriously addressed by both sides in the negotiations .
Sadly , efforts to improve trade have not been successful and many developing countries have much reduced export trade compared with ten years ago .
Regional cooperation should give them the strength to improve this situation .
I am delighted to see that the Joint Assembly is now to be called the Parliamentary Joint Assembly as this will strengthen democracy , and my group fully supports this report .
I wish to begin by welcoming this report by Mr Rocard .
Apart from the normal aspirations , however , it brings us no closer to the future of Lomé after 2000 .
I support a strong political dimension to the new cooperation agreements with ACP countries , especially in the areas of human rights , good governance and the rule of law .
I am entirely in favour of the struggle against poverty being the central theme of post-Lomé IV arrangements .
I also support the mainstreaming of gender and the environment in all negotiations as a matter of course .
Ireland has consistently emphasized the importance of the semi-integration of the ACP countries into the world economy and the compatibility of new trade arrangements with the World Trade Organization .
Ireland considers market access to be of particular importance and will , for example , support the removal of remaining tariff barriers to the fullest possible extent .
When negotiating EU-ACP agreements it is essential to stress the need for simplification and rationalization of aid instruments with a view to gradual evolution towards direct budgetary support for ACP countries .
There is one extremely important issue that must be tackled in the framework of the new cooperation agreements and that is the issue of arms sales .
In the European Union there is free movement of goods , services , persons and capital with full regulation and , indeed , competition checks .
Compare this with the lack of European regulation or competition checks on arms movements from the EU to third countries .
There appears to me and to many other people in my country to be a conspiracy of silence on this issue .
A European Union arms export control agency should be set up in order to protect the human rights of the citizens of the ACP countries .
We must recognize economic development , social development , environmental protection and human rights as mutually reinforcing components of sustainable development .
I regret that the issue of arms exports has not been seriously addressed in the Rocard report .
Mr President , the Rocard report before us is a good report on the orientation guidelines of future cooperation agreements .
It is more than a report about the ACP .
It refers to the post-Lomé period , and I think that here we should support a ten-year transition period .
This is basically a report about the new framework for forming a new South-North policy .
Mr Martens made a start on this in his report .
Mr Pinheiro has introduced something new here , something very good , I think , by instituting a broad dialogue in the Member States in the run-up to the Green Paper .
If a good policy is to come from this good report , I hope that we can convince the Council together with the Commission that its content must be put into effect politically .
Mrs Short , this is a major task for you .
However , in development policy , a basic contradiction can be identified in the European Union and also in this House .
On the one hand we try to integrate ourselves and the ACP countries into the world market .
We have accepted this with the WTO formula .
We see the consequences at this moment in the discussion on bananas .
On the other hand , we want to take account of the regional situation and drive development forward here .
The regional situation is in the foreground in this report too , and I think that is right and important .
Bilateral free zones are not what we must support .
I therefore consider that paragraphs 59 and 77 of the motion for a resolution are important .
The proposal in paragraph 59 is that the extension of the exceptional regulations for the ACP states is necessary , because development cannot happen otherwise in these countries , the poorest of the poor . We should put this proposal into effect .
Paragraph 77 deals with the aims of development policy , the aims of development , about which we must jointly inform the WTO .
I do not regard the WTO as a democratic institution .
Consistency in trade relationships is necessary and appropriate .
We should take note of that in respect of our fisheries policy , ecology and human rights .
We and the ACP states should note that .
Regionalization is an important starting point .
It is a question of developing new instruments .
I believe that support for the process of African unity is important .
But we are creating our own contradictions there as well , in the MEDA programme for instance .
Here too there is a need for consistency .
I am glad that the amendments have been included in this proposal , that the Joint Assembly is explicitly mentioned , and I think that it must also be maintained to form the political process .
Much too little is said about armaments policy , restriction of weapons sales and the effective control of the weapons trade .
The Commission has made specific proposals here .
That is to be welcomed .
Making a link between the targets of armaments restriction and development in the health and education fields is something very important .
The credibility of countries must be measured by this too .
In view of the imminent failure of the code of conduct , I would like to point out that in Amendment No 18 we put forward many specific proposals , and I ask you to support this amendment , and also Amendment No 17 , which concerns the prohibition of antipersonnel mines .
It is a view expressed by this House and belongs in the Treaty .
My colleague Mrs van Dijk has pointed out the problem of women , the role of women in the development process .
There is much more to be added here too .
There is more in it than in the Green Paper .
The role of women must be more precisely defined , because they contribute to the development process .
Partnership is an important precondition , including partnership with NGOs .
Finally , I would like to emphasize again that we have always supported the budgetization of the European Development Fund .
That should also be put into effect .
I would like to have a reply from Mrs Short , on behalf of the Council about whether she will take the initiative , at the latest ...
( The President made the speaker stand down . )
Mr President , at this stage in the debate I do not want to waste time repeating the content of the Vecchi and Rocard reports , which are both clearly excellent since the Committee on Development and Cooperation voted unanimously for them .
I would merely like to refer to one aspect of Mr Rocard 's report in order to highlight the interest the Group of the European Radical Alliance has regarding point 25 of the motion for a resolution .
It relates to the possibility of countries who are recipients of aid themselves proposing the criteria relating to democracy and human rights which would need to be respected to avoid a suspension of European Union aid .
We think that this innovative suggestion is particularly pertinent .
On the one hand because it is in keeping with all our principles of intervention and , secondly , because it should prove to be more effective than the current measures .
We can see that the partnership we have today between the Union and the ACP countries does not fully escape accusations of neo-colonialism since the practical rules and democratic conditions are still by and large formulated unilaterally by the European countries .
The Rocard report proposes a break with this logic and we fully approve of this .
But the idea of handing over responsibility for defining the partnership 's minimum level of democratic content to the ACP countries is clever in that it should improve the effectiveness of the rules .
Today European donors are naturally wary of punishing violations precisely because they do not want to lay themselves open to accusations of neo-colonialism .
As a result you see relative democracy flourishing .
Such a principle would be correct on this side of the Mediterranean but an error beyond it .
From the ACP countries ' point of view the advantage is equally important .
Indeed , what happens at the moment ?
An ACP country breaks the rules of democratic conditionality and immediately gets tacit support , I would even call it experienced complicity , from most of the other ACP countries .
All in all they keep their heads down and wait for European disapproval to fade into general indifference .
If the democratic criteria for aid are from now on defined by our partners , they themselves will be obliged to denounce violations and to apply sanctions .
From now on it will be up to them .
Perhaps this will be the occasion to deepen the dialogue on values mentioned in point 29 of the motion , from the basis of a respect for our differences .
It is because we consider that some of these values are of a universal nature that the Radicals unreservedly support Mr Rocard 's report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it cannot be denied that the results of the cooperation policy between the ACP countries and the European Union measure up neither to the frequently reaffirmed ambitions nor , above all , to the sums of money spent .
You could be forgiven for wondering whether the eighth EDF , which is ECU 13 billion over the period 1995 / 2000 , that is FF 85 billion , is or will be put to better use than the seven preceding ones . This financial aid has been rendered largely useless for three reasons .
Firstly , the socialist model of development , which has been adopted by the majority of ACP countries , based on land collectivization and excessive industrialization . Secondly , corruption of leaders and nomenklatura , which have taken over control of a large part of aid funding .
Thirdly , complexes amongst the European leaders , which render them incapable of commenting on these issues for fear of being branded neo-colonialists . But Michel Rocard himself , far from considering these three points and learning lessons from them , and whilst remaining faithful - let us recognize this - to his socialist ideology , proposes a policy which will be detrimental to the nations of Europe as well as to the people of the ACP countries .
If he will excuse me , I will overlook the commonplace , the popularity-seeking proposals and pious wishes which fill his report for , what concerns us most in this expressed desire to renounce a development policy which remains under the control of Member States , is the substance .
What does the honourable Member want ?
The budgetization of the European Development Fund , which would thus no longer be under the control of our nations .
Diplomatic and political links between supra-national bodies such as the European Union , on the one hand , and the African Economic Community , established in 1994 , on the other .
The importance given to nongovernmental organizations , about which a great deal could , however , be said and the integration of our overseas departments and territories into regional groupings , thus preparing the way for a separation of these territories from their mother country .
We note that Michel Rocard is rightly concerned with the fateful logic that a free trade policy would have on the economic future of the ACP countries .
But , in reality , he only proposes tinkering with the internationalist logic .
His only positive point is the proposal for a productive return of immigrants who have come from the ACP countries , which is completely in line with our own position .
To recap , in general , the Rocard report has unfortunately abandoned , to Brussels ' advantage , a development policy which , although not perfect , enabled the Member States to continue to play a major role .
But it is not through continually wanting to establish relations between blocs , it is not through globalization , it is not through bureaucratization that anything will be improved .
The tragedy is that , despite all the failures , Mr Rocard never wearies of his utopia .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Rocard and Vecchi reports should be approved with firm conviction .
Allow me to explain a few points .
The aim in Article 130 u of the Treaty of Maastricht is global .
Development cooperation should promote sustained development , particularly in the poorest countries , for the fight against poverty and a harmonious , step by step inclusion in the world economy .
The emphasis here is on step by step .
The Rocard report therefore points out that trade liberalization and economic growth alone are not enough to relieve poverty ; there must also be access to resources and participation in decision processes .
That applies particularly to the participation of women , but I am happy to be able to say that we women no longer have to emphasize this point , because it has in the meantime become the common property of this House .
I would like to emphasize that in the course of the Lomé cooperation something like a Lomé culture has been formed , consisting of partnership , equal rights , maintenance of dialogue , mutual contractual relationships and accountability , and this means much more than efficiency aspects on the cost-benefit model .
It is a mark of the Lomé culture that conditions are not just imposed on the contractual partners , but that efforts are made to ensure that the measures proposed are supported by the country concerned , in agreement with the governments and the population .
Certainly participation on the part of civil society still leaves something to be desired .
Above all , the equal right of women to have a say is lacking , as has been mentioned . The correct course has nevertheless been set .
That is all the more important when not just economic but political reforms are concerned , and they must or should be in harmony with each other .
Now , in a mature relationship it must be possible to say critical things , and if necessary to make use of sanctions , including the suspension of cooperation .
The Lomé agreements include this possibility , but for good reasons it is only used with restraint , because it is always better to keep talking than to break off relations .
I think that one particular aspect of cooperation within the agreement must be extended in future : close cooperation with nongovernmental organizations , particularly those which are active in the ACP countries , and not just with our organizations in the Member States .
A cooperation strategy which is tailor-made for each situation must be developed , to pick out the special features of individual regions , regardless of whether their support is national , private or public .
To a greater extent than was previously the case , the supporters of development policy can be part of a concept for the future which promises success .
One of the special features of Lomé cooperation is regional cooperation , which has long been geared to supra-regional development .
The same is true of the demand for the dynamic development of the private sector , to which increasing efforts have been applied in recent years .
I would like to close with a quotation from my general report at the last ACP Assembly , which was accepted with a very large majority : ' By common efforts , development plans which are specific , social , staggered in time , adapted to the current state of development and the problem situation , regionally differentiated and consistent , must be established , with the answers which result for Lomé cooperation arising from the subjects of the big UN conferences . '
This should be our aim .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first , sincere thanks to both the rapporteurs .
I regret that we cannot address them to Mr Vecchi in person .
At last we have a debate about development cooperation , and we all know that does not happen often .
In the case of the Vecchi report , it is rather a nuisance that it comes practically at the end of the process , and since the Treaty of Amsterdam has not yet been ratified , we have no possibility of ensuring that a series of proposals which have not yet been accepted will be included after all .
Madam President-in-Office , I welcome very much your firm emphasis on the fight against poverty but I would ask you to include as an essential pillar , so to speak , of your deliberations , the question of a health policy with particular reference to the health of mothers and children .
Year after year - we can almost say day after day - for thousands of women in developing countries , pregnancy is equivalent to a death sentence , because there is no way of combatting avoidable risks . This must not be allowed to happen .
Here in this Parliament , we have a cross-party working party for reproductive health .
So for us this is a special concern .
A further point of which we must certainly be aware is the question of stable currencies .
There is a special passage about it in the Rocard report .
Commissioner , my special plea would be that we ensure with the appropriate structures that increasingly stable and above all convertible currencies are created in the developing countries .
In this connection , I also draw your attention to the question of the CFA zone in the context of European Monetary Union .
A minor error concerning this matter has crept into the report , and I ask the services to correct it .
Paragraph 69 does not fit the context in which it appears . It ought to be inserted after paragraph 80 .
That is its proper place .
This is my final point .
Mr President , may I begin by congratulating Mr Rocard for the high quality of his report , and Mr Vecchi likewise .
We wish to take this opportunity , as we did in connection with the Martens report , and with the 8th EDF , to restate our commitment to partnership between the ACP countries and the European Union .
Indeed , as we approach the 21st century , we consider that a new , exemplary model should be laid down for this privileged relationship to which the countries of Europe have been committed since the outset of European construction .
The Union for Europe Group considers that the overall thrust of the Commission 's approach is correct .
I say overall , because we do not consider the proposals relating to trade to be satisfactory .
The UPE Group is of the opinion that the process of adapting and integrating regional markets must be monitored , for which reason it earlier suggested to the Committee on Development and Cooperation , which agreed , that the current trade regime should be maintained throughout a transition period to end no later than the year 2010 . The Committee on Development and Cooperation agreed .
The Commission has already agreed to extend the period from 3 to 5 years .
We hope that , vis--vis the Council and the WTO , it will defend an extension of the transition period to 2010 .
In addition , our Group supports the Commission 's guidelines and , like the rapporteur , welcomes the importance attributed to the regional and sub-regional integration process , provided that the integrity and unity of the ACP as a group is not affected .
In that connection , we direct attention to our group 's proposals that the overseas countries and territories and the ultra-peripheral regions should be involved .
We welcome the objective of combatting poverty , which we consider to be a healthy and timely endeavour .
We believe that the time has come to emerge from a rationale of strict conditionality and to concentrate on a more fruitful dialogue , with a view to assessing governments ' endeavours in the areas of human rights , democracy and good governance .
I will end , Mr President , by expressing the hope that the Joint Assembly , which is the prime instrument of political dialogue between the European Union and the ACP , will be strengthened .
Mr President , first of all I would like to compliment Mr Rocard and Mr Vecchi on their reports , and the Commission on its guidelines for the negotiation of the new cooperation agreements .
It is good news indeed that we have been able to confirm in no uncertain terms that we wish to pursue agreements with the countries concerned , and it is good news that we have got some of the key discussions under way on reforms - reforms that will be necessary if we are to get away from the post-colonial relationship of dependency between donor and recipient countries , if the position of women is to be improved , and so on .
It is also excellent news that discussions are taking place on this agreement in the various Member States .
However , I do deplore the fact that we have not managed to revise the list of countries covered by the Lomé Convention .
The needs of countries , not their geographical placement or their historical affiliations with Member States of the Union , should be the governing factor in the amount of support they receive from the EU .
The European Parliament should guarantee that in future , poor nations will be competing on a level playing-field as regards the distribution of EU support and access to EU markets .
This should preferably be achieved through revision of the list of countries covered by the Lomé Convention , but could if necessary be achieved by assuring countries not covered by Lomé V that they will benefit from the same conditions in relation to EU support and equal access to EU markets , regardless .
Mr President , could I welcome the President-in-Office here ?
We are very pleased to see her as a frequent visitor to Parliament 's Committee on Development and Cooperation .
We appreciate her commitment .
She started her address by saying that we had to mobilize international political will .
I think that is precisely the task that faces us because there is a lot of easy talk and yet we need to mobilize that political will .
I commend in particular the cause of Jubilee 2000 which I think has caught the imagination of many people and which says , with a new millennium , let us cancel the debt of the poorest countries .
This point is tucked away in paragraph 74 of Mr Rocard 's excellent report but should be right up there in lights as one of the essentials in the alleviation of poverty to which his report is largely devoted .
This is an excellent report by Mr Rocard , as there are so many aspects to it , any one of which could make a substantial difference to areas of policy and areas of the world .
For instance , we have paragraph 45 on monoculture , one of the really crushing problems for the Caribbean islands , for example , with their historic dependence on bananas .
We have the problem of the small island states , not just in the Caribbean but in the Pacific , which are totally at the mercy of global warming .
That is a very important commitment that we reiterate .
There is an excellent paragraph on landmines which are such a scourge for Africa and other parts of the world .
Arms sales are mentioned , again an extremely important ingredient in development policy .
Paragraph 77 talks about the need to develop fisheries agreements with a development component instead of a purely commercial one .
If we could achieve that , this again would make a huge difference to the coastal countries off which this Union fishes .
Last but not least , there is the 0.7 % UN target of aid ; if we could achieve that for every single Member State instead of just for one or two noble exceptions , then we would be doing something noble .
I would commend the report and perhaps I can finish by saying that ' Nous sommes tous des rocardiens maintenant ' , we are all Rocardians now .
Mr President , research into and the implementation of effective measures to combat poverty will constitute the EU 's greatest undertaking in its future relations with the ACP countries .
Following the Committee on Development and Cooperation 's discussions in Brussels , the overall strategy proposed by the Commission within the framework of negotiations for the renewal of the cooperation agreements with the ACP countries , will be submitted next month , during the course of the Joint Assembly planned in the Mauritius Islands .
Alongside decisive support for a micro-economic approach , which is intended to encourage the poorer countries to invest in the development of micro-credit , the Union hopes to maintain preferential trade with the poorer countries and those which are more vulnerable economically .
As already negotiated within the scope of the Lomé agreements , preferential trade agreements have been renewed for a ten-year period and are incorporated into a clearly political perspective encouraging geographical differentiation , to emphasize regional differences .
The principle of respect for human rights and democracy will be an essential requirement in the philosophy of the cooperation agreements .
Consequently , through the regional authorities responsible for monitoring ethnic , economic , social and religious tensions , the EU should maintain peace and prevent crises and conflicts .


Mr President , on the basis of the work of Mr Rocard and Mr Vecchi , the Group of the Party of European Socialists has undertaken a commitment that has lasted for more than a year : it consists of a working group set up with the representatives of the ACP countries , which has studied this matter and discussed its proposals in Africa with the African leaders .
This is a new way of preparing for the review of these agreements , which must not be called into question .
This special relationship is important and should continue , but should be renewed broadly .
There are many reasons in the Rocard and Vecchi reports for renewing these agreements . It is a new and global concept that deals with all the issues , from democracy and human rights to conflict prevention , all important subjects on which I will not dwell .
An effort is being made to define cooperation and partnership more effectively , by reviewing the way of working but also looking at the mistakes and inadequacies so far , by looking critically at the disguised plundering by the large European companies , by looking to replace huge projects which are not always useful with a vision that is closer to the work and life of the people and the democratic development of society , by looking at new fields of intervention such as women , civil society , health , education and , as I said , by using more penetrating and effective ways of working .
In short , this approach is an attempt to propose a European alternative to the model Clinton has proposed for Africa , which does not seem to have pleased Mandela too much , precisely because it is a model of liberalization at all costs , when everyone is now questioning the role of the IMF - which has also brought disaster - and wondering how to deal with enormous problems such as the debt crisis with new mechanisms and objectives .
The EU therefore has to find an alternative .
With regard to the composition of the ACP countries , that is , the list of participants , the best plan is to review the possible entry of new countries , given the new problems , for example , in South Africa , within the scope of the current regional areas , maintaining the unity of this long-lasting relationship , which is of great political value in itself but which should be made more effective and reformed in depth .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , cooperation by the European Union with the ACP states must be reformed .
There is much that is positive in this cooperation , but there is also much which does not work .
Simply continuing the status quo is certainly not a model for the next millennium .
The present rules are above all discriminatory .
Countries like Bangladesh , Nepal , Bolivia and Nicaragua are excluded , although these are developing countries which need our help just as much as the present ACP states .
I consider that it is rather schizophrenic that in March Parliament adopted an urgent motion on Nicaragua 's debt and pointed out the terrible situation of people in Nicaragua , but the accession of Nicaragua to the Lomé Convention was not even seriously discussed .
At its Congress in Toulouse last year , the Group of the European People 's Party demanded that future cooperation should no longer be based so much on colonial links , but on income per head and its distribution , and above all on the willingness of those in government to contribute genuinely to the development of people in their country .
I expressly welcome what Mrs Dybkjær said about the expansion of the ACP states and the acceptance of new members .
It would be schizophrenic to restrict the acceptance of new members to Cuba of all countries .
The pre-conditions have not really been fulfilled there .
Commissioner Pinheiro , your mandate for action is a tentative step in the right direction , to make cooperation effective in the future .
Keep at it !
We should support this step and encourage you to take further steps .
Do not be led astray by the protectionists of all countries , but go into the new millennium with a new concept !
Mr President , I briefly want to congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr Rocard and Mr Vecchi .
Development cooperation is undoubtedly the focus of a number of important issues at the moment .
I do not have a lot of time , but I would like to make a few points .
Mr Vecchi has pointed out the importance of decentralized cooperation because it means moving the focus from individual projects to those involved in the projects .
But this transition , which is very important , also needs to be demonstrated from another point of view .
The EU has the task of making countries who want to cooperate with us aware of their own resources . Often we do not talk enough about the environmental and cultural wealth of these countries , which could be important resources for them , because , if they are aware of them , they can then understand how to use them to improve their economy in terms of tourism , and we too can offer them important support .
Culture , cultural and environmental wealth with the knowledge and awareness of what they have to give us .
What is important and fundamental is that , when we talk about development cooperation , we should not forget foreign policy and humanitarian aid .
Just one development cooperation measure , if not in line with humanitarian aid measures and with foreign policy , could undoubtedly produce negative results that we do not want .
The EU should thus have a foreign policy on common security , that will enable dialogue in a field where we can really make substantial impact and a significant economic contribution .
We are still lacking in this , unfortunately .
However , I wish to thank Commissioner Pinheiro for the effort he is making for development and real cooperation , especially bearing in mind the need for the necessary financial means .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , two or three years ago we were quite sceptical s to the future of the Lomé agreements , for many reasons .
A decline in the geo-strategic interest of the ACP countries after the end of the Cold War , the need for the European Union to contribute to the economic development and democratic strengthening of central and eastern European countries , the wave of ultra-liberalism created by the WTO along with , of course , a decline in the financial capacities of a Union sharply touched by crisis , can all be given as examples .
All of these factors came together to overshadow the horizon which , at last , seems to be clearing .
We are delighted to note an increased awareness within the European Union regarding a growing interdependence with the ACP countries , particularly with the African continent , an interdependence which concerns economic development , security , democracy and the influx of immigrants .
The Commission 's Green Paper is clearly the source of this awareness , but we can be proud of the European Parliament 's active contribution , and especially that of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , in reflections on the renewal of the Lomé agreements .
The Martens and Rocard reports , which have both been rightly praised , have drawn up a framework and defined the ambitions of a renewed and deepened cooperation , emphasizing the necessary political dimension of the agreements , the promotion of democratic values and the support for a process of regional integration .
I am personally extremely pleased at the importance which has been given to decentralized cooperation - indeed the Vecchi report was dedicated to this - because it responds directly to the needs and aspirations of the populations of the ACP countries and because , through local government and associations , it involves the citizens themselves in the process of cooperation .
Decentralized cooperation brings greater effectiveness and democracy .
Ladies and gentlemen , the game is not yet won with regard to the Lomé agreements for the year 2000 , but we will from now on have , thanks in particular to the Rocard report , intellectual instruments which will ensure that we do not miss this great opportunity .
We also have to fight to gain the necessary financial means .
Much will depend on the political will that Parliament shows .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a change is necessary in the way in which we pursue cooperation between the European Union and the ACP countries , with a view to establishing a renewed , real and fairer partnership .
The post-colonial period should be brought to a close .
We must shake off the old donor-recipient relationships and cease to cast the recipient in the role of a child .
The rationale of conditionality must be replaced by contract-based cooperation .
The main feature of this new partnership should be that populations themselves take their place in cooperation , while its main aim should be to eradicate poverty , prevent conflict , defend human rights and promote good governance .
This new partnership should therefore be given a strong political dimension , extending cooperation to include economic , financial and technical partnership , which should be decentralized to include new protagonists , in addition to governments .
We should remember , at this time , that democratization and good governance are , first and foremost , the product of a way of thinking that takes time to become firmly rooted .
I would like to take this opportunity to express my sincere support for Commissioner Pinheiro for the intelligence he has shown in presenting and developing the new strategic approach which he proposes for such a very important issue .
May I also offer my warmest congratulations to Mr Rocard and Mr Vecchi for their outstanding reports .
Mr President , I will be very brief , because I fully agree with Mr Rocard 's report , and I also greatly appreciate his input .
There is one point I would like to draw your attention to , and this is similar to the one Mr Liese just mentioned .
What I am concerned with is the relationship between the ACP countries and the overseas countries and territories , the so-called OCAT .
In addition to over 70 ACP countries , there are 20 overseas countries and territories , many of which are located in the Third World , often amongst ACP countries .
Their position in relation to the European Union changes frequently , is extremely unclear , and is partly dependent on specific relationships with specific Member States they may be part of .
As we know , this relationship changes from country to country .
In 1957 , the Treaty of Rome promised them that they would be treated equally with the Member States themselves .
But this never actually happened .
The far-reaching equal status they were granted in 1991 has meanwhile been reversed .
Mr President , what should happen now ?
Together with the new Lomé Convention a clear agreement should be drawn up for the OCAT .
This would be fair and honest towards the developing regions it concerns .
It would also be good if the links between the OCAT and the ACP Assembly were strengthened , by giving the OCAT a place in the Assembly as observer .
I am delighted that Mr Rocard has included this in his report .
Mr President , I would like the Commission to tell us when it thinks it will have a new OCAT agreement , and perhaps the President-in-Office can add something to this .
I am extremely pleased that the Committee on Development and Cooperation is to draft an own-initiative report to underline this issue .
Mr President , this is what I wanted to add to the debate .
I would like to offer my full support to Mr Rocard 's report .
Mr President , in the limited time that I have at my disposal , all I can offer is a few words .
The proposal amounts to keeping the general structure , the foundation of the Convention , upright .
This is the unique and only relationship we have with our southern neighbours in particular .
As far as trade is concerned , I believe the integration of the trade regime into the WTO should be gradual , whereby a transitional regime is developed for precarious markets which are still developing .
The question is whether five years is not far too short .
We really need an impact study on this .
Trade barriers , such as the rules of the place of origin , must be abolished .
We therefore need a parallel policy for trade measures .
In addition we should ask ourselves whether the proposed free trade zones do not constitute a threat to the ACP and , in fact , merely provide convenient access to markets for European products .
We should be very conscious of this threat .
To conclude , Mr President , I would like to mention something which has not been discussed yet in this debate , and which I consider to be an omission , namely the little attention paid to complicated procedures .
The Green Paper goes into it at length , and I think this is right .
But I think we should make much more of it .
If we want to make the funds accessible to civil society , then it would demonstrate courage if the Commission and the Council were to look at a proposal , made at an earlier Parliamentary ACP-EU Meeting , to set up a kind of ombudsman initiative in the Pacific and in the Caribbean , initially in a French and an English-speaking country . This would at least allow women 's organizations and environmental organizations , trade unions , the press and the Chamber of Commerce access to EU legislation .
It is imperative that such a scheme is set up , but hitherto no one has taken up our proposal .
That is all I wanted to say for the moment .
Mr President , I wish to devote my contribution to this morning 's debate to the report on decentralized cooperation drawn up by its excellent rapporteur , Mr Vecchi .
Our contention is that EU development cooperation should be based on the same principles of partnership , subsidiarity and decentralization which we have put at the heart of the way we organize ourselves within the European Union and which , we therefore argue , must inform our relations with the developing world .
It fits squarely within the approach outlined by the UK Secretary of State this morning in that the biggest stimulus to achieving quality of aid , to which she pledges herself , is the participation by recipients themselves in the planning , implementation and evaluation of development projects with which we seek to benefit them .
It is decentralized civil society organizations within developing countries which have the ability to adapt cooperation policy to local conditions .
It is decentralization which makes our aid more visible , thereby improving accountability .
It is decentralization which leads to better identification of need and support for smaller projects , with quicker funding availability than is possible in traditional programmes .
It is decentralization which encourages cooperation rather than competition between actors and equitable agreement at local level on the proper responsibilities of NGOs , vis-à-vis local and cental government .
It is decentralization which builds the capacity of civil society to monitor and assure norms of democracy , thereby promoting principles of good governance and respect for human rights .
Today 's report seeks to agree a legal base for decentralized cooperation for the budget heading specifically created by Parliament as far back as 1992 .
Yet I say to the Secretary of State that the Council 's position represents two steps back rather than one step forward .
The Council seeks to restrict rather than encourage this approach by proposing a regulation which will remain in force for just three years .
It seeks to subject programmes to the bureaucracy of the restrictive II ( b ) commitology committee and to limit the finance available to just ECU 18 million over the three-year period .
In retabling our amendments at second reading , we therefore call on the Council radically to review its position .
Parliament wants the legal base for pilot initiatives on decentralized cooperation to be a strong - not a weak - instrument and one which is a starting point for mainstreaming this philosophy as a defining element in all of the EU 's development cooperation efforts .
For all my political career , I have been a decentralizer , whether it has been in UK local government or in seeking to open up the workings of the European Union .
I believe the President-in-Office shares this conviction and hope she will do so once again today .
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner Pinheiro , I welcome this excellent report by Michel Rocard on a new cooperation agreement to replace Lomé 4 .
The EU and ACP must reaffirm their partnership by strengthening democracy and respect for human rights , especially the rights of women .
The fight against poverty and illiteracy must form the basis of any new arrangements and the acquis communautaire must be built upon in political economic and financial terms .
In order to ensure maximum development in the ACP regions it is essential to take on board the question of peace and security .
The sale and distribution of dangerous weapons including , in particular , landmines must cease .
Peace is a prerequisite for development ; without peace all effort is wasted .
It is also vitally important that developing countries be allowed fair access to the world market place within the WTO , thus helping them to achieve their ultimate goal which is the eradication of misery and poverty in these regions .
GATT and the WTO have done little or nothing so far to make increased trade a reality for these very poor economies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , several people have already pointed out the value of Mr Rocard 's report regarding the Commission communication on guidelines for negotiating a new cooperation agreement with Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific .
Many valuable points , such as the desire to continue with cooperation or the emphasis placed on women 's rights , have already been made .
This also justifies the unusual length of the text of this resolution , but greater conciseness in the details might have led to a more correct emphasis on the principles guiding the new partnership agreements between these countries and the EU .
However , since we are emphasizing values , there are several points which , in the opinion of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , should be partly changed .
I am referring in particular to paragraphs 18 and 25 .
Paragraph 18 of the text affirms the desire to use contracts instead of applying too many conditions .
We are asking for a clause to be included to ensure that the countries concerned observe democratic principles and human rights .
I do not think we can disregard this fundamental point , which forms a part of our cultural heritage .
The same applies to paragraph 25 , where it is proposed that the ACP countries themselves should lay down the criteria for arranging partnership agreements , based on Commission proposals .
We think it would be better to establish a completely equal relationship between the Commission and these countries and we are proposing our amendment to that effect .
Mr President , I would like to say that I think this is an excellent report .
The Commission 's proposal and this report represent an important step forwards .
I also think it is good that clear emphasis is placed on increased regionalization and thus also decentralization , since it is clearly difficult to see how else we could achieve effective cooperation between ourselves and 70 states as different as those we have in the ACP agreement .
I think it is good to focus on poverty , the environment and women , amongst other things .
Personally , I think it is also essential for us to pay more attention to the issue of population , which is a very important one .
Whether or not we can solve the problem of rapid population growth depends on issues such as reproductive health and the living conditions of women , but it also depends on the ability of states as a whole to develop in the future .
What I miss in the report , however , and what I would like to have seen included , is a clearer indication of the fact that in the long term we are prepared to adapt the trade preferences which currently exist in the Lomé Convention to the WTO 's rules .
I think this is the only sustainable solution in the long term .
I also think that long term protection of European agriculture is not a durable solution .
We must have the same standards for trade and agricultural policy as we have for aid policy in general .
Mr President , like Commissioner Pinheiro , I think what is most impressive about this debate is the amount of shared thinking there is across the Commission , the Council and Parliament - and right around Parliament .
Of course , there are some nuances of difference which we need to discuss further and to resolve .
This is a very powerful alliance and it bodes well for the next phase of Lomé that there has been some very careful thinking and there is a lot of agreement about the direction in which we need to travel .
Mr Rocard is to be congratulated on his report , and it has drawn praise and respect from all quarters of Parliament .
A lot of the thinking in the report coincides with Council thinking .
There are some details we need to discuss further - for example the best way to deal with AIDS in some of the poorest countries in the world - but we can come back to that .
I would agree with the stress on all sides on support for good governance and human rights as a precondition for eradicating poverty .
We only have to look at the Asian crisis to know that is right ; you cannot promote and sustain development without democracy and human rights .
The Asian crisis shows that and , therefore , it is not an optional extra ; it is part of sustainable development .
I am sure we all regret the fact that Mr Vecchi cannot be here , and we send our best regards to his family and hope all goes well .
I want to make it very clear that there is absolute agreement on the desirability of decentralization in cooperation .
The disagreement is about the commitology , but not about that principle .
So at least we agree about the direction of travel , even if we do not completely agree on everything .
I should like to say to Mrs Van Dijk that there is also now universal agreement that you cannot have development without educating girls and promoting the empowerment of women , because women and children are the overwhelming majority of the poor .
That , again , is now agreed and not just an optional extra .
I should like to say to Glenys Kinnock , who was very worried about the stress on regional free-trade agreements , that what we got out of the last meeting of the General Affairs Council was agreement that regional free-trade agreements are one option but an enhanced GSP is another option that must be at least as good as the existing Lomé access .
There must be better treatment of the least-developed countries inside or outside the ACP alliance .
Within that kind of framework - this , of course , is the area of greatest complexity and needs more discussion - there is room for different countries to choose the way in which they wish to travel .
If we can preserve those options , then it will be possible to go forward in the way that the countries concerned wish .
John Corrie placed a lot of emphasis on regionalization , and we all respect the work he has done on that .
I agree that is the way in which the world is moving but it is for the ACP countries themselves to decide the speed of that movement and not to have a sort of rigid formula that requires them to move in ways that they do not wish to go .
Mr Andrews stressed the need for simplification of the instruments , and we all agree .
The existing structures are far too complex , the agreement is far too complex and it makes rigid the flows of development assistance , and so on .
On budgetizing aid , there is no agreement .
As you all know , the Maastricht Treaty provided for a separate EDF , and that remains the position of some of the member countries .
So we all respect the decision of Parliament but there is not going to be immediate progress on that question .
Mr Telkämper , for the Green Group , stressed that the World Trade Organization and WTO-compatibility are not democratic .
In fact , the WTO is an organization of Member States with one state , one vote , and is potentially democratic .
The problem in this area is that change is so complex that not all states are equal at the table , and what we have to do is spread the analysis and get it shared so that developing countries can come to the table of the WTO clear about what is in their interests .
We need to work together to secure that .
Mr Hory talked about the paragraph in Mr Rocard 's report on human rights being defined by the OAU .
I just wish to remind Parliament that all our countries have signed up to the Universal Declaration of Human Rights .
Human rights are not regional , they are universal for all people , they cross civil , political , social and economic rights and our aspiration is to realize those rights for all people everywhere .
Methods of implementing and strengthening the OAU is a good idea but there are not different human rights in the south compared with the north .
Mr Antony said that some of the progress under the ACP-EU relationship in the past had not been as effective as we would hope .
There is some truth in that , and we have to face it in order to make improvements for the future .
He stressed that there had been too much emphasis on the role of the state in the past .
We have been through two eras : one that gave perhaps too much emphasis to the role of the state and minimized the role of markets .
We are coming out of an era that maximized the role of the markets and minimized the role of the state , and what we need is a new synthesis that puts both the state and markets in their rightful place to get the properly regulated , international and national arrangements that can promote sustainable economic growth .
That is the challenge of the next era .
Mrs Junker said that we must emphasize sustainable development .
I just wish to stress that in the international poverty eradication strategy there is a commitment that every country should have its sustainable development plan in place so that it can promote development that does not use up its natural resources in an unsustainable way .
Mrs Günther talked about progress on health being part of poverty eradication .
That is absolutely right , and the stark statistics of terrible infant mortality , low-life expectancy or maternal mortality are part of the picture of gross poverty in the world .
Again , one of the major poverty eradication targets is the provision of basic health care to all the people of the world by 2015 , and access to reproductive health care for everyone and a reduction in maternal mortality and infant mortality .
So I very much agree that is part of the process of poverty eradication .
Mrs Dybkjær stressed that the least developed countries should have equal rights whether they are inside the ACP or outside .
That is absolutely right .
It was one of the commitments made in a previous General Affairs Council agreement .
We must make sure it is implemented .
I agree with those who say that logically the poorest countries should become part of the ACP .
But in fact the ACP is resistant and a lot of the poorest countries are not seeking to join .
What we need to ensure is that they are treated equally in terms of both trade access and development assistance .
Then we will effectively have equal treatment , even if we do not have it in theory .
I am grateful to Mr Macartney for his remarks .
He raised the question of Jubilee 2000 and debts .
The Council wholeheartedly supports the HIPC initiative .
What we all have to do is speed up its implementation and try to make sure that every highly indebted country is on track for getting the debt to a sustainable level by the year 2000 .
Mr Amadeo said that we must give more assistance to the most vulnerable .
That is part of the broad agreement on development assistance - that there should be differentiation between the investment needs of the very poorest and the technical cooperation needs of the middle-income countries , and more resources ploughed into investment in health , education and so on , in the very poorest countries .
Mrs Baldi said not enough importance was currently attached to environmental resources .
Again , I should like to refer to the commitment in the poverty eradication strategy to a sustainable development strategy , including environmental resources in every developing country .
We need to put that in place .
There is a strong consensus that we should strengthen the partnership .
A partnership implies a relationship of equals and yet it was argued by one of the Members that we had to have conditionality in human rights .
Experience with development shows that if conditionality is imposed it is never effective .
The basis for the partnership has to be that we agree on the need to eradicate poverty and this calls for respect for democracy , human rights and good governance ; within that framework we can then agree as equals on the details of implementation .
I share Mr Howitt 's aspirations towards decentralization .
There is strong agreement in the Commission and the Council that is the way in which our efforts need to move .
I have one reservation : we cannot have all the Member States , as well as the Commission , working with NGOs everywhere .
We need to decentralize our efforts and then we need to decide in what areas the Member States should take the lead and in what areas the Commission should take the lead .
We should not be tripping over each other on the details of our cooperation .
The final point , raised by Mrs Lööw , is population growth .
In 1945 there were 2.6 billion people , now there are 5.7 billion and by 2015 the population of the world will be at least 10 billion .
If we eradicate poverty and improve access to health care and education it will increase to about 15 billion and then be sustainable .
If we do not develop the world economy it will go well beyond that and start to use up the resources of the world in a way that is not sustainable .
That is part of the challenge of development : that we hand on a sustainable world to the next generation and for that it is absolutely essential that we succeed in these endeavours .
I am very optimistic that we are going to make progress in the effectiveness of our development collaboration .
The consensus between Parliament , the Council and the Commission bodes very well for our future endeavours .
Mr President , I am impressed by the breadth and clarity of the President-in-Office 's answers but there is one point that I missed and that is the complexity of the procedures .
The procedures are becoming so complex that they are a serious deterrent .
It was one of the reasons for the underspending under Lomé and the inaccessibility of Lomé for chambers of commerce , women 's groups and environmental groups in the ACP countries .
Can you , and maybe the Commissioner as well , go into that issue ?
May I very quickly touch on the complexity of procedures ?
If you look at the Lomé agreement , it is enormously complex , with very complex channels of funding , and we are all agreed that they have got to be simplified .
The administration has got to be decentralized so that it is less slow , less complex , more effective .
There is agreement across Commission and Council that we must make those improvements .
At the moment , as you will know , in all areas of European Union endeavour we have difficulty in disbursing the funds that we have available .
We must improve our capacity to do so .
That is agreed .
Mr President , all I want to know is whether the Commissioner and the President-in-Office of the Council plan to say something about the US President 's visit now , or to the Committee on Development and Cooperation at a future date .
Mr Robles , perhaps I could ask them to respond in writing because we are out of time for this debate .
Members know the procedure .
We have a debate and a separate time for questions .
I have to move on .
I would like to thank everybody who took part in the debate , in particular the President-in-Office .
EU-Russia relations
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media I should like to congratulate Mrs Lalumière on her excellent report .
The bonds that tie Russia and the European Member States are centuries old .
Russia is also important as a bridge between Europe and Asia .
Europe 's relationship with Russia is a chance to further the principle of western democracy , which is a key element in cooperation with other nations .
Russia , as a superpower , however , goes its own way in matters of geography , natural resources , its population and its culture .
Progress in Russia is unpredictable , often chaotic , following no western model or timetable .
For that reason , an understanding of Russia 's special features is a key factor in a successful partnership between her and the EU .
The Committee on Culture proposes increased reciprocal understanding and trust through a programme of education and study as well as exchange arrangements .
People should know more about Russia 's rich cultural heritage with its many vital minority groups , which are worthy of our support .
Nevertheless , Russian cultural heritage is being threatened by economic problems and indifference .
The EU should be helping Russia to take stock of this heritage , promote information exchange and vocational training in the area of culture , as well as encourage legislative moves in favour of ethnic cultures .
The challenge for us is , above all , to give our support to nationwide and local democracy in Russia .
The countries around the Baltic and Barents Sea are especially well placed to establish more opportunities for cooperation with Russia .
The TACIS-Interreg cross-border cooperation and TACIS-PHARE programmes must be brought more into the picture .
But proper cooperation in education cannot take place just through TACIS projects : it will require a European foundation or an entirely separate source of funding .
In any case , resources have to be increased and cooperation has to be based on the reciprocal dealings of two equal partners .
Mr President , on behalf of the Socialist Group , can I first of all say that our group welcomes Mrs Lalumière 's timely report on Russia ?
It is regrettable , however , that an additional 62 amendments were tabled for plenary after over 90 had already been considered at the committee stage .
Nevertheless , we are at a crucial time in the development of Russia 's economic and democratic reform process , and the EU 's future relations with Russia can play a vital part in supporting and invigorating the push for reform in the Russian Federation .
For many people in Russia the end of the Soviet Union and the beginning of economic transformation from command to market economy have not led to obvious improvements in their standard of living .
It is to be hoped that the appointment of a new Prime Minister will lead to a rebalancing of the Russian Government with a clearer emphasis on the democratic and economic reform process .
The EU and the European Parliament must exert their influence through the TACIS and democracy programme , the partnership and cooperation agreement and the newly established Parliamentary Cooperation Council .
Human rights will always be high on the agenda , and Parliament must continue to monitor the law on religious freedom in Russia .
Parliament must support initiatives on tackling international crime , legal reform , trafficking in women , combatting poverty and poor health and encourage the Russian Federation 's membership of WTO .
On the security front , it is important to avoid the division of Europe once more into two camps .
Russia - building on the mutual founding act between NATO and the Russian Federation - must not be excluded from discussions on the future security architecture for Europe in the twenty-first century .
The OSCE and the Council of Europe also have a role to play , as do improved relations between Russia and its neighbouring regions .
The Council must play its part - and I hope Commissioner Van den Broek will endorse this - in building a new relationship with a new Russia .
Mr President , compared with Hungary , Russia is not a model of democratic transition .
Any such comparison would be incorrect and a political error .
Russia was subjected to communism for 75 years , that is , three generations .
That means that there is no memory of the brief democratic experience of 1905-1914 , nor of the prodigious economic development and the spirit of enterprise of the turn of the century .
It is a unique case in history whereby a memory has been suppressed , replaced for three quarters of a century by the sole experience of a one-party system and a state-run economy .
What is more , Russian society has experienced an incomparable demographic tragedy .
Since 1970 - not since 1991 as was stated - life expectancy has done nothing but fall .
That leads a society to despair .
It is an unprecedented phenomenon .
It is with this in mind that the Russian efforts to build a rule of law and a market economy must be evaluated .
The rule of law is still not perfect , but let us not forget that in spite of malicious prophecies , all elections since 1993 , both general and local , have taken place on the anticipated date and , according to the experts , have been properly conducted .
All national and regional institutions are functioning .
Serious crises have erupted , in particular the war in Chechnya , but they are already a thing of the past .
The market economy is coming up against serious difficulties , above all the corruption inherited from the Soviet regime , and a collapse in the economy in general . This collapse also does not date from 1991 .
Soviet experts have been analysing it since 1982 , when it was noted in the Novossibirsk report .
A reform of the economy is difficult under such circumstances . Nevertheless , the first signs of recovery are clear .
The consequence of the reforms has been to differentiate society , but we must not reduce this phenomenon to a contrast between the impoverished masses and the fabulously wealthy mafia .
Those who knew the Soviet Union well know that nearly everyone was poor then , with the exception of the ruling classes .
Today , 50 % of the population are poor - it is true - but the other 50 % are experiencing a continual increase in their standard of living and there are already the beginnings of a middle class .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Russia has considerable natural resources and a very highly educated population , often better than that of our older democracies .
This means that whatever happens , she will make up the lost ground in terms of political and economic backwardness in the near future , as she was doing at the turn of the century before the revolution put a stop to that progressive momentum .
It is a country which has shared our history and which is today making considerable efforts to align itself with us .
If we recognize these efforts , if we are able to measure the progress achieved in comparison with the disaster from which the country is emerging , we will be offering Europe an opportunity for cooperation which will strengthen it in terms of security , prosperity and spiritual enrichment .
If we refuse to recognize the breadth of the transformation underway , if we do not commit ourselves fully to helping Russia , we run the distinct risk of seeing this country turn quite naturally to other countries for support .
She will turn to the United States , or Asia , or the Muslim world , and our part of the continent will be weakened by this .
This is the essence of Mrs Lalumière 's excellent report .
The Group of the European People 's Party supports it and hopes that it will not be unduly modified .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , I would respectfully like to thank Mrs Lalumière for her report .
The report shows just how much expert knowledge she gained in her splendid work as Secretary-General of the Council of Europe .
Russia has a key role in EU foreign relations .
She is still a superpower and her development and progress is vitally important for the security and well-being of the Member States .
With enlargement , the Union already shares a very long border with Russia , and one that will grow even longer with the next round of accessions .
Enlargement will mean the strengthening of ties between the EU and Russia .
Enlargement to the east will be on a far larger scale than is generally realized .
All eastern European countries , Russia included , are on the path to democracy and a market economy .
Before long , they will all fulfil the criteria required for membership as laid down at Copenhagen .
Despite all this , Parliament should not yet , in the opinion of the Liberal group , take a stand in any way on Russia 's inclusion in the EU .
Mrs Lalumière 's excellent report originally gave the impression , and still does to some extent , that there will be a new bi-zonal Europe made up of Russia on the one hand and the rest of Europe on the other .
To rid ourselves of this image we suggest new wording to paragraph 57 regarding the Council of Europe and the EU so that " to act as a link between the two halves of the continent ' will read as " to promote genuine pan-European partnership . '
The Liberal group suggests a new paragraph should be inserted in the report , which stresses the importance of the EU Nordic dimension and provides for the start of close cooperation between Russia and the Council of Baltic states , the Barents Euro-Arctic Council and the Arctic Council .
We hope everyone will approve this addition .
Mr President , the European Union must support the greatest possible development of relations and cooperation with the Russian Federation .
It will be impossible to build a stable Europe if we turn our back on that country or try to isolate it .
The enlargement of the European Union to include the central and eastern European countries , and the enlargement of NATO to the east , should be accompanied by a proportional increase in relations with Moscow .
The plan and proposals , presented by the Council and the Commission respectively , should aim in that direction , as of course should the proper application of the 1994 agreement signed with the Russian Federation , which has just come into effect .
Russia is going through a difficult transition in political terms , with a democracy marked by Boris Yeltsin 's presidential authoritarianism .
Examples have included the assault on Parliament some years ago , the war in Chechnya , and the most recent government crisis , not to mention the general lack of respect for many human rights .
Some institutions in Russia are weak as a result of that same authoritarianism .
There is a profound economic crisis , caused by ultraliberal approaches . And of course there is an extremely serious social crisis , which manifests itself , for example , as poverty , public servants being unable to draw their salaries , and even - though it is hard to believe - a decrease in people 's standard of living and life expectancy .
It is a question of cooperating with Russia on equal terms , to help to ensure that the European Union has a democratic and socioeconomically consolidated partner .
Such a partner is essential for security in Europe . Security and cooperation with Russia cannot just be based on the founding act signed between Moscow and NATO : bodies such as the OSCE also need to be strengthened .
It is a question of having a reliable partner on the international scene , one which cannot be forgotten , as we saw during the most recent Iraq crisis and with the situation in Kosovo .
I want to end by saying that I am worried that countries such as France and Germany obviously might be tempted to enter into bilateral relationships with the Russian Federation , independently of moves from the European Union .
Lastly , I want to express our general support for Mrs Lalumière 's magnificent report .
Mr President , the sensitive reactions of the West to the risky government restructuring with which the Kremlin leader Yeltsin has startled his European neighbours in the last few days shows once again how profound the links between Western Europe and Russia are .
There is therefore no question about it : the challenge for Europe after the fall of the Wall is the clarification and restructuring of our relationship with Russia .
Basically , the question of European security will depend precisely on the success of the balance struck with Russia .
In the face of that , what the Commission calls an " action plan for the future relationship of the EU and Russia ' seems to be a conglomeration of individual measures ; it seems aimless , inadequate and unprofessional .
It is another demonstration of the poverty of our common foreign policy that in respect of what is our continent 's key concern , neither a decent joint strategy nor a comprehensive set of ideas can be found in it .
I think I have made it clear : For the Green Group , there is no doubt that Russia can also become a member of the Union if it wants to .
Anyone who does not accept this not only ignores the EU Treaty on this point , but also rejects involvement in this great restructuring task of Europe .
Such a rejection is marked by the same spirit as the provocation which was caused by the expansion of military power systems during the Cold War .
It does not contribute to the settlement , peace and stability of this continent .
We need an investment in the partnership process with Russia , and that means an investment in the peace of Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the members of the Italian National Alliance look favourably on the EU action plan for Russia , launched by the Council in May 1996 under the Italian Presidency .
The plan seeks to ensure good coordination between the various actions , both bilateral and Community , aimed at supporting the transformation of Russia .
It contemplates five major areas of cooperation : democratic reforms , economic cooperation , justice , safety and foreign policy .
In this respect , the National Alliance notes with satisfaction the efforts made by Russia with regard to political freedoms , the development of democracy and the protection of human rights .
It is , however , worried about a few uncertainties and a few steps backwards in this area and also hopes for marked , significant and positive developments in this respect .
We should therefore follow developments in this area carefully , helping and supporting them in all ways possible , without forgetting that only a year ago Russia was under the yoke of a communist and totalitarian regime .
We are asking the Russian government to pay greater attention to the control and suppression of local organized crime , which is spreading dangerously to Europe , and to give a strong commitment to environmental protection in order to avert further ecological disasters and repair the damage caused by the previous communist regimes , which were totally insensitive to these problems .
Finally , to ensure lasting peace for Europe and the world , we hope there will be a reinforcement of the political , economic and cultural partnership with Russia , which is undoubtedly a great world power today .
Mr President , allow me to deal particularly with the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement in this debate .
In this agreement , there is already an effective instrument for carrying on a permanent dialogue with our Russian partners about all those questions of a political and economic nature which are central to our mutual relationship .
Let us not forget that it was the parliaments - the European Parliament and the Russian State Duma - which christened the first of the executive bodies of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement , the Parliamentary Cooperation Committee which I chair with my Russian colleague , Mr Ryshkov .
In this capacity I would like to emphasize particularly how profitable the work in this committee was last December .
I can assure you that we address the individual problems in the relationship between the EU and Russia very openly with our Russian colleagues , and that we are frank about the difficulties .
Continuity of contacts and regular mutual visits , which create mutual trust , are particularly important , even if the contacts on the Russian side are continually changing .
I think that it is not too much to say that the form of cooperation which we are developing is a future model for Russian-European cooperation .
In this way , the relationship with our Russian partners can be constructed and can be further extended without discussing Russia 's EU membership .
Neither side needs to discuss that .
In this context , allow me to point out the importance of the TACIS programme .
In her report , Mrs Lalumière calls on the Commission to strengthen support for these projects , and demands that the priorities in TACIS aid for the improvement of daily living conditions should start with setting up the structures necessary for the rule of law .
I would like to underline this very explicitly .
We know that we must improve this TACIS programme , but we also know that preparatory work is essential for our future cooperation between Russia and the European Union .
Mr President , first I would like to congratulate Mrs Lalumière on her brilliance , because she reminded me of a colleague I once had , Mr Vergès , who was one of the best lawyers in the world , and to whom I once said : If I am ever found with a bloody knife next to a corpse , I would certainly take him as my advocate .
Mrs Lalumière , if that happens to me again , I would willingly engage you as my lawyer , because we must remember one thing , which was not mentioned here in the discussion , and my colleague Mr González Carnero has underlined it , that we must let caution rule in our relationship with Russia .
I would like to point out the following above all else here : Russia is today , in an era of worldwide decolonization , the last great colonial empire on earth .
The Chechen war showed that clearly , and there will be more colonial wars .
At any rate , I do not want any of my 18 grandchildren to die in a colonial war for the defence of Russia .
We do not need Russia in the European Union before decolonization has taken place , afterwards yes , but not before .
But I would like to point out the other fact , that Mr Yeltsin 's last press conference has shown us how dangerous it is to leave the keys to nuclear weapons in such hands .
We must all be clear about that , and therefore we must think more about our security .
Obviously we do not want a war or conflict with Russia , but we must see the situation quite clearly .
I therefore have certain reservations about an over-optimistic representation of a situation which must simply be seen as it is .
The danger is still before us .
Mr President , the European Union 's policy on Russia is aimed at strengthening democracy , peace , trade with , and the economic development of , this large and important country of 140 million inhabitants .
If Russia 's development is successful , a natural further step should be that Russia becomes a member of our democratic union , the EU .
On this issue , Mrs Lalumière is left quaking in her boots in her otherwise excellent report .
The EU was founded by six states with around 200 million inhabitants .
We now have 15 countries with 370 million inhabitants .
When we have accepted the 12 new countries which now want to join , we will number almost half a million people .
Surely a Union of that size which is functioning well could also open its doors one day and find room for a successful Russian democracy .
Mr President , Russia 's population is falling and poverty is spreading .
Nuclear waste and environmental pollution are a threat to the whole of Europe .
In the future , the EU will be dependent on Russia for her natural resources , especially gas .
The EU should not be sending any military signals that Russia might interpret as a threat to her national security .
A country like Finland should remain non-aligned , even if the EU were to have a common foreign and defence policy .
Mrs Lalumière 's report brings to mind Karl Marx 's book on the history of nineteenth century diplomacy .
It was never published in the Soviet Union because it brought up the question of Russia 's foothold in both Europe and Asia .
We should not , however , adopt double standards when we look at the Russian issue .
The same criteria should apply in the West to President Yeltsin 's dictatorship or the total indoctrination of the media as if that were what was taking place in our own countries .
The Russian people need money , good health , human rights , a clean environment and hope , just as we all do .
An equal basis for dialogue and cooperation requires the EU to look to Nordic policies .
Mr President , I enthusiastically support Mrs Lalumière 's report and I pay tribute to her ability and perceptiveness .
On many occasions in this House I have had the opportunity of regretting that the European Union has committed itself to opening up to the west , to international high finance from across the Atlantic , and to the south , to an uncontrolled influx of immigrants , whilst I have dreaded the Union shutting itself off from the east , precisely where the European border remains to be drawn , since Russia straddles two continents .
If enlargement of the Union to the central and eastern European countries is to be brought to a successful conclusion , it must not be done to the detriment of our sister countries of the former USSR , in case we merely rebuild a new wall of shame a little further east .
It is probably unrealistic to envisage the accession of Russia to the enlarged European Union .
I have , however , always attempted to put forward the idea of unifying the enlarged European Union with the twelve member countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States in a structure such as a confederation .
They would thus form the two poles of a future binomial partnership which would finally free our people from American protection .
Only as a Europe with a continental dimension can we become winners in a global economic war in which we have already lost too many battles .
Mr President , the report on future relations with Russia is an important one .
I am therefore surprised and find it very regrettable that there are a number of strange deficiencies in the otherwise well thought out proposal .
Let me begin by mentioning paragraph 54 , in which the rapporteur makes it clear that Russia is neither suitable nor desirable as a member of the EU , ' in view of the dimensions of Russia and its Eurasian interests and of the deeply integrated nature of the European Union . '
It is quite inappropriate for the European Parliament to make prejudiced comments on Russia 's possible future membership , not least in view of the fact that Russia has not actually applied for membership .
It would be quite inappropriate to adopt paragraph 54 in its current form .
If such a statement of principle is to be adopted for Russia , it might just as well also be applied to other countries which could think of applying for membership , such as Belarus , Ukraine , Turkey and so on .
Regardless of whether people currently think that Russia should or should not become a member of the EU , such a point of view does not belong in the report .
It must be more in the EU 's interest to establish strong ties with Russia which can develop into a closer cooperation in order to strengthen and guarantee peace and security internationally .
Europe 's partnership for peace should clearly include the area from the Atlantic to the Urals .
The other flaw which I would like to mention is paragraph 46 , in which the rapporteur suggests that it will only be possible to develop security relations with Russia once it has been decided to incorporate the WEU into the EU .
We must bear in mind that , according to the whole Russian establishment , NATO 's enlargement is causing increased security worries for Russia .
The Russian military are now also demanding increased investment in Russian nuclear weapons as a result of NATO enlargement .
It is therefore very important for the EU to help reduce the worries which NATO 's enlargement causes Russia rather than increase them .
Finally , I would just like to criticize the incomprehensible wording of paragraph 1 a , namely that the EU should foster the ' emergence of a middle class to provide a firm base for democracy . '
This wording belongs to 19th century thinking not to that of 1998 .
Mr President , I too would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Lalumière on her difficult report .
Although I have submitted a series of amendments , I know that we fundamentally agree .
A few days ago , the Russian human rights activist and Duma member Kovaliev expressed his concern about the anti-democratic tendencies which still exist in his country .
He is a man who loves his country , and anyone who reads his book ' The Flight of the White Raven ' will see why he was in prison for seven years .
However , I would like to point out something which has hardly been mentioned .
He accuses both the old and the new leading elites of contempt for democracy and law .
These principles are conditions for the creation of a greater Europe , in which peace , freedom , the rule of law and democracy rule .
The European Union must take note of these questions .
It faces great challenges , because these relationships will have far-reaching consequences on the negotiations which have just begun with all countries .
Russia has joined the Council of Europe , to which all the Member States of the European Union belong .
It has thus said " yes ' to the rule of law , democracy and human rights .
It has also said " yes ' to the legal community which has been developing up for decades .
We in the European Parliament will approve the relationship with Russia , we want close cooperation , but we shall also pay close attention to , and when necessary issue a reminder about , the reform process in Russia towards a state which operates under the rule of law , respects human rights and establishes a civil society which acts democratically .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me , in the discussion about this report , to say something about the developments in our cooperation within the delegation or within the joint committee which we have with the Russian State Duma and the Federal Council .
When I consider the development in the last few years , I detect that there has been a basic improvement .
Whereas in the joint sessions in the initial phase after 1994 we very often indulged in reciprocal statements - whereby the Russian side was sometimes quite emphatic in forcing us onto certain subjects , for example NATO membership of some east European states , subjects which really had nothing to do with the bilateral relationship between the European Union and Russia and prevented a rational dialogue - this has essentially changed .
It is now the case that we discuss many subjects of mutual interest and thus achieve agreement on many points , or can at least have an effective exchange of experience .
Take , for instance , the debate about TACIS , about the development of the partnership agreement , about Russian or European internal questions , such as the development of international crime , the rule of law or the tax system in Russia .
I believe that it is the task of the European Union to encourage the development towards a stable democracy in Russia , but to observe and follow it critically .
Russia is not yet a stable democracy , because there is still no stable combination there of the elements necessary for it .
The clashes and movements in internal politics make this clear , as we have seen recently .
Nevertheless I believe that Russia is on the right path , and we as Europeans should accompany her and be vigilant .
Mr President , despite the over-optimistic tone of the report I would like to thank the rapporteur for her work .
The most important problem with the report is the lack of examples .
Mrs Lalumière mentions as one main goal the strengthening of security for Europe and her closest neighbours , based on equal partnership .
What does this actually mean , though ?
The Finnish government aims to put the Union 's Nordic dimension on the agenda during her Presidency in the latter part of 1999 .
The Nordic dimension is a security project , broad in scope , which focuses , for example , on the TACIS programme , on Russia 's commitment to regional cooperation in the areas of environmental concern and nuclear safety , and on the multi-faceted relationship that exists between the Baltic states .
Cooperation with Russia can be a success only by means of a step-by-step policy that addresses one issue at a time .
Russian stability will not be aided by grandiloquent , celebratory eulogies even in this House .
Commissioner , thank you for battling against the noise .
I have to say that it never ceases to amaze or depress me how ignorant this House can be when people are speaking .
It is the same people who session after session stand up and talk about the dignity and importance of this House who treat it like a street market .
It is quite a disgrace .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at voting time .
Madam President , I refer to Article 48 of the Rules of Procedure .
On 9 March we gave the starting signal .
The European Parliament wanted to declare 1999 the European Year against Violence against Women , and to start a European campaign for this .
The initiative from the Committee on Women 's Rights exceeded the required number , 314 , today .
We have 323 votes .
Never have things moved so fast in the history of the European Parliament .
We managed to reach this number in only six and a half days of sittings .
I now ask the Commission and the Council to make preparations as quickly as possible , so that the women 's organizations , churches , associations can start to prepare for this European year .
The women in our countries are waiting for support .
Once again the European Parliament has come forward in the vanguard of women 's rights .
Sincere thanks to all my colleagues , men and women , who have signed the declaration .
But it is still possible to sign !
( Applause )
Like you , I am extremely pleased that this resolution has been so successful .
Madam President , I would also like to congratulate our colleague Mrs Gröner on achieving the 323 signatures .
However , as usual I rise on the voting procedure .
I advise you now that I will be present and voting so you will have no problems .
However , I note that the voting list distributed to Members advises Members when there will be a roll-call vote .
There are ten roll-call votes for this particular session .
Two or three could be added to this making perhaps twelve to thirteen .
Therefore , if I stay for seven roll-call votes , I could then leave having completed the 50 % .
These rules are absurd , the way the Bureau treats them is absurd and the quicker they are removed the better .
There are about fifteen roll-call votes , Mr Falconer . I bring this to your attention for whatever purpose it may serve .
Madam President , on a point of order .
I alerted the services to this point in advance this morning , but it was not taken even though it is relevant under Rule 19 ( 4 ) .
Last month this Parliament passed a resolution in favour of human rights in Nigeria .
In the debate I called for safety for the detained Ogoni human rights activist Batom Mitee , brother of the acting president of their movement .
At the time Batom 's whereabouts were unknown , but a released detainee has confirmed on Tuesday of this week that Batom is held in the Delta Rubber Plantation and , after suffering torture including daily beatings , is in deep fear of his life .
I ask you , Madam President , on behalf of Parliament to write urgently to the Nigerian authorities to press for respect for this Parliament 's will consistent with human rights law and our February 1998 resolution .
Batom Mitee continues to be refused visits from his family or any medical care and yet he is paralysed on his left side , cannot stand or eat unaided and has lived in the same soiled clothing for over three months .
I would be grateful if you could convey to the President that I have discussed this issue with Mrs Kinnock who also wishes to express her concern .
If the President kindly agrees to write the letter as requested , she will present it with her other colleagues at the EU-ACP Assembly due to take place next week .
Thank you for your cooperation .
Thank you , Mr Howitt .
I will , of course , pass on your comments and your wishes to the President .
Madam President , regarding the document for Mrs Schaffner 's report which is only available in French .
Madam President , you promised to come back with information on how we should deal with Mrs Schaffner 's report .
I would like to have that information .
Firstly , we verified the facts .
It is true that the document to which Mrs Schaffner 's report relates exists only in French .
It is indeed a problem .
One possible solution would be to have the debate but not to vote until the report has been translated into all languages .
Mrs Schaffner is showing her approval of this proposal .
Does anyone have any objections to this ?
It appears not .
Thank you , Mrs Lindholm , you have an answer to your question and , as you see , we have done what was necessary .
Mrs Berès , do you have a procedural motion ?
I would like to draw your attention to a letter signed by the Secretary-General , Julian Priestly , which we have received this morning .
According to this letter ...
( Laughter .
Heckling : ' April fool ! ' )
Excuse me , ladies and gentlemen , but procedural motions are an expression of democracy .
You know very well that every Member has a right to express himself or herself , including Mrs Berès .
I am happy to have been a victim of the British sense of humour and I thank the House for its understanding .
Votes
We shall now proceed to the vote .
Proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the noise emission by equipment used outdoors ( COM ( 98 ) 0046 - C4-0122 / 98-98 / 0029 ( COD ) )
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal )
Madam President , today I do not want to ask for signatures against criminality in Brussels , although we have only until Friday to do so , but I would like to propose , in accordance with Article 129 , that the Murphy report should be referred back to the responsible committee , since there are over 100 amendments , which are mainly of a purely technical nature , and to make a SLIM initiative myself .
Two additional directives about measurements , dimensions and technical features of buses are added .
We should therefore agree in a working party on how we intend to proceed with these three directives , in accordance with the rules .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as chairman of the committee responsible , I must first inform you that the committee decided by a small majority to bring the Murphy report in this form to a sitting of the European Parliament .
I therefore do not speak as the committee chairman , but as a member of the Group of the European People 's Party , and as such I support the proposal to refer this report back to the committee .
Why ?
It has been my opinion for many years that we as the European Parliament can in future no longer afford to pass technical legislation by means of hundreds of amendments .
Since Maastricht , we have had co-decision in these matters .
The new directives are no longer directives of the Council alone , but directives of the European Parliament and of the Council .
As Parliament , in the case of this legislation , we can contribute to ensuring that the protection of the health and safety of citizens and of disadvantaged people is taken into account .
That is extremely important .
We have always done it successfully in the past .
But what we need here are not 112 technical amendments , which none of those present understands and about which no-one knows what interests lie behind the individual amendments . We need one amendment which states that buses must be designed which are suitable for the disabled .
The execution of this legislative instruction of the European Parliament is then the responsibility of the technical bodies .
( Applause ) This is called the legislative procedure of reference to technical standards , which I have always supported and which must always be the way in which we operate in future .
For this reason , I personally would be happy if it was possible to discuss it again in the committee , so that we can find a sensible solution in this matter .
I will now make a personal declaration : If this proposal is not referred back to the committee , I shall stay here , but I shall not take part in the vote .
I ask that this should be minuted , because as a parliamentarian I am not prepared to cooperate in this nonsensical kind of legislation .
( Applause )
Madam President , I hope not to take as much time as Mr von Wogau .
I have some sympathy with what he says that we have been dealing with a technical matter here but I would ask the House to consider this .
Are we saying to the citizens of Europe that we are not competent enough to actually legislate on something which will affect people 's lives ?
I put it to you , the committee had every opportunity to debate this report .
They had every opportunity to discuss with me the amendments I was moving .
I accept that there are a lot of amendments but many of these are absolutely necessary .
If it is so technical for members on the other side not to have been able to understand what is going on , why were some 20 amendments actually moved by members from the other side of the House ?
I would argue that they did understand what the issues at stake here were and I would come back to what the Commission said last night .
Commissioner Bangemann , when this point was put to him , said he could see no reason why Parliament should not actually take a position on the report and , indeed , he gave an indication that the Commission was prepared to accept 22 of our amendments .
So I say to Members on the other side of the House , we have had every opportunity to debate this issue , yes it is complicated , yes it is technical , but let us not abrogate our responsibilities .
We have an important job to do here ; let us get on with it .
Mr President , I have just one question for the chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy who was speaking here in person .
There have been three or four debates , and he has had every opportunity to submit an amendment , as just noted .
I would like to know why he did not accept that responsibility .
Madam President , I would like to reply to that personally .
As chairman of the committee , I asked the rapporteur to proceed , as I said , by proposing an amendment about the disabled , but to refer the rest of all of it to the technical bodies .
It was then shown that there were difficulties in doing this .
I therefore proposed setting up a working party to look for a sensible solution .
I proposed this before the vote in the committee .
We then voted on it , but the majority party in this House voted otherwise .
The result was that the Murphy report , which in my opinion was not ready for discussion , came to the House against my will as committee chairman .
I am therefore not now speaking as the committee chairman , but as a member of the Group of the European People 's Party .
That is my answer to what Mr Metten has said .
( Applause and heckling )
Madam President , I particularly want to respond to the comments by Mr von Wogau .
I joined this House in 1989 and under his predecessor , Mr Beumer , we dealt with a mountain of technical legislation which went through this House to complete the internal market and it is a nonsense for the Economic Committee chairman to say that we are not competent to deal with this legislation in this House .
The reason why they do not want this on the floor today is because they voted against the amendments to help the disabled in the design of buses and coaches .
That is why they do not want the legislation on the floor of this House .
I tell you , disabled people around Europe now are watching to see how the Christian Democrats vote on this issue because we have passed amendments in the committee to support the disabled and they want this report off the agenda .
( The matter was referred back to the committee responsible )
The next item is the report ( A4-0110 / 98 ) by Mrs Randzio-Plath , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , on democratic accountability in the third stage of EMU .
Thank you , Mr Berthu , for drawing attention to these linguistic confusions .
I am sure the ensuing debate will clarify any unclear points , and it is therefore my great pleasure to call upon Mrs Randzio-Plath to speak .
President , what matters in the question of democratic accountability is the creation of transparency and credibility .
It is not a question of the control of the future European Central Bank , because the Treaty of Maastricht establishes the independence of the future European Central Bank very clearly .
This European Parliament , in its decisions and reports , has left no doubt that the future European Central Bank , in the conception of independence , is also a constituent part of European monetary union , which will begin on 1 January 1999 .
This leads one to the conclusion that one side of the coin is the independence of the European Central Bank , but that the other side of the coin is transparency of decisions and their context , which find expression in a duty of accountability of the European Central Bank .
Besides , the Treaty of Maastricht and the statute of the European Central Bank already provide for a duty of the future European Central Bank to report .
The place in which this duty to report as an expression of transparency must be fulfilled is Parliament .
This transparency is an obligation in a democratic system for all institutions and establishments , and therefore also for the first supranational , federal European institution , the European Central Bank .
This transparency must be expressed before the only legitimized European body , the European Parliament .
Therefore , what is necessary today is to define in what form this European Parliament wants to see this monetary dialogue with the European Central Bank .
We also make demands on the basis of our experience of the debates with the Boards of Governors of Central Banks , the European Monetary Institute , in the Sub-Committee on Monetary Affairs , and also in the sittings of this Parliament . This experience shows the importance of regular monetary dialogue , which actually concentrates on the monetary subjects which are currently of intense topicality , does so calmly and will continue to do so .
We must also consider the ideas of the Treaty , which says very clearly that the European Central Bank must pursue the aim of price stability and also support the economic policy of the European Union , provided that the aim of price stability is not affected .
It is therefore important that we know all about the definition of price stability , about the decisions and the backgrounds to them , about the monetary aims and how the instruments are used .
That is all part of the dialogue of the European Parliament with the European Central Bank , as is publishing the reports of the European Central Bank .
This publication and this dialogue create transparency , not just in the interests of the European Parliament , the functioning of the democratic system and in the interests of the European population .
No , I believe that this transparency is also in the interests of the European Central Bank itself , which can only gain credibility , acceptance and trust through this transparency of its decisions .
We all know that right now in our Member States important questions are being asked about the start of monetary union .
It will therefore be particularly important that this European Central Bank should gain trust , credibility and acceptance .
It is therefore so important that we as the European Parliament should participate in the nomination procedure .
We are being heard .
I assume , and presumably this is also the view of the European Parliament , that no candidate will become a member of the Executive Board of the future European Central Bank without the approval of the European Parliament , even if this rule has not yet been written into a treaty .
The candidates will surely gain credibility and certainly weight as a result of their competence and by giving evidence of their previous position to the European Parliament .
This new European Central Bank gives us the possibility of entering into a dialogue with its President .
But at the same time , in all Member States , the national parliaments will have to enter into a dialogue with their national central bank presidents .
What matters , therefore , is that use is made of this right , so that Parliament is the place of openness , and above all so that this European Parliament is the place of that European openness , which is still lacking .
That is in the interests of the population , and also of the markets , for as the great economist Schumpeter once said , everything a people wants , does , suffers and is , is reflected in its monetary system .
I hope that the stable community of the European monetary union really will offer possibilities of creating the overall economic conditions within the European Union that enable the euro to contribute to the fight against unemployment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the power to mint or issue a currency is a considerable one , and history shows that those who hold this power have rarely resisted the temptation to abuse it .
People who have been the victims of such abuses of power thus always want to put safeguards in place .
The French , after suffering the " assignat ' bank notes issued during the French Revolution , made such a mythical rush for gold that General de Gaulle himself took out a loan .
The Germans , traumatized by two monetary cataclysms , found maximum protection from the political control they rightly feared through the independence of the Bundesbank , which was imposed on them from outside .
You can understand , then , why governments were keen to ensure sufficient guarantees before renouncing national monetary sovereignty in favour of a common currency .
These they gained beyond all expectations .
The independence of the future Central Bank will be stronger than that of any other similar institution , as I explain in the opinion which is submitted to you .
But independence does not imply irresponsibility .
In a democracy , all holders of power must be answerable to those who gave them that power and in whose name they exercise it , in this case the people of Europe who we here represent .
The Randzio-Plath report , as it has been adopted , finds an acceptable balance between independence and responsibility .
In today 's world , the credibility of the future Central Bank will depend on its accuracy of analysis and its explanation of decisions .
Mr Lamfalussy and Mr Duesenberg were the first to understand this and this is why they have lent themselves so easily to listening to , and dialoguing with Parliament , rightly considering that they would thus acquire greater legitimacy than that conferred on them by the Treaty .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Randzio-Plath on an excellent report and also thank my colleagues in the other political groups for the enormous amount of cooperation we have had in the formulation of this report .
The EMU , as we know , is the most historic development that will take place in the European Union since the creation of the European Economic Community .
Therefore we have to make sure that we do it right .
We have to make sure that it is particularly friendly to the citizens .
I want to say to my German colleagues in particular , who seem to feel that those who want accountability of the Central Bank in some way want to impede its operation , that the citizens in the rest of the European Union do not have the same confidence and warmth for the ECB that you probably have for the Bundesbank . The Bundesbank has been enormously successful .
The European Central Bank is a new institution that has to earn the confidence of the public .
The way to do that is to make sure it is accountable to the only democratically elected body we have among the European Union institutions .
There is nothing incompatible in defending the independence of the bank .
The Socialist Group will defend the independence of that bank wholeheartedly .
But we want to make sure that the currency we are creating is a citizens ' currency ; something that the people in the European Union feel confident with and feel is acting on their behalf .
This is not merely a currency for the large financial institutions and multinationals .
It is for the 370 million people who live in the European Union .
So we need to put in place systems that will guarantee that public confidence .
Those of us who have had the chance to talk privately to Mr Alexandre Lamfalussy and other people who may find themselves on the Executive Board of the European Central Bank have always said that it is essential that the European Central Bank does not simply act as a collection of bookkeepers but that it acts very much as an institution of the European Union acting on behalf of its citizens .
I say to all Members of this House , the Commission and the potential candidates for the ECB : please understand that the success of that bank , operating in Frankfurt , will depend upon its public acceptability and its public accountability .
There is another point which is important from the point of view of accountability : we will have a centralized monetary authority but we will have a decentralized fiscal policy in the European Union .
We have to make sure that when national parliaments are setting their national budgets there is a feeling that there is a democratic body at a European level overseeing the monetary policy that is being set in the name of the citizens of the European Union , on behalf of the whole European Union .
We have to make sure that there is a link between the work of national parliaments and the European Parliament in ensuring that we have the democratic accountability of our Central Bank .
If we fail in this project then I think it will impede any further development we want to see in the future of the EU .
Mr President , after some irritation over treaty changes , a vote of no confidence and so on , the RandzioPlath report is now before us in a version on which we can agree to a large extent .
The European Parliament today shows by a convincing majority - at least in the vote - that it is conscious of its great responsibility for the independence of the Central Bank and for the lasting stability of the euro .
The Christian Democrats have one signal to give today . It is that we want a European currency which contributes , within Europe and globally , to ensuring that the citizens can rely on having long term political and economic stability .
But such a signal must also be demanded from the Heads of States and Governments .
Their task now is to appoint the President of the Central Bank as soon as possible .
Trust in the euro and European monetary union depends on the time and progress of this decision .
But - and I must say this openly - anyone today who , like the SPD candidate for chancellor , Gerhard Schröder , calls the euro a deformed premature birth , disqualifies himself as an interlocutor to be taken seriously .
How will such a man carry through a long term European policy , if he gives way to moods and vague fears and , against his better judgement , deliberately denigrates the greatest project of the post-war period ?
I appeal here to the Social Democrats in this House : put a bit more mental effort into finally teaching your own candidate for chancellor the ABC of European politics .
Mr Schröder may manage to buy a steelworks at the taxpayers ' expense and to sit on the Volkswagen Supervisory Board , but he is not up to forming a strategic monetary policy or to buying Rolls-Royce .
That needs political heavyweights like Kohl , Waiger and Stoiber , and not SPD lightweights like Schröder and Lafontaine .
If the Socialists in this House do not manage to help their candidate for chancellor back onto his feet in terms of European politics , they remain paper tigers , and the man from Hannover will bring them yet more horror stories about Europe .
We , the European Christian Democrats , want to make our contribution to making the euro into the most important and most stable currency in the world , next to the dollar .
We owe that to our citizens !
Mr President , as rapporteur I would like to ask that the election campaign in certain Member States should remain outside the House at a time of such an important decision for the future of European democracy and for the historical project of monetary union .
I am outraged that this historical hour is being used in this way , that we are squandering this time , which has been provided for the important democratic debate that should really do honour to this European Parliament .
Mr President , I ask you to ensure that it does .
I can assure you , Mrs Randzio-Plath , that this was not an item on the agenda .
Mr President , with regard to electoral campaigns , in France we have already given an opinion and I would prefer that we keep to the subject in hand .
This Parliament , which represents the citizens of the Union , will naturally have a role to play within the framework of the third phase of Economic and Monetary Union , which will necessarily lead to greater powers for certain institutions .
Clearly , the independence of the European Central Bank will be greater than that of any other national central bank and whilst we can imagine enforcing democratic control of the ECB at European level , I am not at all certain that the Bank will be able to draw its legitimacy from a control which is too nit-picking .
This legitimacy will come rather from its success in managing the European Union 's monetary policy .
Amongst the interesting proposals in this report , I would like to mention the one inviting the President of the ECB to participate in a general debate regarding economic and monetary developments , along with the relevant Commissioner and the President of the Ecofin Council . This would be on the basis of an annual report from the ECB and the annual economic report drawn up by the Commission , which requests the ECB to give an explanation of decisions previously taken on monetary policy and requests a description of the way in which monetary policy will support the economic policies of the Union .
I would merely like to remind you that some of the initial proposals of the rapporteur were not acceptable , nor were they in accordance with the measures of the Treaty .
For example , the idea of requesting the ECB to publish a summary of the discussions of the Executive Board , which was in direct contradiction with paragraph 4 of Article 10 of the ESCB statutes , which anticipated that these meetings should be confidential , with the board deciding whether or not to make their deliberations public .
It was the same for the idea of giving the European Parliament the right of censure and of joint nomination of the Executive Board , which assumed a revision of the Treaty , in particular paragraph 4 of Article 109 .
On 18 March , the initial report was substantially modified in committee and our group is extremely pleased with this .
All of these modifications are good in that they have enabled the report to be more lucidly refocussed .
Thus modified , Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report is acceptable to us .
Mr President , I think it is plainly dangerous that the world 's most independent bank , the European Central Bank , is going to become a sort of ivory tower in Frankfurt .
The danger is that the bank and its directors will withdraw from normal society and that exaggerated price stability will , in the end , pose a threat to peace within EU society .
This must be prevented by the board of the ECB becoming involved in institutional dialogue with the other political bodies .
The decisions the board takes must always be transparent .
They must be stated publicly , and I am totally convinced that public opinion will still accept that the European Parliament has a key role to play in this matter , and in the monitoring of democracy .
Obviously it is not a question of the ECB receiving binding instructions from political bodies .
Rapidly dwindling capital resources simply will not sustain this sort of old-fashioned policy .
But it is quite clear that the European Parliament should propose bold amendments to the Treaty of Rome .
Now , unfortunately , Christa Randzio-Plath 's splendid report has little left in it of this courage , and little left of the proposals she originally made .
The Green Group supports the idea that the ECB board should be appointed by the same process as exists with the European Commission , a body to which Parliament has an important role in appointing members .
I think it is essential that everyone should be in a position to remind the Central Bank 's Executive Board of its mortality .
This could come about in such a way that Parliament , say by a given majority , could make recommendations to the Ecofin Council in extreme cases concerning the dismissal of even the President of the Bank .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European Radical Alliance fully supports the Randzio-Plath report .
I consider it an excellent text which attempts to show what dialogue there could be between the Central Bank , which in fact will be the most independent in the world , and other institutions , especially Parliament .
I would ask Mrs Randzio-Plath to be so good as to take on board the amendments we have presented , which move in the same direction as the report , whilst trying to strengthen it somewhat in order to encourage even greater dialogue .
We must strengthen the possibility of the European Parliament becoming the place of dialogue with the ECB , the place for transparent and regular exchanges - at closer intervals , in my opinion - the place where the President can express himself and where , on behalf of our people , we can question him without challenging its independence .
I think such dialogue would be extremely important to show public opinion that we are not creating an ivory tower but a body required to account for its actions before an institution such as the European Parliament .
The proposal that I have made on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance suggests a monthly meeting for contact and dialogue with the future President .
I leave this on the table for your consideration .
I think this could strengthen dialogue , not only in spirit .
I understand the President of the Federal Reserve appears before the American Congress every fortnight .
Our other proposal is for the President designate , who will be in regular contact with Parliament , to give an opinion on the resolution that we are going to adopt tomorrow , on the basis of this report .
These are the two proposals that I would like you to consider , and I hope that you will vote in favour of them tomorrow .
Mr President , scarcely a month before the choice of countries to be irreversibly , according to the expression drummed endlessly into us by Commissioner de Silguy , blended together in European Monetary Union , Parliament has finally become concerned with the essential question of its democratic accountability .
Many good people , amongst them federalists , some within this Parliament , are beginning to show serious concerns about this dangerous flaw in the European institutional system .
But raising the problem of this democratic shortcoming is not enough , we must also look for possible remedies .
This is what the Herman report , in particular , tried to do , by not evading the " taboo ' issues such as lack of a political mechanism to warn us of any abuse of monetary power on the part of the ECB which might be to the detriment of the general interest , or the risk of seeing day to day decisions on the external value of the euro being taken by the ECB and not the Ecofin Council , contrary to the measures of the Treaty .
It would have been preferable to agree to put the Herman report back on the agenda for this part-session , as my colleagues Mr Berthu and Mr van Dam proposed on behalf of the Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations , in order to give the debate its true dimensions .
This was not done . The Randzio-Plath report is therefore the only one on the table today .
It limits itself to a number of pertinent comments , it recognizes that the ECB will become the first supranational monetary authority in history and will thus consequently hold unprecedented power , far greater than that of the German Bundesbank or the American Federal Reserve and that , for the first time , an area in which federal political decisions are taken within the European Union will emerge .
But whilst the report admits that this unprecedented independence calls for a similarly high level of democratic accountability , no concrete proposal is made as to how this might be achieved .
The report makes no mention of the essential role that national parliaments have to play in this control .
It contents itself essentially with reminding us of a few powers of consultation that are reserved for the European Parliament , which seem really quite derisory in the face of the central question raised by Mr Herman : to whom are these holders of quasi-absolute power going to be answerable ?
Mr President , under such conditions we cannot support this report and we fear that the birth of the first truly supranational institution of the European Union may be synonymous with a decline in democracy .
Mr President , the problem we are dealing with today is both a theological and a teleological one , that is , a question of purpose .
Theological because it is a question of belief , of dogma .
The independence of central banks should be a factor of efficiency .
The Bank of England was the model for the dependent bank , along with the Bank of Japan , and everyone knows that these two countries were inefficient .
Economic literature does not enable this problem to be solved .
For example , France during the 90s did not have any inflation , but their central bank was nevertheless dependent .
If we look at German history we can see there is a German desire to resolve their neuroses : Weimar , independence .
People say that the Germans have been very prosperous and they have had an independent central bank .
But the Germans are also blonde , yet is this a factor in their prosperity ?
In this case , let 's dye all the Spaniards ' hair blonde and there will no longer be an economic problem in Spain .
Must all Europeans give up sugar just because its German grandmother is diabetic ?
Perhaps the German situation is explained by the fact that they have not been involved in wars in Indochina , or in Algeria ?
Germany lost the Second World War and has put its efforts into household electronics instead of military electronics .
Is this factor not important ?
There are no choices but ideological ones , of the same type as that of Vincent Auriol , " I 'll close the banks and lock up all the bankers ' .
We have come a long way since then .
It is revealing that Mrs Randzio-Plath has talked constantly of the ECB , rather like we talk about BSE .
First the mad cow , now the mad single currency !
There is a teleological question . What is the purpose ?
Why have a monetary Europe ?
Why have an independent central bank ?
For monetary stability ?
Is our aim in life , man 's destiny , the independence of the Central Bank ?
The mystery of life on earth , the single currency , are they monetary stability ?
I believed that Europe was the little Eurasian continent , a model of democracy .
Mr President , when a governing body receives orders from no-one and is made up of a very small number of people , what is it called ?
Government by a few is known as an oligarchy , and there stands the tragedy of the European continent , the model of democracy , which ends up with a monetary oligarchy , or at least , a Prussian one .
Mr President , in her report Mrs Randzio-Plath rightly quoted Joseph Schumpeter 's comments in which he said that the state of a nation 's monetary system reflected all aspects of the nation 's intentions , actions , vicissitudes and , indeed , its very essence .
There is therefore nothing more important than democratic accountability of monetary policy .
It has to be noted that within our institutional framework - which has been ratified by our people , our parliaments and our authorities - the current Treaty gives the European Central Bank power and independence without democratic accountability .
Within this overall unsatisfactory framework , the quality of Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report is that it attempts to see how Parliament may make its voice heard better and how we could use the measures within the Treaty to go as far as possible , not in the sense of controlling the Central Bank , for there will be no control given that there are no sanctions , but in the sense of a dialogue with Parliament and a capacity for transparency .
I thus approve of the proposals which have been made .
It is in this context , above and beyond Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report , that it is important for the House to encourage some readjustments in how democracy functions in Europe .
I believe that a Central Bank - if it were independent - would need checks and balances in a number of areas .
It is not normal that it takes its independence from a treaty alone .
As Mrs Randzio-Plath said in her report , whether it be the American Federal Reserve or the German Bundesbank , central banks are usually controlled by parliaments because their jurisdiction is set by legislative acts which can at any given time be amended or changed .
This is unfortunately not the case with the European Central Bank .
It would be appropriate , in the future , to provide national parliaments , and above all the European Parliament , with the means to have an influence in this direction .
Secondly , it is important to highlight the fact that the Ecofin Council now finds itself in a position where it has the capacity to intervene with regard to the exchange rates of currencies such as the dollar or the yen , but with limited powers .
I have one small regret with regard to Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report .
It is that , when she rightly explains that the concept of monetary stability is a concept which must be tailored to the circumstances of the situation , she gives the Central Bank , rather than the Ecofin Council , the role of fixing the criteria for stability , which could have moved the balance back a little bit in the other direction .
But more fundamentally , Europe needs an economic government. a political government which , a little like the case of the German government in relation to the independent central German bank today , is in a position to make other reasoning , apart from the logic of monetary stability alone , prevail .
I am talking about employment , prosperity and social justice and it is not satisfactory to see the Euro Council be no more than a vague instrument of consultation .
I will finish by saying that my great regret is that Amsterdam has not enabled this institutional readjustment .
Failing this at Amsterdam , let us move quickly on to a new stage , which is essential and which Parliament desires since it wants major reforms to have taken place before enlargement .
Mr President , should the Central Bank be accountable to this Parliament ?
The answer is " yes ' .
Should the bank be corrected by this Parliament ?
The answer is certainly not .
I come from the Dutch tradition of an independent central bank .
Dutch politicians , and certainly the Dutch parliament , have , as far as I know , never formally tried to exert influence over the bank .
The European people , and this is my firm conviction , have nothing to gain from political influence over monetary policy .
Economic research has shown that independent central banks are more successful in achieving lower inflation rates than banks which are guided by politicians .
Politicians are reelected every four or five years .
This entails , by definition , a markedly short term vision .
Public confidence and faith on the part of the markets is crucial to the EMU .
That is why it must be guarded with a long term perspective in mind .
That is why the President of the ECB will be appointed for a term of eight years .
As he cannot be reappointed , he does not have to please anyone .
One of the bank 's central tasks is to achieve price stability and he therefore forms an element of continuity and stability within European monetary policy .
Of course the ECB should not operate from an ivory tower .
Mr Donnelly , I would like to say to you , being independent and having a central position in society does not have to be a contradiction in terms .
That is why a provision has been made for intensive debates between the President , the Executive Board and this Parliament on the annual report or the quarterly reports .
The presidents of the national banks will also start a dialogue with their parliaments .
Finally , the bank will not receive political instructions , but neither will it be blind or deaf to the needs of European society , because it will be in touch with all the important forces in society .
If this is its position , its monetary policy will be supported .
Mr President , as the structures of the single currency are put in place , fundamental questions are coming to light .
Some of them cannot be satisfactorily answered without rethinking some of the measures anticipated by the current treaties .
Today 's debate on democratic accountability of the ECB is a significant example of this .
The resolution shows that the objective of European economic and monetary policy must be to assure a high level of growth and employment .
Indeed , this is common sense .
It also notes that in a democracy , there must also be control of the ECB 's monetary policy .
This seems unquestionable .
However the statutes provided for the ECB by the current treaties do not move in this direction at all .
On the one hand , its level of independence - unsurpassed in the world - is so far removed from the citizens and their elected representatives that any effective control of its activities would seem to be illusory .
On the other hand , the mission conferred on it by the treaties is to ensure , not a high level of employment but price stability , which is totally different .
As the reports on convergence from the Commission , the European Monetary Institute and the Bundesbank have reminded us , this stability will be obtained by keeping salaries in check and lowering the overall cost of labour .
From within this concept then , the ECB is more ultra-liberal than the United States Federal Reserve itself , which officially has the main objective of high employment .
If one day we should criticize the President of the ECB for being overly concerned with a strong euro and ignoring all social considerations , he will merely reply that he is only doing his job .
This is why I think that if you truly want a monetary institution that does not ration , but relaunches the necessary finances for employment and growth , and one which the citizens ' representatives can effectively monitor in this objective , we cannot economize on the reorientation of the construction of Europe .
By chance , the very day that we are debating this question an official report has sent out a warning regarding the levels of poverty and insecurity in France .
It is the same throughout Europe .
Faced with these issues , which touch on the very core of values essential to our society , we cannot let the financial markets make the rules , nor be satisfied with potential control over an all powerful ECB .
European construction has greater ambitions !
Mr President , the establishment of a European central banking system is drawing near , planned for the first half of 1998 , following the decision to participate in the third stage of EMU .
The European Central Bank will have the fullest legal status and , as soon as it is set up , will take over the residual duties of the European Monetary Institute .
As specified by the rapporteur , the European Central Bank will have the specific task of controlling price stability , which is achieved specifically by means of a cautious and impartial monetary policy , and by conducting exchange transactions , managing the foreign currency reserves of Member States , promoting the operation of payment systems and , finally , authorizing the issue of bank notes and coins .
Price stability throughout Europe and the independence of the European Central Bank will give rise to trust on the markets and , consequently , we should achieve a fall in interest rates , particularly in the long term .
This will be extremely favourable to small and medium-sized enterprises , which represent the highest percentage of European businesses , particularly in the economically weaker areas .
However , I share the rapporteur 's concerns when she notes that , as established in the Treaty , in exercising its powers and performing its tasks and duties , the European Central Bank is totally independent , which means that none of its bodies can accept or request instructions or orders from any government or other organization .
As laid down by Article 7 of its statutes , it is certainly the most independent central bank in the world .
The sovereignty it will hold should , however , ensure an impartial monetary policy for all the Member States , thereby ruling out the risk that , lacking any democratic control , the European Central Bank is free to interfere at will in any questions dealing with the monetary policy of Member States .
I therefore believe it absolutely essential that , in view of the necessary operational independence of the European Central Bank , appropriate mechanisms are provided for consultation with the European Parliament , which is a democratically elected body .
Mr President , the European Central Bank , which will be set up in three months time , will be more independent than any existing bank in the world .
It would be a misconception to think that it does not have to take any notice of anybody .
It will not be operating in a vacuum , and it will have to acquire credibility and authority .
The ECB will find this easiest if it is able to show results , but this will take some time .
Moreover , although the ECB will be born in an era of historically low inflation , no one knows how the monetary instruments which have proved their usefulness on a national level will work on a European level .
During its initial phase , ECB policy will have to be characterized by a cautious , searching approach .
It will be extremely difficult to acquire public credibility through such an approach .
It can only be achieved in one way , namely by reporting back continuously and by explaining what the ECB does , and why .
This is the paradox of the ECB ; it will be the largest independent bank in the world , but it has the most to gain from transparency and accountability .
This is where the interests of the ECB and the European Parliament meet , because the European Parliament is the only public forum the ECB has the duty to report to , as laid down in the Treaty .
We therefore think it would be useful to reach agreement with the ECB on how , in the interests of both , this transparency and accountability can be effected in as meaningful a way as possible .
It will require regular verbal or written reports about such issues as which monetary objectives are set and why , the degree to which objectives are implemented and the reason for any possible divergence and the effects of monetary policy on the economy and employment .
The willingness of the ECB to be as transparent as possible and to be accountable in a meaningful way will be particularly crucial during the initial phase .
Without this , it might seem that the ECB is making a false start and is unsuccessful in building up credibility and authority .
That is why Parliament will have to ensure that belief in the principles of democracy and a willingness to be accountable are significant factors in the choice of prospective board members .
We will not only ask those who may not win the confidence of a majority in this Parliament to withdraw their candidature , but we will also call on Member States ' governments not to appoint any candidates who cannot rely on the support of this Parliament .
In view of the ECB 's extreme degree of independence , the democratic attitude of individual candidates most definitely matters , and this includes candidates for all posts .
That is why the candidate hearings next month will not be a mere formality .
If the ECB is to be imbued with the principles of democracy , it should be done now .
That is what is at stake at the moment .
Mr President , the establishment of the single currency is an unprecedented historical phenomenon .
For the first time in the world 's history , independent states and democratic societies have decided to give up a significant part of their national independence - their currency - to a common instrument , to be managed for the benefit of all .
I therefore think the debates now taking place about transparency , about the " absolute management ' method , or the fears being expressed about whether the European Central Bank will act imperiously or in ways that do not benefit the societies it represents , are rather unnecessary .
In democratic societies such as ours , public opinion and the democratic process are facts of life . Since central banks everywhere , and especially the European Central Bank , are supposed to be working for the good of all Europe 's peoples - and that is the reason why they exist , otherwise they would not - , public opinion will compel them both to operate transparently and to deal with the issues for which they are responsible in the best possible way .
I therefore think that the debates from time to time about lack of transparency , and the concerns expressed by one side or the other , are unnecessary and should cease as soon as possible , since the other extreme , that of complete openness , would make it impossible for the Central Bank to do its work .
Mrs Randzio-Plath 's very good report , as it has developed , proposes precisely a balance between those two factors and , I think , expresses a very correct opinion . I hope Parliament will adopt it in a way that protects the interests of Europe 's peoples while at the same time enabling the new system to operate as effectively as possible .
Mr President , the full independence of the European Central Bank is quite rightly anchored in the Treaty .
The highest aim of its monetary policy is to ensure price stability .
The decision on how far the European Central Bank supports the general economic policy of the Community thus depends on its assessment of a possible effect on the aim of price stability .
Price stability at any price , even at the price of increasing unemployment !
That is , to come to the point , the public discourse , which in the end means one thing : monetary policy is not neutral .
That is why it is necessary to involve the European Central Bank in a dialogue about politics .
I do not believe that the independence of the European Central Bank on the one hand and the required democratic transparency on the other must necessarily be in contradiction to each other .
But I am certain that monetary union needs the acceptance of citizens to be successful .
This , however , can only be achieved by the transparency of the decisions of the European Central Bank and by their democratic legitimization .
Mr President , Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report addresses one of the most important questions facing us as we wait at the door to monetary union , the very central pillar of which will be the independence of the European Central Bank , in the terms laid down by the Treaty and the bank 's statutes .
That the issuing institute should be independent is no mere dogma or axiom of economic science , or the result of abstract reasoning . Instead , it is a working method vouched for mainly by historical experience .
On both sides of the Atlantic , in the two best known examples , experience has shown the practical advantages of an independent monetary authority for guaranteeing price stability .
Well , as has been said here this afternoon , independence certainly does not mean irresponsibility .
In a democracy , every power - and the European Central Bank will be a power - even if it is independent of political power , as is the case with the European Central Bank or , in another area , the judiciary , should be able to explain to the citizens and public opinion the reasons underlying its actions and its choice of objectives , and why it chose the methods it adopted in order to achieve those objectives and goals .
All of that should be true both a priori and a posteriori .
For democratic control demands , firstly , dialogue with the parliamentary institution - with this Parliament and the national parliaments - and also transparency of information .
In both those respects , the Randzio-Plath report is realistic and balanced .
I conclude , Mr President , by saying that we have to realize that in setting out along this road , Parliament must show that it is up to its new role as the European Central Bank 's main partner for dialogue .
At the same time , it must also be stressed that along that road we should not rule out the possibility of eventual reforms , even of the Treaty itself - as has been called for here this afternoon - in order to give greater depth to that same democratic control of the European Central Bank .
Mr President , as has been clearly stated , the independence of the European Central Bank is a valuable asset and is therefore beyond discussion .
In a federal system , it provides a fundamental guarantee for the participating states and also gives credibility and authority to the Bank on the financial markets .
Accountability , which we have been talking about this afternoon , is not only a democratic requirement but also an essential requirement for maintaining the authority and credibility of the Bank .
Firstly , therefore , it is in the interests of the ECB itself to adopt adequate methods of referral to public opinion , obviously taking into account the enormous difference between explanations given prior to action programmes , which can only be expressed in general terms , and statements after implementation on the lines followed , which should be more analytical .
In my opinion , therefore , it is not a question of laying down rules , but rather of encouraging behaviour towards the European Parliament , a behaviour that can establish a climate of trust through transparency and availability to explain and discuss its actions , which , in the context of our debate , we are calling accountability , and which is in the interests of the authority and credibility of the European Central Bank .
Mr President , unlike all the other people who have spoken in this debate , I come from a country where , prior to the euro , there has never been a political debate on currency .
Luxembourg , united with Belgium in monetary union since 1922 , has never truly had the right of speech within this union .
Economic and Monetary Union will give us that right .
With monetary union , the citizens of my country are discovering the importance of everything surrounding the issue of currency .
This is why the purpose of dialogue between the European Parliament and the Central Bank is to raise awareness amongst the general public of the importance of monetary policy within social and economic policy in general .
The ECB 's objective has been stated as price stability .
What will the consequences of this be on the Member States ' policies ?
Let me give you an example .
In Luxembourg , incomes are largely indexed to price levels .
It is an important factor in my country 's policy of redistribution of income and social policy in general .
If , for example , the ECB were to give an opinion on this , it needs to be possible to discuss this question publicly , along with the choices .
I therefore think that public support for the ECB 's monetary policy is essential for the birth of the new currency . The Bank 's public presentation of its choices and interventions will also be essential .
I would like to finish , Mr President , by congratulating Mrs Randzio-Plath on her report and above all on the work which she has achieved over the last few years , as chair of the Sub-Committee on Monetary Affairs , in putting monetary union in place and getting it onto the European Parliament 's agenda .
Given the weight of the future European Central Bank , I think that the European Parliament should seriously consider creating a Monetary Committee , within the framework of which , dialogue with the Central Bank could be developed .
Mr President , all the speakers have said we are facing the most historic event since the signing of the Treaty of Rome .
That is true , and this Parliament - which has always been the driving force behind European integration - should do everything that can and must be done to ensure the euro is a success .
And in order for the euro to be a success , we are all agreed that we need to guarantee price stability .
I am not going to question that , but I am glad that Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report also talks of other objectives , particularly that of job-creation .
We are also agreed that monetary policy should be designed and implemented by a European Central Bank which is independent .
I will not question that either , but I am also glad that the Randzio-Plath report talks about the need to coordinate monetary policy with the rest of our policies , in order to achieve the European Union 's great objectives .
I think the institutional agreement suggested by Mr Herman is a clever idea , and I think it represents a first step which we will probably have to evaluate in the future , revising the Treaties if need be .
As noted in the report , the economic government of Europe constitutes a necessary counterweight .
To conclude , I think it is important that the European Central Bank should not just be a bubble in the air , a sort of aristocratic Neoplatonism , and the European Parliament should play its part here .
Mr President , in a few weeks ' time the European Union will be choosing the governor of the European Central Bank and Britain 's future bank manager .
Make no mistake about it , the setting of interest rates by the ECB governor and his or her board of five governors will profoundly affect the United Kingdom 's interest rates , inflation levels and the strength of the pound sterling .
So we parliamentarians had better get it right when we help to confirm the choice of Europe 's bank boss , especially when we hold the unique inquisitorial hearings in Parliament in Brussels in May .
To scrutinize the candidates for the ECB is in no way to challenge the independence of the ECB .
Indeed its independence , guaranteed by the Maastricht Treaty , is even more sharply defined and delineated than that of the Bundesbank , its original model .
But Europe and its peoples do demand that we subject the ECB to legitimate , democratic accountability , that we verify that what is done in the name of the independent bank , is done for the people , of the people and is by the people ; that the central objective of price stability leads to the palace of prosperity and jobs , not to the den of deflation and recession .
Such accountability is merited , not only to satisfy Europe 's democratic needs , but also and more importantly to shore up the credentials of the bank itself .
This point was itself made to me by candidate Duisenberg last week in the European Parliament 's monetary sub-committee and this committee , too , must adopt and adapt .
Its fledgling role as banking committee for the citizens of Europe must be developed and essentially the ECB governor should present not only the bank 's annual report but also offer regular , possibly quarterly , explanations of its interest rate decisions , and the minutes themselves should be published in summary form showing the decisions made plus explanatory commentary .
Only in this way will the European Parliament perform its task of independent custodian of the independent bank as set out in the exemplary and pioneering report so finely chased and chiselled by my colleague Mrs Christa Randzio-Plath .
Mr President , when the European Central Bank begins operations , it will have immense economic power .
Seriously , it will take decisions on all economic policy , because , for example , the hands of financial policy will be bound by convergence criteria .
European trade-cycles will in the long run depend on the ECB Board being able to take the right decisions and avoid making mistakes during its eight-year term of office .
Whether or not we find an Executive Board for the bank made up of six men and women with practically supernatural abilities is the old sixty four thousand dollar question .
Independence is a proper issue , but we also need to have Parliamentary dialogue .
Unopposed power easily leads to its misinterpretation and abuse .
The Board must work in close cooperation with the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
It must also be able to resolve problems in monetary policy , and growth and employment policy .
A very orthodox monetary policy might very well lead to stagnation .
Ladies and gentlemen , the euro has to create stability for Member States .
The euro should become the third international reserve currency alongside the dollar and the yen .
How well this is to succeed depends on the efforts of the ECB 's directors .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the reports by the Commission and the European Monetary Institute have brought us into the finishing straight for the single currency 's establishment , an historical event for the building of a single Europe .
For the single currency 's management , Europe is at last getting a Central Bank equal to the task , a bank that will exercise Europe 's monetary policy in a unified way that takes into account the needs and interests of all the single currency Member States and , I hope , those of the countries which are not yet members of the single currency but aspire to become so soon .
It would be a mistake to think that there has never before been a single currency policy in Europe .
Such policies have existed from time to time , but not with a spirit of cooperation .
They were implemented under a spirit of imposition by one or another powerful central bank in Europe , or even by a powerful bank outside Europe .
That will not happen in the future .
But to be able to implement its monetary policy in a fair and balanced way , the European Central Bank must be sure of its independence .
That independence is not threatened , but safeguarded by the provisions for democratic accountability advocated by Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report .
Responsible information of Parliament will consolidate the bank 's authority among Europe 's peoples , and will enable it to do its work guided only by the general interest and without being influenced by the interests of special groups .
In the process of democratic accountability advocated by the report we are debating , Parliament will be able to point to the general interest , according to circumstances , and so create a climate which provides a framework for the Central Bank to fulfil its duties in the best possible way .
Mr President , although from my point of view there is no question of challenging the ECB 's independence , the problem of knowing how to control those who implement monetary policy , their power to do both good and evil - in the field of economics , of course , because it is not a question of preaching morality - is the decisive factor .
It is clear that democracy demands that those in charge of monetary policy should not be allowed to operate without ever having to justify their actions .
It is appropriate that these people should account for their policies and that such policies should be widely discussed , particularly within Parliament as this is the only elected body at European level .
Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report more or less respects the balance between independence and democratic accountability extremely well .
The Group of the European People 's Party , myself included , are generally in favour .
Nevertheless , I would like to raise one doubt .
It is with regard to Article 3 which points out that monetary policy has an influence on growth and employment .
I do not question this position , but I think it lacks precision .
Certainly , currency influences growth and employment , but it is a temporary and not a long term influence .
To believe that currency has a long term influence on growth and employment , as was the case in the preliminary report , has devastating consequences for monetary policy .
If this were so , there would be no reason to follow a monetary policy of price stability .
On the contrary , it would be necessary to apply a permanent policy of reflation .
It would only be a question of the President of the Central Bank getting into his helicopter - for I am sure he will have one - and throwing tonnes of 500 euro notes down on the heads of the astonished but delighted populations of Europe .
It is in order to avoid this sort of misunderstanding that I thought it necessary to clarify this point , for it must not be misunderstood by the Commission , the Council or public opinion .
Mr President , this report is fundamental to the future of the European Parliament .
The European Central Bank is totally independent , and that is how we perceive it .
However , the legitimacy of its operations and the possibility of monitoring it in a democratic manner are matters that have been widely discussed in all countries .
In Portugal , one of the most controversial and widely discussed subjects is the European Central Bank 's lack of democratic accountability .
The European Parliament , which will examine the candidates to the board of the European Central Bank , is entitled to hear the President and respective board regularly .
In our view , in the European Parliament , when we vote for and approve the Executive Board of the European Central Bank , they assume the responsibility of any elected individual to render accounts .
While the European Parliament will not intervene in the European Central Bank 's decisions , the Bank itself has everything to gain from explaining its decisions in a regular and systematic manner to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and the Sub-Committee on Monetary Affairs in the manner previously practised by the heads of the European Monetary Institute .
In Portugal , we have a saying that " if you owe nothing you have nothing to fear ' . Therefore , let the European Bank come regularly to the European Parliament to discuss its decisions with us .
European citizens will then know that the European Central Bank will hear and render accounts to those who legitimately represent them in Europe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the debate until now has shown that in this House there is a very broad majority for the independence of the European Central Bank .
But on the other hand , something else is clear : this European Central Bank must not live in an ivory tower because the decisions which are made there will have an direct effect on the lives of many people in the European Union .
In future anyone who wants to build a house , take out credit or buy a car on credit will be directly affected by a decision of the European Central Bank .
Therefore , the President of the European Central Bank must justify his actions , be accountable , explain to people why he has made certain decisions in favour of monetary stability , and he must be involved in a dialogue .
But we now have the problem that there is not yet a European public in the same way as there is a German , a French , an Italian and a British public .
Consequently , the European Parliament is the place in which this discussion with our people must first be concentrated .
For this reason , we demand a constructive dialogue with the President of the European Central Bank . This dialogue must take place firstly here within the European Parliament , when he presents his report once a year and explains how he intends to form the policy of the European Central Bank in future , and secondly in the standing committee , in individual discussions with the Central Bank President , in which there must be no technical talk .
We need a broad dialogue with the Central Bank President , not just about the specialist questions of monetary policy , but also about economic policy , tax policy in the European Union , about budget policy , competition policy , to the extent that these policies have an effect of the stability of the currency .
What we want is a broad dialogue .
The real challenge which faces us is that of carrying on this dialogue firstly with the Central Bank President , but secondly with the European Commission , as we already do , and with the Council Presidency and the finance ministers of the Member States , who have become accustomed to reporting at regular intervals to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy about their stability programmes .
The real challenge which faces us is the necessity , now that we have a common European monetary policy , of also formulating a common European economic policy .
The President of the ECB needs a strong partner when he makes his decisions .
Who should this partner be ?
I do not believe in the idea of a European economic government , because we have European institutions .
We have the European Commission , which must be an important interlocutor .
We have the European Council , the Heads of States and Governments , who come together twice a year and can provide guidelines for economic policy .
The European Council is without doubt the strongest institution of the European Union .
We have the Ecofin Council , and we have the European Parliament , where this debate must be focused , and where the reasons for certain decisions at European level must be explained to the people .
I believe that it is important , when we discuss today Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report , which I approve in its present form , that we are clear that it is not just a question of the monetary policy of the European Union or the control of the European Central Bank , as some people say , but a question of a broad dialogue about the future monetary and economic policy of the European Union .
Thank you , Commissioner .
It is a great pity that the many speakers who have left the House did not hear your excellent answers .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Results of the European Conference in London
The next item is the statement by the Council on the results of the European Conference in London .
It is my great pleasure to welcome Mr Henderson , who will present the statement on behalf of the Council .
Mr President , progress on European enlargement has been one of the key priorities of the Presidency .
We are determined that the European Union should seize this historic opportunity to banish for ever the divisions that have sadly scarred our continent for too many years .
That is why I am pleased to confirm that the remit of the Luxembourg European Council on enlargement has been successfully completed .
We opened the European Conference on 12 March .
We secured European Union approval of the terms of the accession partnerships .
We successfully launched the accession process on 30 March and we launched accession negotiations with the Six on 31 March .
Each of these points represents a vital element in our efforts to secure successful enlargement .
I would like to deal with them one by one .
Firstly , the European Conference .
The first meeting of the Conference on 12 March was a historic gathering .
It was a clear demonstration that all participants are part of the European family .
The day was full of symbolism .
We welcomed the important contribution of President Gil-Robles on that day .
12 March showed how conference can add value .
The 26 countries agreed the chairman 's conclusions establishing the broad framework of the Conference .
The Conference will allow the participants to consider issues of common concern and to make their cooperation in the international community more effective .
Discussions will focus on drugs and crime , the environment , foreign and security policy , regional cooperation and economic matters .
The 26 countries also agreed a statement on Kosovo and they decided to set up an expert group on drugs and crime which we are taking forward urgently .
The next meeting will now take place at the level of foreign ministers during the Austrian Presidency .
We are pleased that we have established a Conference as a body which addresses the issues that have a direct impact on people 's lives and which enables all the participants to consider issues on an equal footing .
We regret but respect Turkey 's decision not to attend on 12 March in London .
But the Conference sent a clear signal that the door remains open for Turkey .
Secondly , we were pleased that the accession partnerships could be adopted on 24 March .
They are a crucial element of the reinforced pre-accession strategy .
We were grateful for the European Parliament 's cooperation on the last occasion I was with you in the plenary .
Now we must ensure that the applicants get the help they need quickly and that they use it effectively .
Thirdly , we completed the remit of the Luxembourg European Council by launching the accession process .
The process was successfully launched at foreign minister level on 30 March in Brussels .
It will demonstrate that enlargement is all-inclusive .
The next ministerial meeting will take place on 29 and 30 May at the level of the JHA ministers .
We hope that at that meeting the 26 countries will conclude the pre-accession pact on organized crime .
Fourthly and finally , we have launched accession negotiations with the Six : Estonia , Poland , the Czech Republic , Hungary , Slovenia and Cyprus .
These negotiations were launched on 31 March by foreign ministers .
Now it is down to the detailed business .
The task ahead of us is a great task .
We must ensure that we carry public support as the process moves ahead .
It will be especially important to explain the benefits of enlargement to our citizens and to win their hearts for this historic project which will at last enable us to spread the benefits of the European Union to the wider Europe .
We look to the European Parliament to help us in this endeavour .
Mr President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I truly believe that this has been a historic month for Europe , because of the European Conference , the discussions about accession partnerships and the first round of negotiations .
Mr President-in-Office , you spoke about symbolism and symbols , and we have also seen many photographs which have documented the start .
But , thankfully , you have also told us that there are matters of substance .
It was this Parliament , and above all this party , which pointed out that the European Conference will become a farce if it is merely a social framework , if occasional photographs are all that matter .
I am very glad that a start has been made with matters of substance , and that perhaps some people who saw things as very open and very casual have now changed their conception , that we are actually talking about subjects which are very important for Europe and the future .
In the short time available , I would just like to mention a few points : First , we must point out in this framework and these discussions at the European Conference that we want a larger Europe , but a stronger Europe .
The enlargement and the larger Europe must not proceed at the cost of Europe 's strength .
We see day after day how many deficiencies we have in our common foreign and security policy , and also in other areas .
This is also important because quite a few of the countries which now want to join have only achieved their independence very recently , and are asking themselves whether joining a new community can be combined with their striving for independence .
They may urgently want to join the Community , but they imagine it to be looser and less binding whereas it is important to us that the Community does not develop in this way .
Second , because the negotiations and discussions about accession will continue for a long time , we shall have to set some signals in the next few years , signals which say to the countries : the moment of accession has not yet come , but you are preparing well for it .
You are on the right path .
Such signals are expected .
I say that because I was recently in the three Baltic states with Pauline Green and saw how hungry they are for signals from Europe .
At the same time , Europe has just partially introduced obligatory visas or visa charges .
It is grotesque - to take just this example - that we expect countries and people in Europe to act on the basis of the Schengen rules , and at the same time force other countries - including Austria - to introduce obligatory visas or visa charges .
This practice is incomprehensible and unacceptable , and I believe that we should change it .
Third , I would like to point out that the discussions with Slovakia are very important .
We are very sad that the Meciar regime is operating a policy which damages its own people , and I believe that the European Conference is the right framework for forcing Slovakia into pro-European behaviour .
It is also decisively important to consider today how the European Conference can be further developed , and what the relationship is with Russia , Ukraine and in particular Turkey .
Mr President-in-Office , I thank you for your report .
I believe that it was a good start !
It will be Austria 's responsibility to continue this good start .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that this first European Conference was an important contribution to the whole field of the enlargement and unification process in Europe .
It can be seen as a preparation , a part of a link in a new European order .
It was developed to involve one country , but I believe that we should make it clear that such a European Conference only makes sense in the long run if it is open to all those who from their own point of view or that of the European Union do not yet want to hold accession negotiations but feel that eventually they belong in the European Union .
If countries like Switzerland and others could find a link here , it would surely be easier for another country such as Turkey to go the same way , and to rejoin this process .
I think that the five points which were discussed in London are essential questions .
I really hope that the group of experts which the British Presidency has put together in connection with the fight against cross-border organised crime will produce in 12 months results which will then have a practical impact on the safety of our citizens . Questions of environmental protection , competitive economies , foreign and security policy and regional cooperation are in the common interest not only of members of the European Union , but also of those who are holding immediate accession negotiations and those who are anywhere in the neighbourhood of the European Union .
I think that is obvious .
I really believe that in this way this European Conference also offers the possibility of bridge-building beyond the future borders of the European Union .
I hope that the foreign ministers at their first conference under the Austrian Presidency will continue this initiative accordingly .
I believe that if it is begun in this broader and content-based way , it will also be possible to rebuild the bridges to Turkey . Unfortunately they were broken for reasons which we do not need to investigate today , but I hope that they will soon exist and be usable again .
Mr President , I would like to say a word or two of appreciation and thanks to the President-in-Office for his valuable contribution to the European Parliament this afternoon and to take the opportunity of wishing him and his colleagues who are guiding the UK Presidency continued success for the remainder of their term .
The opening of negotiations with six applicant countries this week in Brussels constitutes an historic step in the evolution of the European Union .
I welcome this first step in the process of expanding the Union into central and eastern Europe and I look forward to the opening of the negotiations with the rest of the countries who have applied for membership .
The process of enlarging the Union will be difficult both for the applicant countries and for the existing Member States .
The recent publication of the Santer package of proposals has clearly shown that the existing Member States will have to take difficult decisions concerning the size of the European budget and the future operation both of the Structural Funds and of the common agricultural policy in order to prepare for enlargement .
The applicant countries will also be confronted with a difficult process of adaptation in many areas ; for instance , justice and home affairs issues are central to the enlargement process .
It is essential that the applicant countries put into place the body of EU law already adopted to fight organized crime across Europe .
As this area of EU law is constantly evolving , I believe they need to give it top priority and to do so they must take immediate steps to ensure that those who are responsible in their countries for the fight against organized crime , such as judges , police and customs departments and tax authorities , have access to the necessary programmes to improve their skills and operational methods in what must increasingly be a joint effort to combat organized crime .
International criminal groups have huge resources at their disposal in terms of finance , technology , networks and expertise and the European Union must continue to develop the means to put criminals operating with impunity across all borders behind bars .
We expect and demand no less of our future partners .
The Council has just reached a political agreement on making it a criminal offence to participate in a criminal organization in the Member States of the EU .
This will strengthen our hand in combatting organized crime and I do hope that the applicant countries will keep pace with us in this regard , not least in the area of dissuasive criminal penalties .
In the future I want to see more joint EU surveillance exercises such as operation PEGASUS which is aimed at detecting the smuggling of cocaine and other prohibited or restricted goods by passengers arriving by air from certain South American and Caribbean countries and continuing in transit to other EU destinations .
Extending such joint surveillance exercises into the applicant countries should be an early objective .
Finally , I would urge the three Member States which have not yet ratified the EUROPOL convention to do so without delay .
The full extent of the EUROPOL convention cannot be enforced unless this procedure is completed and it is a poor example to the applicant states if we ourselves cannot complete the ratification process .
Mr President , on the walls outside the House there are photos taken 30 to 40 years ago , which symbolize the success of the European Union .
Another set of symbolic photos has been taken recently , and I hope that in 20 years time , these will be another illustration of success .
This will depend largely on what we do during the coming years .
It will entail much homework for candidates , but also for the Union .
The Union must finally start acting as one , and I have to say that the discord which the Union has been displaying , for instance with regard to Cyprus , is downright disgraceful , and worse still , harmful to our relations with both Cyprus and Turkey .
The threat made by the French to exclude Cyprus is tactically extremely unwise , because no negotiator gives away his bottom line before the negotiation process has even started .
The Union needs to stick to earlier pronouncements , as the British Presidency finally did at the start of the negotiations .
The work can start now .
I can of course get all worked up about the Turkish warnings that there might be a new war .
I can also get worked up about the refusal of the Turkish-Cypriots to take part in the negotiations and about the continuing annexation , at least verbally , by Turkey of Northern Cyprus .
Perhaps we should just put this down to attempts to block the negotiating process .
The Union must learn its lessons and be brave enough to act as one with respect to Cyprus .
The Union should rethink its policy on Turkey .
We cannot pursue the policy suggested by Greece without looking at what lies behind it .
Turkey , too , is a candidate which deserves intensive cooperation .
I therefore welcome the Commission 's new statement on this .
What policy has the Council in mind , Mr President-in-Office ?
And my last question is : will our Greek friends drop their resistance to financial cooperation ?
Mr President , I think the President-in-Office of the Council has adopted a restrained position with regard to the London Conference , and it must indeed be restrained because we ought not to forget that the London Conference was largely planned to accommodate Turkey 's presence .
We , too , are sorry that Turkey was not there , and believe that as a country it will take the necessary steps in relation to democracy and respect for its neighbours that will soon allow it to upgrade its relations with the European Union .
We view the fact that the process of the Republic of Cyprus 's accession has begun as important , with talks about accession which not only represent a beginning but must promise an end to that process .
There are many obstacles and there is a real danger that the island may be partitioned , as we see from the extreme statements in Ankara which regards Cyprus as one of Turkey 's provinces .
Ankara 's attitude to the part of Cyprus occupied by Turkish troops is the same as its attitude towards its Kurdish provinces .
I think the European Union , working together with the Republic of Cyprus , has a responsibility to ensure the integrity of the Republic and this should be made clear to Ankara , at the same time , of course , as the wish of both the European Union and the Republic of Cyprus that accession should include representation of the Turkish-Cypriot community with full rights , with respect for its special claims and problems but within a framework of the Republic of Cyprus 's existence as a single and undivided entity .
Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , with merely one minute 's speaking time I am compelled to confine myself to one point , namely Cyprus .
The accession negotiations alone will under no circumstances lead to a resolution of the political conflict which is tearing Cyprus apart .
On the contrary , without a solution to this conflict , a successful accession is highly unlikely .
That is why the European Union should invest time in simultaneous negotiations with Cyprus , but also in seeking a way out of this political impasse .
Furthermore , it is obvious that the Turkish community should be able to participate in the negotiation process with a clear mandate , so that they do not feel the odd one out .
Two pitfalls must be avoided .
The Union must not bow to threats from Turkey , but it must offer Turkey a better and more concrete perspective for accession .
Secondly , the Union must , in conjunction with the United States , ensure that the arsenal of long-range weapons in Nicosia is defused .
If this does not happen , we will be in a new phase of military build-up and that is most unlikely to lead to a solution .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , there is a saying which says that if you are at the ball , you must dance .
This is indeed the situation we find ourselves in and when I hear Mr Brok say that everything is going well I have the impression of hearing , " things could not be going better , ma 'am ! ' .
I believe that the Europe in preparation , the Europe of fifteen , of nineteen , of twenty five , is certainly not the Europe which the founding fathers wanted .
It has no ambition .
It wants to absorb the countries of eastern Europe with a mere 1.27 % of the budget , when we know how great were the sacrifices and the ambitions of the American project at the time of the Marshall Plan .
We should keep this very clearly in mind .
I think we should very rapidly envisage a federal Union of a few states and continue to work on this great project .
It is urgent for a certain number of Member States , undoubtedly not that of the President-in-Office , to come to an agreement to bring about as quickly as possible a federal Europe .
I would like to say something to Mr Brok .
It truly shows great optimism to think that following this conference in London we are going to be able to resolve the drugs problem in twelve months when thirty years of prohibition have done nothing but aggravate the situation .
It is time to give up this rather blind optimism .
Mr President , first of all can I say I welcome the President-in-Office 's statement this afternoon in which he underlined the British Presidency 's commitment to a successful programme of enlargement .
When I last spoke on enlargement in this Parliament , I said that I understood the disappointment felt by those countries which had failed to make it on to the list of the new Member States .
I was therefore pleased that the London conference brought together existing Member States , the fast lane applicants , and those in the slower lane .
The conference itself may have appeared to be more cosmetic than substantial in terms of what it achieved , but I believe the value of the conference will become more apparent as time goes on .
From the point of view of the applicant countries , it must be encouraging for them to see their Heads of Government and foreign ministers now with a high profile and able to deal directly with the Heads of Government and foreign ministers of the existing 15 Member States .
I do not think that the concluding statement from the conference , claiming that a new era had begun for European cooperation , was an overstatement .
The more that representatives of the applicant countries are involved with us , the more likely we are to achieve the goal of stable democracy and respect for human rights and economic development throughout Europe .
Most of us in the Parliament support enlargement .
The more difficult question is how much we are prepared to pay to achieve it .
We heard this week that the 10 eastern and central European countries are to be offered 1.8 billion a year in new grants to help them to prepare for membership of the Union .
I welcome the fact that this offer is to be subject to the condition that recipient countries must keep to an agreed timetable for political and economic reform .
We should of course remember that democracy has only come recently to some of these countries and that the timetable should reflect the need to move forward cautiously .
That may cost more in grant aid in the short term if we are to achieve permanent stability in Europe in the long term and the cautious approach must be followed .
We are now halfway through the Presidency , a Presidency which has adopted an extremely ambitious project in getting the European conference under way ; it is fair to say I believe that ambition has been fulfilled .
I have only one slight reservation and that is the position of Cyprus .
I must question the wisdom of the approach and I am concerned by your actions ; you could well have made a protracted problem more difficult to resolve .
Mr President , the emphasis placed here on the conclusions of the London Conference seems to be inversely proportional to the attention given by citizens to what is considered an historic event by the Council .
The decision to begin the overall expansion process can certainly be considered an historically significant fact as the reconciliation between states that were enemies and the consolidation of stability in freedom are factors of extreme importance for the commencement and continuation of European cooperation .
But why is this importance not perceived by European citizens ?
Is it because of the inability of the media to convey a positive message or is this feeling of indifference the result of the employment crisis and fears of monetary union caused by the restrictive measures imposed by governments ?
It is a fact , however , that even if the expansion is historic , it does not rouse enthusiasm but creates fears for various reasons , including the fact that the average wage in the new states applying to join the Union is , at best , one-third or even one-sixth less than the average wage in the 15 current Member States of the Union , which will certainly affect the problem of employment and unemployment and that of company relocation .
The achievement of political union between 15 countries , which has not yet happened , will become even more difficult with 21 , owing to the still unsatisfied need to establish the new institutional organization of the Union and the problems connected with common foreign and security policy .
The recent declarations made by the Slovenian Ambassador to Rome show how , in that country , at least one line of thought is quite different from the spirit of the governments and member nations of the EU .
The Italian National Alliance therefore believes it is necessary , before Slovenia joins the Union , to define the problem of compensating Italians for confiscated goods and the final condemnation , and all its consequences , of the annihilation that took place during the notorious feuds .
Cyprus ' accession is very positive for us . Its territory is still divided and the problem of the Islamic unitary policy obliges the Union to work with greater commitment and good will to strengthen relations with Turkey , a necessary step to achieve greater protection of human rights and for Turkey to join the Union , a Union which needs to be rebalanced between north-east and south .
Finally , the Kurdish problem cannot be considered a problem of the individual states with regard to immigration control , but a Community problem .
The National Alliance therefore wishes to remind everyone that political union should be achieved .
Mr President , we started off with the President-in-Office of the Council giving us a report on the London conference , which showed that the European Council - and it is not a precedent - has in some way taken up some of Parliament 's earlier proposals .
It was a joint ceremony involving all the countries and had a certain solemnity , which is especially important at times of historical significance .
There was acceptance of the idea that this process should be of a global , inclusive nature , involving all the countries and ending to some extent the division into two groups . There was also acceptance that this is a process which is open to emulation and competition between the countries .
Based on what I have just said , my comment relates to my experience as a member of the European Parliamentary delegation , headed by President Gil-Robles Gil-Delgado , to the Bucharest Conference , where we met with the heads of parliament of the candidate countries .
We talk a lot about public opinion and the participation of civil society , but basically it has to start with a decisive participation on the part of the parliaments .
And I must point out , Mr President , that in those countries there is a profound historical aspiration - which I think we should take up - to be reincorporated into a process from which they were brutally cut off , as a result of the division of Europe . That means we must provide the impetus , and a political vision which goes beyond discussions of accounts and what could be termed " shopkeeper 's book-keeping ' .
In other words , it is important for us to calculate the sacrifices we have to make , but we must also remember the advantages we already enjoy .
While on the subject , I should also like to point out the concern which can be observed in some of those countries that they may be relegated to a sort of " second division ' .
I think it is important for us to be able to admit , again with that political impetus , that many of those countries can even speed things up during the marathon process that incorporation will turn out to be .
Finally , Mr President , I have a comment about Turkey .
I believe the British Presidency and the Commission are making efforts to reincorporate Turkey into this process , but I also think we must remind ourselves and our Turkish friends and partners that we currently have a customs union with them , and that to enter into a verbal escalation with one of our Member States is not the best way of conducting relations with us .
I think that is a message which , I repeat , our Turkish partners and allies can and should accept .
Mr President , the British Presidency has made a good start with the two-track approach . This has been expressed through symbolic events .
One was the strengthened accession partnership which it tackled in a highly directive manner . The other , which is clearly related in spirit , but does not form part of the accession process , was the multilateral consultation and the European Conference where everyone is more on an equal footing .
This is a good thing , and has been effectively put into practice .
The Presidency emphasized that priority must given to good governance , democracy and human rights .
It did not just confine itself to economic issues .
It also talked about the environment , and so forth .
I believe that this is an important issue .
The third pillar is becoming increasingly important for the European Union , because we are characterized by the fact that we are an association of democratic constitutional states .
In order that accession countries achieve this as well , it is of extreme importance that they undergo cultural change .
In this context I am a little surprised at what is sometimes said about Turkey .
My question to the President-in-Office is whether Turkey has in fact made clear , substantive policy changes , so that it becomes obvious that we have been wrong ?
Is there no need for Turkey to take any further steps , and will it be increasingly received with laurels the more arrogantly it approaches the discussions surrounding the European Conference ?
I think it is a little strange to pretend that the usefulness and value of the European Conference depends on the presence of a state which is not a constitutional state .
It is much easier to talk about the third pillar with countries which are constitutional states and full democracies .
I would like to ask the President-in-Office what his thoughts are about this , and whether he is getting any signals that Turkey is making substantive steps towards us , instead of our being forced to make steps towards Turkey .
The second point I wanted to make is about the foreign policy convergence of which the President-in-Office spoke .
Will some kind of action plan be developed during the British Presidency to achieve convergence in foreign policy ?
We will have to arrive at a situation in which European politicians do not only inspire confidence in their own country , but amongst all European citizens , so that they can see that European responsibilities are dealt with effectively and thoroughly by the European authorities .
Mr President , it was important that the European Conference should get under way and that European integration is a step nearer .
On the agenda were environmental issues and matters to do with regional cooperation .
Dealing with issues of the environment with all applicant countries right from the start is essential .
If this matter is not given the attention it deserves there will be a danger that the Union 's short timetable for enlargement will mean the environment getting swept aside in favour of economic and trade agreements .
The environment has to feature in all issues , not least of all transport and agriculture .
The EU 's unique and comprehensive process of enlargement makes security on a broad scale an even more urgent notion in the EU decision-making process , and that of its various bodies .
EU enlargement must come about while stressing the concept of sustainable development in the areas of both the environment and social welfare .
Cooperation in matters of the environment must be very necessarily included in the strategies prior to enlargement .
In this we need to make the most of the ISPA financial instrument and derive from it the means to solve environmental problems as far as possible while negotiations for membership are still going on , so that the transition periods involved can be as short as possible .
Another matter that came up at the conference was that of regional cooperation , and the connection with the environment here is important .
Just think : after enlargement the Baltic Sea is going to be an inland sea of the EU .
We know the problems there are with protection of the Baltic .
Without the presence of Russia in all of this there can be no sustainable development or improvement in environmental conditions in the Baltic Sea .
Mr President , all the speakers have said here that the conference was very important and a success , although Turkey did not take part .
Actually this conference was conceived to involve Turkey .
I would like to associate myself expressly with this judgement , and I do not understand why the socialist party is apparently split on this question , because the former President and present Vice-Chairman , Mr Hänsch , said yesterday in an interview that the European Conference could be dissolved , and that it should be made clear to Turkey once and for all that it cannot join .
It would then no longer be possible to fulfil the purpose of the European Conference .
That has not been stated here , and I am surprised that former presidents do not give this opinion here in the House , but in press statements .
Since the decision of the EU Summit in Luxembourg , relationships between Europe and Turkey are in a difficult phase , and likewise those between Germany and Turkey .
I will not mention the reasons , but when we consider how to improve this situation , we must discuss the preconditions which were formulated at the Luxembourg Summit .
I think that parts of these preconditions were such that Turkey could not be a member without loss of face from the start , because border questions which are disputed between Greece and Turkey were made the yardstick , and not , Mr Oostlander , a question of the rule of law or human rights .
I also want to reject decisively your claim that Turkey 's status as a state of law is disputed .
He does not listen , but he goes on spreading these inaccurate opinions .
I must expressly point out that in Turkey women achieved the right to vote in 1923 , and that many other aspects of a democratic constitution are in place .
I demand that the Commission , the Council and Parliament should start talking again with Turkey , and that we formulate preconditions which enable Turkey to be present at the next European Conference .
It is actually the case that we must have the greatest interest in finding a reasonable basis with Turkey .
It is not the champions of the Christian West , as Mr Yilmaz said , who prevent Turkish accession , but primarily the still unfulfilled preconditions for accession .
But it is precisely because they have not yet been fulfilled that the European Conference was founded , and it would be completely wrong now to make the next hurdles for the European Conference so difficult that Turkish participation is made impossible .
I therefore ask the Commissioner to negotiate with the Council and Turkey to change this situation !
Mr President , there has been much talk of accession today , although actually the European Conference should definitely not be seen as an instrument of pre-accession strategy .
For this reason , Turkey , which I do not consider to be a candidate for accession although I share Mr Langen 's political assessment in all points , was accepted into the conference .
But in my opinion this European Conference has an important task to fulfil apart from accession , and therefore it should be opened to other states , as Elmar Brok said .
It should be opened to states which are not yet at the gates as candidates for accession , either because they have been internationally slandered - like Croatia , which is at least as ready for accession as Slovakia or Cyprus - or because , like Ukraine , which still has to live through a difficult time , and which we must help massively , they are not yet in a position to move closer to Europe or the European Union .
However , the London Conference , in spite of the difficult , unclear position in which it found itself , made one specific statement .
That was its declaration on justice and internal affairs .
My report about expansion eastwards and internal security will be presented tomorrow .
But beyond that , the European Conference can achieve a Pan-Europe of law and internal security before the last agricultural problem in the European Union is solved .
People will only accept a greater Europe if it results in more , not less security .
This approach , putting internal security at the centre of this conference , is therefore to be welcomed .
Also to be welcomed is the consideration of Kosovo , one of the most important problems which the whole of Europe will face in the next few years , and there it is important that Turkey as a partly European and Islamic country should be involved in this region , because of its special historical connection .
We must restore the autonomy of Kosovo under international control with international peace-keeping troops , for we have already gone beyond the eleventh hour there .
I am therefore glad that the European Conference has concerned itself with this subject , although the outcome was inadequate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday at 12.00 noon .
Aid for Bosnia and Herzegovina , Croatia , the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia - post-SFOR strategy
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0123 / 98 by Mr Schwaiger , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation 1628 / 96 relating to aid for Bosnia and Herzegovina , Croatia , the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( COM ( 98 ) 0018 - C4-0105 / 98-98 / 0023 ( CNS ) ) -A4-0106 / 78 by Mrs Daskalaki , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on a post-SFOR strategy in Bosnia and Herzegovina containing a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if all programmes and budget lines are taken together , more than ECU 350 million annually are available from the European Union for the reconstruction of BosniaHerzegovina and the other countries which were involved in the war .
Our involvement is therefore not just moral and political , but also financial to a very large extent .
But if we take as our basis the resources which have actually been used , in the years 1996 and 1997 , less than ECU 100 million , that is about 15 % , were spent .
The USA , with its splendidly organized team on the spot , manages to spend 95 % of the US $ 200 million which are available each year .
What are the reasons for the vast gap between our intentions and the reality which is expressed in these statistics ?
The activities of the European Union are hardly visible on the ground , apart from a few secondhand tram-cars with European Union written on them .
There are many reasons for this , and they can be divided into objective difficulties on the ground and the behaviour of the Commission and the Council of Ministers .
First , the difficulties on the ground : it is true that since the Dayton Agreement the weapons have been silent , but peace has not yet returned to Bosnia-Herzegovina .
Political conflicts continue to smoulder , the animosity of various population groups has been stirred up towards one another .
People around Karadzic and Mladic , and others , are particularly responsible for this .
Intimidation and threats to refugees who want to return still continue in some places , particularly where they form a minority after they return .
The central government of Bosnia is still incapable of acting .
Even the institutions of the sub-republics , such as the government of the Federation of Bosnia-Herzegovina and Republic Srpska , are only slowly getting into gear .
In 1996 and 1997 they were either non-existent or ineffective .
Nevertheless the resolute process of pacification of the country continues , under the decisive leadership of the High Representative Carlos Westendorp and his deputy Jacques Klein , with the help of SFOR troops .
Of course , as well as numerous functions to aid the construction of authorities on the ground , they carry out peace-keeping tasks , and do it very well .
The elections at the end of the year may bring further stabilization in terms of concentration on reconstruction and more cooperation between the sub-republics .
The Dodik government in Republic Srpska is gradually acquiring the ability to act .
It is ready to allow its refugees to return and to cooperate closely with the European Union .
But the previous broad administrative and financial paralysis of the Commission and the Council of Ministers can be corrected in important points by a change to Regulation 1628 / 96 , which is now on the agenda .
We therefore support the proposals of the Commission in principle but they do not go far enough .
A new start is possible in which the institutions of the European Union , the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament cooperate closely but this depends on a fundamental change to the Regulation .
That is our opinion in the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , but also the opinion of the ad hoc delegation which visited Bosnia from 21 to 24 February .
As for the behaviour - unfortunately I must say misbehaviour - of the Commission and Council : neither the Council nor the Commission , through the necessary cooperation , has created suitable instruments and legal bases to meet the special challenge of reconstruction , and to adapt to the difficulties on the ground .
Summarized in one sentence : reconstruction aid for Bosnia with a non-existent or non-functioning administration of the whole state or the sub-states is something different from European legislative procedure or classical development aid with partners which can act and function administratively in the normal way .
The Council and Commission have not adapted to these circumstances .
For that reason , the goal-oriented , coordinated use of financial , technical and material resources on the ground was largely absent .
Success-oriented management on the ground is still not evident enough .
The Council has enforced a complicated and inefficient Regulation .
It forced the Commission to juggle with three different budget lines : ' Reconstruction ' , ' Return of Refugees ' , ' Europe for Sarajevo ' .
They are known by the Bosnian term OBNOVA and only formally combined .
The Council has stymied itself by subjecting all projects over ECU 2 million - that is Article 12 of the Regulation - to a complicated procedure of a governmental committee , which almost always delayed the necessary decisions by several months .
We in the European Parliament are no longer prepared to accept such a situation .
A new start is necessary .
In the name of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , I propose today to the Council and Commission nothing less than this new start .
The Commission must have an efficient action and decision summit with a general plenipotentiary on the spot , carrying the responsibility , equipped with the most extensive autonomous powers of action and decision , and provided with a strong management team .
That may cost up to 10 % of the operating expenditure .
The Americans need 15 % for theirs .
If cooperation by the European Union with the Member States and the aid organizations is to be improved , regular coordination meetings , if possible monthly , must be possible .
I would therefore like to put the question to you , Mr President-in-Office , whether you are prepared to accept our amendments , as they are summarized in paragraphs 1 to 23 .
If you do not see it as possible at this moment , what procedure do you have in mind ?
We have a conciliation procedure from the year 1975 , and there are other procedures , which give us the possibility of providing and arranging cooperation with the Council - this has already happened with the Commission to a large extent , and the Commission has supported us in our amendments .
Mr President , two years have passed since the Dayton Agreement and all the signs are that although important steps have been taken , the agreement 's implementation is still very slow in many areas .
For example , we see delays in the operation of political institutions , there are still problems with freedom of movement and with the return of refugees .
Since the beginning of 1998 , there have of course been positive indications that reconstruction could take place more quickly .
The High Representative is particularly dedicated to the agreement 's implementation , the Serbian Republic has a moderate Prime Minister whom we have already had the opportunity to welcome in the European Parliament in the context of the relevant Joint Parliamentary Committee , and more generally , there are better hopes for an acceleration of the reconstruction process and the repatriation of displaced persons in light of the September elections .
Those are the optimistic points .
However , we also know , and can see , that the peace is still fragile and indeed over a wider area , where as recent events in Kosovo have shown , focuses of tension still exist .
In Bosnia-Herzegovina mistrust still prevails between the various sides .
More particularly , the functioning of common institutions is always problematic .
At some points , such as Mostar , there are important local government problems .
In some districts the spirit is opposed to municipal elections .
There are no laws about landmines and the disarmament issue has not been resolved .
There are problems related to human rights , and monetary and economic problems in a very sensitive , if not fragile economy .
It is therefore common ground that a stable and secure environment must be established so that the peace agreement can be fully implemented and the country reconstructed .
The Peace Implementation Council has recognized and supported the existing understanding to continue the military presence after 1998 .
Those of us who went to Bosnia as electoral observers on behalf of the European Parliament had the opportunity to confirm that understanding and wish on the spot .
That presence is deemed necessary to preserve a stable and secure environment and to ensure the prerequisites for action , both by the High Representative and by international organizations , in order to implement the Peace Agreement .
Since December , NATO has been examining the alternative solutions for sending a multinational force after SFOR , whose tenure lapses in June .
The European Union applauds that .
But beyond that point , since the Union 's political and economic commitments in BosniaHerzegovina and the military commitment of its Member States are huge , it would be better to have more consistent and visible common action for active Community participation in the multinational force that is to succeed SFOR .
For that reason , the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy believes with this report that it should be the WEU 's job to coordinate the efforts of the Union 's Member States in the context of a NATO enterprise and under NATO 's leadership , a thing that would also stress the efforts to build up the CFSP .
A European commitment of that kind would also improve non-military cooperation in the area , aiming gradually to reduce the need for a military presence as reconstruction progresses .
This Community participation should be linked to compliance of all the parties with the agreement and with arms control , and the European Union must insist that there is no rearmament of the contesting parties .
The production of landmines and their export to the country must also cease .
In parallel with what has already been considered , it would be good if the Member States made a commitment to preserve and assist the European Community Monitoring Mission , the ECMM as it is called .
Its members , who have offered a great deal , are the only people who , for the time being at least , are a visible sign of the EU 's presence and Mr Schwaiger has stressed that this presence is not very much felt in the area .
Because , that too , is one of the many paradoxes : despite the bundle of money the Union has spent there , despite the real and human sacrifices made by the Union , Europe seems not to be present at all .
With these thoughts , we call for common action for European participation in the post-SFOR force along with the other efforts already being made , such as the training of local police forces in the context of the UN policing mission .
As a recommendation to the Council , this report aims to contribute towards positions that will stress Europe 's involvement and presence on behalf of peace and the reconstruction of Bosnia-Herzegovina on the basis of the Dayton Accord .
After the words of the President-in-Office of the Council I will be brief .
Firstly , I wholeheartedly thank Parliament and the committees involved for dealing so swiftly with our proposals , in particular the fact that a special Parliament mission under the leadership of Mr Spencer went to Sarajevo to get acquainted with the situation on the ground .
More specifically , I would like to thank Mr Schwaiger for the great effort he has made to publish what is , in our view , a very balanced report which clearly shows that he has an understanding of the situation on the ground .
We need not talk too much about the past .
One thing is for certain : things can be improved on our side .
In the past two years we have been confronted with situations that nobody could have foreseen ; be it the lack of coordination in the central authorities ; be it non-compliance with Dayton which , in the Republika Srpska , has led to only 2 % of the total aid going to that particular region ; or other forms of non-transparent infrastructure at the receiving end which has made the distribution of aid and money a hazardous and often impossible affair .
That has also led to rigorous centralization in Brussels over the past two years for the simple reason that deconcentration and delegation under those circumstances was not feasible .
Mr Schwaiger 's report , in combination with the measures that we prepared a couple of months ago and which very much complement each other - the Schwaiger report and the measures under preparation - show that there is a clear , common understanding between Parliament , the Commission and the Council about what has to be done .
We have embarked upon a strengthening of our staff in Sarajevo .
Redeployment is taking place from Brussels .
We are undergoing deconcentration and decentralization .
All of these meet the desires of Parliament , according to the recommendations in Mr Schwaiger 's report .
Regarding the proposals for changing the regulations , I would say the same thing : more flexibility , in particular by enhancing the thresholds above which the Member States have to give their approval to projects from 2.5 to 5 million .
I agree with the President-in-Office that there is very little chance - I speak from experience - of the Council agreeing to a further increase from 5 million to 10 million .
Eliminating any Member State 's influence in projects up to 10 million is a bridge too far at the present stage .
As far as the operational cost is concerned - the famous 10 % question - with the Council Presidency it is ultimately Parliament that decides this .
I suggest that I talk to my colleague , Mr Liikanen , and that we undertake to make a proposal to the Council for a significant increase in the present percentage , which is 3.5 % .
I have to have an agreement with him on this .
Again , it is Parliament that will eventually decide this .
That meets Parliament 's wishes .
In our very constructive preparatory discussions for this debate today we were in agreement that on the basis of further evaluations the Commission is prepared , during the course of this year , to make other proposals that may increase the flexibility and efficiency of our total operations .
We can talk this through on the understanding that Parliament is prepared to accept that we do not encroach on the life of the current regulations , which lapse at the end of 1999 , so that we do not run the risk of creating any kind of legal vacuum .
We are prepared to remain in touch to see whether , and what kind of further proposals can be made at a later stage .
With the President-in-Office I say : do not let this delay , in any way , the present proposals that are on the table .
If it is deferred back to the Commission at the end of April - I say with due respect to Mr Spencer - that would be beyond the point where the next General Affairs Council would be able to formalize this modified regulation .
We would lose more time , whereas what we are talking about is a matter of utmost urgency .
In that sense there is no difference between Parliament and the Commission .
All three institutions are very close together in their proposals and understanding of what has to be done .
I hope that ultimately reconstruction and , not least , the return of refugees in Bosnia and Herzegovina will benefit from the results of this debate .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
Ladies and gentlemen , the debate is now adjourned to 9.00 p.m.
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is questions to the Council ( B4-0272 / 98 ) .
We are starting questions to the Council 15 minutes late , so we will extend it accordingly . I hope Parliament 's services , especially the interpreters , will be kind enough to make the appropriate arrangements , because Question Time will end today at 7.15 p.m.

Mr Truscott would like to speak on a point of order .
The Rules of Procedure say that I must allow it , but I must request that you keep within the allotted minute , Mr Truscott , because we must start Question Time .
Mr President , I am very conscious of the time but I do have a point of order under Rule 41 which deals with Question Time .
The problem is that the first ten questions deal with an issue that is not a matter for the Council , i.e. the Elgin Marbles , and therefore I am asking you to rule the first ten questions out of order as they are clearly a matter for bilateral discussions between the Member States concerned and not a matter for the Council .
Mr Truscott , I respect your opinion , but this question has been accepted in accordance with all the established rules , and it is now up to the Council whether to reply or not .
I shall not allow any more points of order .
Mr Henderson has requested to speak .
Good evening and welcome , Mr Henderson .
You have the floor , before we begin Question Time with that block of ten questions Mr Truscott mentioned .
Mr President , can I just make a procedural point before I take up question one ?
I am afraid I have to leave at 7 p.m.
I am happy to extend Question Time on some other occasion .
I was not responsible for the delay today .
If at the next occasion you wish to extend Question Time over the lunch period for a little while I would be very happy to cooperate with that by bringing forward the agenda to perhaps a 2.30 p.m. start but I cannot wait today .
I have to leave at 7 p.m.
Mr Henderson , I very much enjoy your presence here but I am not going to make you stay , or turn you into a hostage .
Not at all . You are free to leave this House whenever you see fit ; this is an area of freedom .
Now as President of this sitting , my agenda states that there is an hour and a half of questions .
If we cannot count on the valuable presence of the Council during that time , then we cannot have an hour and a half , but I would like to be able to do so .
You may go whenever you want to .
However , I must say that since we have started late , my wish as President of the session is that we should finish after an hour and a half .
Your invitation to move to lunchtime seems a very good idea , especially if the food is Mediterranean .
However , I prefer to keep lunchtime for relaxed , peaceful conversations , not for questions to the Council , which is not so relaxed . Indeed , sometimes there is a certain amount of tension , as now .
Mr David has the floor on a point of order .
But please , Mr David , help me to get started with Question Time itself .
If people ask to make points of order , I do not deny it to anybody , least of all you .
You have the floor on a point of order , but it will detract from the time we have available for Mr Henderson and his invaluable answers .
Mr President , I will be extremely brief .
I just wanted to say that I think we should take up the minister on his very kind offer - giving up part of his lunchtime in a future plenary session .
I am sure that many of my colleagues in the Parliament appreciate that and , if it cannot be done formally , perhaps some of us could meet him informally for a question session .
We will examine the possibility .
But for myself at least , as a good gourmet , the first thing I should want to know in advance is the menu .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are now going to deal with a block of ten questions .



Of the authors , Mr Alavanos , Mr Lomas , Mr Sanz Fernández , Mr Gillis , Mrs Castellina and Mr Bertens are present in the House , so it is to them I shall give the opportunity to put a supplementary question .
Mr Henderson , you now have the chance to reply to this block of ten questions and to these seven questioners .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Question No 1 by Alexandros Alavanos ( H-0251 / 98 )
Subject : Cooperation between the EU and UNESCO
Pursuant to Article 128 ( 3 ) of the EC treaty , " The Community and the Member States shall foster cooperation with third countries and the competent international organizations in the sphere of culture , in particular the Council of Europe ' .
Operating under the UN is UNESCO , the authoritative and universally recognized international agency for cultural , educational and scientific cooperation .
A UNESCO Conference of Ministers for Cultural Affairs meeting in Mexico in August 1982 decided that the marbles currently in the British Museum should be returned to their country of origin as they had been removed from the Parthenon in Athens , described by UNESCO as a monument forming part of the universal heritage .
What steps will the UK Presidency take to implement UNESCO 's decision pursuant to Article 128 ( 3 ) , which provides for EU cooperation with international organizations in the sphere of culture ?
Question No 2 by Alfred Lomas ( H-0327 / 98 )
Subject : Return of the Elgin Marbles to Greece
The year 2001 will be the 200th anniversary of the year in which the Parthenon Marbles left Athens .
It will also be the first year of the new century .
Does the Council agree that Britain 's return of the Elgin Marbles to Greece would be an imaginative gesture towards the cultural unification of Europe , one that would be applauded throughout Europe and the world ? Question No 3 by Francisco Sanz Fernández ( H-0334 / 98 )
Subject : Compatibility of the EU 's cultural policy with UNESCO resolutions about the Elgin Marbles
There is a great disparity between the positions of UNESCO and the EU concerning the Elgin Marbles .
What steps will the Council take to ensure that EU cultural policy complies with UNESCO resolutions ? Question No 4 by Jan Bertens ( H-0336 / 98 )
Subject : Return of the Elgin Marbles
The Conference of Ministers of Culture held in Mexico voted overwhelmingly for the return of all the marbles which were removed from the Parthenon on the Athens Acropolis and which form an integral part of that unique building , the supreme symbol of the Greek cultural heritage .
What will be the response of the Council Presidency to that vote ? Question No 5 by Hélène Carrère d 'Encausse ( H-0337 / 98 )
Subject : The return of the Elgin Marbles is not harmful for the museums in Europe
Greece has officially acknowledged that its claim concerns only the marbles that once adorned the Parthenon and the Caryatid and the Column of the Erechthyon and that it has no other claims for the return of ancient artefacts currently held in any other museum or collection in the United Kingdom or other European country .
Does the Council agree that the return of the Elgin Marbles would represent an important expression of European unity and friendship and not adversely affect European museums ? Question No 6 by Friedrich Wolf ( H-0338 / 98 )
Subject : Coordination between the EU and UNESCO for the return of the Elgin Marbles
Is there any coordination between the EU and UNESCO as regards science , education and culture and , in particular , concerning the issue of the return of the Elgin Marbles in accordance with the 1982 UNESCO resolution ? Question No 7 by Fernand Herman ( H-0345 / 98 )
Subject : The new Acropolis Museum for the Parthenon Marbles
Does the Council agree that the European Union must support the construction of the new Acropolis Museum in Athens , to provide a convenient and technologically ideal home for the Parthenon Marbles that are now kept in the British Museum ? Question No 8 by Alan Gillis ( H-0350 / 98 )
Subject : Taking into consideration the feelings of the European peoples in the cultural policy of the EU
European public opinion is in favour of the restitution of the Parthenon Marbles .
Even public opinion in the UK itself is overwhelmingly in favour , as was expressed in a broadcast on Channel 4 TV on 16 April 1996 , when 91 822 viewers supported the proposal for the return of the marbles and only 7516 voted against .
Does the Council agree that the cultural policy in the EU must reflect the feelings of the European peoples ? Question No 9 by Joaquim Miranda ( H-0360 / 98 )
Subject : The Elgin Marbles
The problem of the Elgin Marbles , which are currently in the British Museum although they belong to the Acropolis of Athens , is poisoning relations between two EU states , the UK and Greece .
Will the Council take any steps with a view to reaching an agreement on the Elgin Marbles , since this is also a matter of European importance ? Question No 10 by Luciana Castellina ( H-0361 / 98 )
Subject : Return of the Elgin Marbles
During the vote on the UNESCO resolution on the return of the Elgin Marbles , the Greek Minister for Culture , Melina Mercouri , said : " We are not asking for all our treasures back , we only want the part removed from our most revered national monument , the Parthenon ' .
Does the Council not agree that the return of the Elgin Marbles would be an important cultural and psychological step towards the unification of Europe ?
As I said in my previous address I have to leave at 7 o 'clock and I would like to do so with the blessing of the House .
I will be happy to extend my attendance at a future sitting at an earlier time in the day if that would be helpful .
In relation to Question No 1 , as honourable Members are undoubtedly aware , although the 1982 UNESCO recommendation stated that the sculptures should be returned to Greece , the recommendation went on to say that they should be returned for reincorporation into the Parthenon .
The Parthenon sculptures are not a matter for the Council as the European Community has no competence in this subject .
It is entirely an issue between the United Kingdom and Greece .
I say to Mr Alavanos that I do not accept his point about the competence of the Council .
Even if I did , there has to my knowledge been no referral to the Council by either the United Kingdom government or the Greek government for assistance in conciliation .
Therefore , I still believe that this is a matter for those two nation state governments to determine .
Mr President , on a procedural matter .
We were given notice that the Minister would be replying to all ten questions at once .
He has only replied to Question No 1 .
Before I have my minute , could you tell me if the Minister is intending to reply to all the questions separately or is that the complete answer to all ten ?
I thought , Mr Lomas , that I had explained very clearly .
Mr Henderson is replying jointly to the ten questions .
In other words , his first comment was an answer to all ten questions .
Mr Lomas , now that I have explained that point , you have a maximum of 60 seconds .
If the Council was to refrain from commenting on matters where it had no competence , there would be very few matters in the world that it would be able to comment on .
Does the Council not feel that , in view of the fact that these sculptures were taken from Greece under Turkish occupation , they are not something in isolation like a painting , but are part of the Parthenon , a building , and they ought to be returned there ?
Also , given that there is such overwhelming , massive support in the United Kingdom , as shown by the surveys , including a television survey which recorded 94 % of people in favour of their return , would the Council like to give an opinion as to whether this would be a practical and good thing to do , since it comments on matters all over the world on which it has not the slightest influence ?
As I outlined , the constitutional position is that the Council has no competence on this matter .
If Mr Lomas wishes to raise this question with the British government , then I am sure that the appropriate minister would be happy to respond to him .
Again I say to Mr Sanz Fernández , he actually can , if he wishes , communicate with the British government .
He will not be able to do that in the British parliament but he would have an opportunity to contact the British government and express his view and seek a response from it and , as I said to Mr Lomas , if he did that then I am sure the minister responsible would be able to reply to him .
I fully agree with the questions which were asked about the return of the Parthenon art treasures to Athens , but I would like to place this issue in a wider context .
This is , of course , not the only looting which has taken place .
I thought it might be worthwhile if I broadened this Question Time into something more general .
Then several countries have bilateral problems .
Under Napoleon , the French took the first mosasaur head , which is now in Paris .
We have tried to get it returned to Maastricht in Limburg .
You know the city .
Up until now we have not heard anything from the French .
I believe true European integration , real European cooperation , can only take shape if this kind of cultural injustice is put right .
Might the President-in-Office and his successors be able to help with this in future ?
And I do hope that the Elgin Marbles will be returned .
I would say to Mr Bertens that some of those matters were discussed in theory when we were dealing with the Amsterdam Treaty .
The Council has a clear remit which is currently authorized from previous Treaties .
There are authorizations in the Amsterdam Treaty .
If my interpretation is correct , I do not believe that when the Treaty is ratified it will make any difference to the competence on this issue or the issues to which he refers and I can really go no further than that .
It is for each state to give its views on that matter and you should address your questions to them .
I am more than a little disappointed with the answer from the President-in-Office , but it may well be outside the competence of the EU as he has said .
However I asked a slightly different question and I think it might still be possible for it to be answered .
Does the Council agree that the cultural policy in the EU must , or should reflect the feelings of the European people ?
I think that is a slightly different question from the one you have been answering .
I thank Mr Gillis for his supplementary but he is really trying to make the same point as Mr Bertens , from a different angle .
The question of cultural standards and cultural policy within the European Union is largely a matter for the Member States .
When it is a matter for the Council , it is already established in the Treaties and subject to some modification in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
But as I said to Mr Bertens , if my reading is accurate , I do not believe that the Treaty of Amsterdam would give the Council jurisdiction to deal with a matter such as this .
Mr President , I will be brief .
This is a situation that involves two Member States and the specific question posed to the President-in-Office was as follows : is a political will necessary to resolve this issue that involves these two Member States .
Does the British Presidency have the political will to contribute to resolving this matter finally and effectively ?
Again I say to Mr Miranda , I am not here to express views on behalf of the British Government , I am here to express views on behalf of the Council and if he wishes to put a question to the British Government , as I said already to two of his colleagues then I am sure that the responsible minister would be able to give him a reply to the matters that he raises .
Mr President , I wish to remind the British Presidency that the Treaty of Amsterdam has in some ways extended the EU 's competence with regard to culture , in a paragraph which states that culture should be present in all aspects of Union politics .
It is quite clear that the EU 's policy of harmonization and cohesion has to include a cultural dimension . The fact that such a delicate cultural question is present in the Union 's internal relations - I am talking about the refusal to restore the Parthenon frieze - can only discredit the rest of the European policy .
Do you not think that the Treaty of Amsterdam also made an innovation from this point of view ?
I say to Mrs Castellina that , again , it is a matter of interpretation as to what the Amsterdam Treaty says on this .
My understanding is that it would make no difference to competence in regard to this matter , and any points she wishes to raise on this she should raise with the British Government or the Greek Government .
Speaking as the Member for Elgin - where we are very ashamed of the past history of Lord Elgin - I wish to say to the President-in-Office that by way of follow up to Mrs Castellina , who is chairman of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education and the Media , I was chairman of that committee in 1985 when it passed a report which included the restoration of works of art in the broader sense of Mr Bertens .
That report was adopted by this Parliament .
No-one challenged our competence at that time .
On the day that Greece took its seat I lodged a resolution to restore the Elgin marbles .
I wish to remind everyone of the excellent precedent created recently by England when it returned Scotland 's Stone of Destiny to Scotland .
I am pleased that Mrs Ewing has raised the point on behalf of the town in her constituency which has the same name as the diplomat after whom the marbles are named .
She will not know this but I was an election agent in her constituency in 1970 , having been sent up there by the Glasgow Labour Party to help out .
So I know the views of the people of Elgin on these important questions .
I have to say to their representative that if she has very strong views which she wishes yet again to press she should raise this matter with the British Government .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :

Question No 11 by John Cushnahan , which has been taken over by Alan Gillis ( H-0273 / 98 )
Subject : Effects of abolition of duty-free sales
What measures do the Member States intend to implement to deal with the social and economic consequences of the abolition of intra-EU tax and duty-free sales in accordance with the terms of the 13th recital in the preamble to the Directive 91 / 680 / EEC and the 23rd recital in the preamble to Directive 92 / 12 / EEC ?
Question No 12 by Pat Gallagher ( H-0368 / 98 )
Subject : Transport Council request for a study on social effects of the abolition of duty free
In view of the decision at the March 17 Transport Council to request Finance Ministers to ask the Commission to undertake a study into the social effects of the abolition of duty free , can the Presidency confirm that this issue will be on the next agenda of the ECOFIN Council ?
In the directives referred to by Mr Cushnahan the Council agreed that duty- and tax-free sales on intra-Community journeys could continue for a transitional period up until 30 June 1999 .
The intention was to minimize the social and regional difficulties which might arise from abolition by allowing operators time to adjust .
It is for individual Member States to decide whether any further action is required to deal with particular social or economic consequences .
As to Mr Gallagher 's question , the President of the Transport Council has written to the President of Ecofin reporting the views of transport ministers on the need for a Commission study .
No decision has yet been taken on whether to put this issue on a future Ecofin agenda .
The answer again is more or less what I expected , because we have been listening to it for a long time .
However , it does not address the unemployment question or the downside , negative aspects of the abolition of duty-free in terms of airports , airlines and , indeed , shipping companies that are already under severe pressure .
It would be worthwhile if we had this study brought forward as quickly as possible , perhaps with a more open mind , to see if it is possible to retain duty-free sales .
I have very little to add to my initial response to the questions .
As I said , the matter has been raised by the Transport Ministers but Ecofin have not yet decided whether to place it on the agenda .
It is a longstanding decision .
To change the decision would require unanimity .
It is up to the Commission whether it decides to produce a report .
As I said at the last plenary when I addressed this subject , there is a lot of speculation as to what the impact of the abolition of duty-free within the European Union will be .
There is speculation that jobs will be lost and speculation that jobs will be gained , speculation that consumers will gain overall , speculation that some consumers will lose .
Individual Member States have to make their own calculations .
They have had a considerable period of time in which to make an assessment .
I can add no more at the present time .
I am pleased that the Transport Council has communicated with the Ecofin Council .
I sincerely hope that the Ecofin ministers will respect the wishes of the Transport Council and commission a study .
However , I am particularly sad to hear the President-in-Office this evening talk about speculation .
There should be no reference to speculation .
It should be fact .
The only way we can establish that is by having an impact study carried out on the socioeconomic effects .
Then it will not be speculation , it will be fact .
From studies that have been carried out in my own country it has been established - not speculated upon - that tens of thousands of jobs will be lost throughout the Union , with no alternative source of employment for those people .
There will be an additional £ 17 per fare for the many hard-pressed citizens throughout the Union .
I would like the President-in-Office to confirm that unanimity is not required for the Council to call on the Commission to undertake an impact study on the socio-economic consequences arising from the proposed abolition .
Could he confirm that to me ?
I can confirm that the Council could request a study without a unanimous decision , but to change the decision which was reached previously would require unanimity .
It would be interesting if every study which was ever produced guaranteed that the facts would emerge .
I am not as confident as that .
A lot of judgment would be involved as to what the impact might be .
I say that as someone who has an airport in his constituency and thus has a vested interest in these matters .
But there are other wider considerations that the Ecofin Council and the Council of Ministers must take into account .
I would hope Mr Gallagher would understand that .
I would like to congratulate the President-in-Office and encourage him to stick to his guns in the face of all the persiflage which comes from those who claim to be concerned about duty-free .
They have swallowed whole the arguments of the duty-free industry .
The President-in-Office is quite right to cast doubt on some of the forecasts of job losses , about which I am extremely sceptical .
However , I was a little concerned because his reply to the earlier question appeared to be rather less forthright and firm than it was last time he came to this House , when he repeated - and I supported him - that there were no plans in Ecofin to return to this subject .
He did not put it quite as firmly this time .
Can we have a firm undertaking that there are no - I repeat , no - plans to re-open the whole debate ?
Mr Cassidy 's comments show that there are many views on this subject which cross the political spectrum of this House and no doubt other political institutions throughout the European Union .
I said at the last plenary that there were no plans by the Ecofin Council to place an item of this nature on the agenda .
That was the position at that time .
Subsequently , a decision has been taken by the Transport Council and the wording I have chosen today , that no decision has been reached as to whether or not to put this issue on the agenda , is a better way of expressing the kind of response that Ecofin might make to a request from a sister Council .
I will be very brief .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for his clear answers , but the questions also refer to the social consequences and social benefits of this matter , and I wonder if he would agree with me that the abolition of duty-free would also reduce the levels of consumption of both alcohol and tobacco and that the consequences of this can only be beneficial to public health in Europe .
Would he agree that the abolition of duty-free , which is , as he says , a long-standing decision , would allow both sea- and airports to resume their primary role , which is to transport people from one place to another .
I think my professor of economics would have told me that the marginal propensity to consume might be pricesensitive and that before giving an answer to that question one should conduct some surveys on whether that was the case .
Just on that last point from the President-in-Office , I think he has answered the point that Ecofin ought to put to the Council of Transport Ministers : some more objective studies are needed .
Is the President aware that this Parliament has had a previous clash with the Council and the Commission on a similar point , when we were insisting on an objective study of safety for users of superbikes .
When we were successful , the people who were opposed to Parliament 's position believed that the conclusions defied gravity and that in fact the superbikes were proved to be safer than other machines which the Commission and Council had no objection to .
In that situation the decision of the European Union - or European Community as it was then - was made under very different procedures which did not involve co-decision .
Does the Council accept that there might be a case for considering whether the legislation is satisfactory or whether an over-hasty decision was taken under the old procedures and does it also accept that a study would assist us in reaching a sound decision now ?
It is superficially attractive always to allege that legislation which was agreed in a previous circumstance would not be approved were it to be before a political institution currently .
I do not dispute Mr Barton 's observation in general .
But that does not mean that we can reverse all legislation which has been introduced in the past .
It is not that long ago that a decision was reached on this but it was still seven or eight years ago and this has given outlets who benefit from duty-free the opportunity to consider the effect on their businesses and to make alternative provisions .
There has been that opportunity in the past .
No decision has yet been taken by ECOFIN .
I cannot say more than that at this point .
I do not believe there is much hope that the finance ministers will change their minds .
On the other hand , it should be possible to provide what the transport ministers have requested , namely an impact analysis , partly with regard to employment and partly with regard to taxes , since the idea was that taxes should be harmonized during this period , which has not been done , and which may in turn have consequences for travel between different countries and consequences for ultraperipheral countries .
It should therefore be possible to provide this .
What Mr Cassidy said is not true , that only the industry has carried out studies in this area .
This was first done in Sweden , and now there has been a government study which emphasizes exactly what the industry 's studies did previously , namely that this will have an impact on employment in my country , costing around 2 000 jobs .
I refer to my previous answers that one can speculate as to what a study would indicate and , indeed , on how accurately the study may be able to predict consequences .
At this time , although the Transport Council has taken a decision , no decision has been reached by the ECOFIN Council on whether or not to take this matter further .
Question No 13 by Jens-Peter Bonde , which has been taken over by Ulla Sandbæk ( H-0275 / 98 )
Subject : Equal treatment for lesbians and gays
Will the Council amend the legislation so as to introduce full equality of treatment for homosexual men and women and thus to nullify the discriminatory judgment of the Court of Justice in the Lisa Grant case ?
The honourable Member who originally tabled the question and Mrs Sandbæk will be aware that the Treaty of Rome does not currently provide the Council with competence in the area of sexual orientation .
However , the Treaty of Amsterdam will , when ratified , provide the Commission with the legal base for future action .
The Council will continue to work with the Commission in bringing forward measures that benefit all citizens of the European Union .
I am , of course , fully aware that the Treaty of Rome does not grant these powers , but I do appreciate the answer and would like to convey my thanks .
However , would it not be possible for you to expand on this and be a touch more specific ?
In your answer , you indicated that you would endeavour to do something .
This appears to me to be a rather non-specific choice of words .
I am curious to know exactly what you have in mind .
I think Mrs Sandbæk is asking me to do the impossible .
If the honourable Member had wished to ask a specific question then I would have done my very best to answer it .
But I surely cannot be asked to predict a range of specific questions which I might wish to give answers to .
Therefore I cannot really help the honourable Member .
Mr President , I understand completely that you have difficulties in foreseeing the future .
I just wanted to ask you if perhaps in this preparation for the future , for which you are responsible , you would bear something in mind , namely that if this equalization were carried out , an absolute economic inequality would result , in which communities without children would have considerable economic advantages compared to those who have children , quite apart from the fact that it would contribute to our continent slowly dying out !
These are very delicate matters and I understand that , but I do not understand the point that the honourable Member was making .
Is he suggesting that where discrimination is outlawed among people who do not have children , they have an advantage over people who do have children and who are not discriminated against in a particular instance ?
I do not follow the logic .
Question No 14 by Ioannis Theonas ( H-0278 / 98 )
Subject : Severe repercussions for weakest economies of introduction of euro
Opposition is intensifying among workers and experts on economic affairs to the imminent introduction of the euro .
A particularly important issue in this respect is the status of the currencies not forming part of the euro zone , the impact on the economies of those countries , combatting speculation and other pressures and the effects on workers ' living standards and social rights .
Has the Council looked into this matter ?
On the basis of which studies and communications from the Commission - which has not notified Parliament of any relevant details ?
What policy decisions will it take to relieve workers of the burden they are enduring in the name of the euro and to offset the severe repercussions which will particularly affect the weakest economies ?
Far from intensifying opposition to the introduction of the euro , the most recent Eurobarometer poll shows an increase in support , though I acknowledge that this was not the case in the honourable Member 's home country , which is a matter of concern .
The Council has been very conscious of the need to ensure a social dimension to its work .
The Amsterdam European Council underlined that economic and social inclusion are complementary aspects of the more cohesive European society that we all seek .
The policy changes which preparation for the euro has required make sense in their own right and will benefit workers .
They help to ensure the correct macro-economic climate for stability and growth .
In many parts of the Union we are seeking the benefits of those policies now .
These benefits have not been bought at the expense of workers in other parts of the Union .
Growth across the Union is in the interests of citizens of all our countries .
Mr President , I would like to thank the President-in-Office , but he gave me a very general answer and I would like to help him with certain specific facts , so that we can see what reactions are being caused .
Recently , Greece decided to bring the Drachma into the Exchange Rate Mechanism .
That entry was accompanied by a 14 % devaluation of the national currency .
That devaluation is already worsening all the Maastricht indicators concerning EMU .
The public debt , and servicing it , demand an additional sum equal to 1 % of GDP , so instead of a 4 % GDP deficit we will have 5 % .
Economists tell us that for every three percentage points of devaluation , inflation increases by one percent .
Here , even if 3 % is too much , even with 4 % or 5 % devaluation for 1 % inflation , we will increase inflation in Greece by 2 to 3 % .
Public debt is increasing by 5 % of GDP .
Are working people in Greece not justified in expecting that the agreement between the Council and the Greek Government will act against their interests , when they hope that Greece will satisfy the convergence criteria in 1999 ?
I say to Mr Theonas that it is a matter of judgement by the various countries within the European Union how they can best manage their economies .
It looks as though eleven will wish to manage them in a monetary sense by membership of the euro .
Greece has indicated that it intends to join the eleven .
It has joined the ERM .
There are consequences of these decisions and the timing of those issues is a matter for the governments concerned .
The general principle is that it is in the interests of all citizens of the European Union to have a stable economic situation .
The Council believes that to achieve a stable economic situation there must be a stable monetary situation , and that is why many of the Member States within the European Union have tried to put their economies in a position where they can contribute to that stable monetary situation and benefit from it .
The warning in the long term for us all is that if we have instability and monetary disunity , then the likelihood is that there will be significant inflationary consequences in the short , medium and long term .
Those are consequences that an economy which is competing in a global context cannot afford , and that is why the policies of the Union are geared to achieving monetary stability .
It may well be that , although there is pain for the Greek economy in the short term , as the economy begins to restructure itself the benefits accrue in a longer-term perspective .
I wish to congratulate the President-in-Office on his last answer .
I agreed very much and , therefore , it reinforces the problems of those countries not in the euro .
I single out here the British economy and the UK .
Would he not agree that the situation in Britain is that not being part of the euro is damaging British industry ?
We are seeing high interest rates in the UK , which are having a detrimental effect ; we are seeing an overvalued pound , which is likely to lose a hundred thousand jobs in the UK economy next year .
Would it not be better for the President-in-Office to advise the British government that the best way it can bring about stability in Europe and stability in Britain is to declare an early entry into the ERM and an early date for joining the euro ?
Perhaps he ought to tell Mr Blair to stand up to Mr Murdoch and the Sun and declare in favour of that .
That would be the best thing to help the British economy and help stabilize Europe .
I have to say that Mr Kerr very rarely misses an opportunity to take a pot shot at the British Government .
However , I am here to respond on behalf of the Council and the Council has acknowledged the coherence in the British Government 's approach to the euro .
The Council has acknowledged that the Chancellor of the Exchequer , speaking in the House of Commons , indicated that between November 1997 and a time after the next general election a convergence process could take place and the British Government could then decide whether or not it was in the economic interests of that country to seek membership of the euro at that date .
The Council has acknowledged that the other partners in the European Union and industry and commerce in Britain and elsewhere - and , indeed , the workers and their organizations in those countries - have a better understanding of the British position .
The stability brought to the British economy by this relationship to the European economy and the euro has been acknowledged .
I cannot therefore agree that the Council should approach the British Government to give the advice that Mr Kerr seeks , although he knows himself that if he wishes to give that advice to the Chancellor of the Exchequer he is free to do so .
Would the President-in-Office like to comment on the fact that even if it were not for the single currency there was a need for consolidation of the European economies , given the fact that we are now competing in a global environment , in particular in those countries which have weaker economies and could be most at risk as a result of globalization ?
Secondly , would he like to comment on the fact that we need to make sure that all countries of the European Union , not just those that will be joining on 1 January 1999 , must start preparing , because all their businesses will be affected ?
Given Mr Theonas ' question , is it not the case that those weaker economies need to make sure that they have prepared fully for the single currency , so that their small and medium-sized enterprises can take full advantage of the stable and very large euro area that will be created next year ?
Mr Donnelly makes a very valid point that there is a need for all of the economies of Europe to make the changes that are necessary to achieve a more competitive position within a global economy .
There is a strong view , which the Council has acknowledged , that the establishment of the euro will be a major contribution to achieving that .
A number of countries who will seek to join the euro at an early stage will recognize that they need to take further action to reinforce that decision so that they can get the best out of their economy in a competitive sense .
Other economies who will choose not to join the euro or may not be eligible to join the euro at its inception will also recognize that they need to make changes in their economies as well , whether or not they enter the euro at a later stage .
For those who seek to enter , the question of convergence and preparation is of vital importance to their economies .
But even if a country within the Union did not seek to accede to the euro at a later stage , clearly businesses within their economy would probably want to link their calculations to euro calculations .
Indeed , there is already evidence that this is the case .
It is very important for the governments of those countries to do what they can to assist their industry and commerce to make the changes that are necessary .
Question No 15 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0279 / 98 )
Subject : Euro-Mediterranean relations with Algeria
In the context of the Euro-Mediterranean process of cooperation with Algeria , what practical form is the wish for partnership expressed by the Council actually taking ?
What programmes and projects have been launched in the past two years ?
What is the outlook for the immediate future ?
To what degree do young Algerians benefit from the EU ?
Does our intention to offer protection reach Algerian women ?
Will measures and programmes be introduced to combat corruption ?
The European Union is developing cooperation with all 12 Mediterranean partners , including Algeria , within the Euro / Mediterranean process launched in Barcelona in November 1995 .
A wide range of initiatives have taken place in fields as diverse as the environment , investment , cultural heritage and industry .
The needs of women and young people , as well as the necessity of combatting corruption , are taken into account when drawing up initiatives under the process which is supported by ECU 4.7 b in European Community financial assistance for economic transition under the MEDA programme .
Negotiations are also under way for a new association agreement with Algeria .
The Presidency hopes that good progress can be made in these negotiations during the course of the year .
The President-in-Office of the Council has answered the question without saying anything concrete . It was almost a compromise answer , and overly evasive .
However , I would remind him that at the moment , Europeans want to get involved and do something to support the people of Algeria .
Please give me a more concrete answer , because you have told us absolutely nothing apart from vague remarks .
Do you not think , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , that this would be a very good time to establish a specific programme in favour of Algeria , to take effect immediately , before the association agreement negotiations ?
You must realize that because of its nature , the association agreement is a long term measure , although negotiations have begun .
The reality is that young Algerians are not benefitting at all from the European Union , and neither are Algerian women .
I cannot add a lot more to what I said in my original reply .
What I can say to Mrs Izquierdo Rojo is that there will be a conference of the Mediterranean countries and the EU in Palermo in June .
That will be a further opportunity to discuss many of those issues .
But it is the aim of the Union to seek to build links with Algeria .
Economic links are important and must be accompanied by a commitment to the other things that would be incorporated into any association agreement such as democratic procedures and human rights .
Question No 16 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0285 / 98 )
Subject : The EIB 's information policy
The European Investment Bank lends money to a series of projects both in the EU and in the applicant countries .
Compared with other banks like the EBRD and the World Bank , which lend money to similar projects , the EIB provides very little information about the environmental impact of projects . This applies both before projects are approved and after the decision has been taken .
For example , the EBRD - unlike the EIB - publishes an environmental impact assessment before decisions are taken on various projects .
The World Bank also publishes documentation on the environmental impact of projects before decisions are taken .
Does the Council consider the information provided by the EIB about the environmental impact of various projects to be adequate ?
If not , what improvements does it feel that the EIB ought to make in this area ?
. Since the European Investment Bank 's task is to contribute to the balanced and steady development of the Community , it is bound to act in respect of the provisions of the European Community Treaty concerning the environment , in particular Article 130r which states that ' environmental protection requirements must be integrated into the definition and implementation of other Community policies ' .
The Council has not taken a view on whether the information provided by the European Investment Bank on the environmental impact of particular projects is adequate .
In general this is for the Commission to judge and the Honourable Member may therefore want to direct his question to that source .
The reason why I asked this question is because I have been in contact with a number of eastern European environmental organizations which are very unhappy about the way the European Investment Bank has acted in certain projects in eastern Europe , that is , when environmental impact assessments are not carried out until after grants have been made to projects which are very suspect from an environmental point of view .
I think the Council itself should take overall responsibility , since this affects the environmental situation in the applicant countries .
They expect major adjustments which could , for example , affect biodiversity which is also affected by these projects .
I think the Council itself should have an overall view about how the European Investment Bank acts in eastern Europe , and about the fact that it has a significantly worse policy than , for example , the World Bank or the EBRD .
I wonder whether you really do not see this as part of your responsibilities , since it is part of the Union 's overall policy in the area of the environment in relation to the applicant countries .
I very much agree with Mr Sjöstedt that environmental policy is a very important policy within the Union and that Community policies generally should be taking much more account of environmental matters .
Indeed , in the Amsterdam Treaty which has not yet been ratified , of course , there is an additional Union obligation to give environmental considerations a higher priority .
Currently , under existing Treaty provisions the EIB publishes an environmental policy statement which sets out its general approach .
In relation to the countries who wish to accede to the European Union , environmental matters are important matters for them and from my discussions with them they have all recognized that .
One of the things which can be identified in the accession partnerships is the need to take action on the environment .
I am sure that when those matters are identified by the countries which wish to accede to the European Union the Commission will respond with appropriate funding within their remit .
I think all the countries who want to be on the negotiating line for membership of the European Union - at the moment there are six - recognize that they have to make many environmental changes before they will be able to accede , and that involves very many issues .
One of the key issues is having the necessary regulatory expertise to be able to monitor environmental considerations and make any necessary recommendations for change : from matters relating to power stations , to matters relating to environmental standards in public parks , across a wide range of diverse issues , I agree with Mr Sjöstedt that it must be given higher priority and I am sure that the EIB is aware of its obligations in this regard and I can say that the Council will do everything it can to assist that process .
Only today we have discussed a matter in Parliament relating to the follow-up of the Copenhagen Summit on Social Development , especially in developing and less developed countries .
This included proposals which were approved by Parliament today to introduce ethical rules into trade agreements , rules which move in the right direction with regard to social development and child labour , but also with regard to environmental requirements .
It was very pleasing to see Parliament support these demands .
I see the Council 's answer as very positive and would just like to ask a supplementary question .
You say that the rules are such that you cannot always fulfill our requests for environmental impact assessments .
In that case , is the Council prepared to help change the rules for the EIB and other EU institutions in the right direction , so that environmental impact assessments can be made ?
The EIB generally has to follow the policies of the Union but it has its own decision-making structure and the Board of Governors is composed of finance ministers from the Member States and they are charged with implementing the policies of the Union in the execution of their duties .
I think in relation to agreements with third world countries one needs to strike a balance .
One cannot expect poor third world countries to immediately meet environmental standards that one would expect to be applied in rich countries within the European Union , but that does not mean that one ignores environmental matters .
I am sure that the first to recognize that would be the governments and the peoples of those third world countries themselves where they genuinely want to develop their economies , but they want to do it on a sensible basis .
They do not want to destroy their environment and I think it is wise to agree programmes over a longer period and those should rightly include environmental considerations , but not exclusively .
Mr President , I would be interested to know whether the best practice model would also be possible for the information policy of the EIB , because listing the most successful projects would have a considerable effect on the future of the other projects .
I would say to Mr Rübig that what he says makes sense .
I hope that the bank would adopt that policy .
Question No 17 by Veronica Hardstaff ( H-0288 / 98 )
Subject : Arrangements for the agrimonetary systems for non-EMU states
Will the Council be making recommendations on arrangements for an agrimonetary system for countries remaining outside the " Eurozone ' when the decision is made in May as to which countries will be the founding members of EMU ?
The Commission has indicated that it will submit draft proposals to the Council for agri-monetary arrangements to apply after 1 January 1999 , shortly after decision on single currency participants are taken in May .
The Presidency will ensure that the Council undertakes an examination of the Commission 's proposals as early as possible after due consultation of the European Parliament .
I thank the President-in-Office for his reply .
It is a matter of great urgency and anxiety among the agricultural community in those countries which are not going to be in the first wave of EMU because they are subject , not merely to the vagaries of weather and climate and the changes in CAP reform , WTO and GATT , but will continue to have considerable anxieties about the vagaries of currency exchange .
I would urge that our agricultural communities be given this information as quickly as possible so that they can plan ahead knowing that at least one area will not be as uncertain as many others in the years ahead .
I can give Mrs Hardstaff the commitment she is looking for : the Presidency recognizes the importance of this issue , and a speedy response will be given as soon as possible after the date to which I previously referred .
Mr President , this is of interest both to the countries within the single currency and to those which remain outside .
Can Mr Henderson tell us whether there is a tendency to equalize the green exchange rates with the commercial exchange rates of the currencies ?
Thank you for that further supplementary .
That would be a matter that the Commission would need to consider , and the Council would liaise with the Commission on that matter .
Thank you very much , Mr Henderson .
I fear you want to leave us .
When we started Question Time , I suggested extending it to 7.15 p.m. but you told me that your plane would not wait and you would have to leave at 7.00 p.m.
This Presidency greatly enjoys your company and the chance to listen to the answers you give to the honourable Members of this House , but I cannot keep you here against your will , when you really cannot stay .
Let us hope that in the future we can organize the work of this House better , so we can keep precisely to the time we have both agreed upon .
Thank you for your presence and your replies .
Questions Nos 18 to 40 will be dealt with in writing .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Aid for Bosnia and Herzegovina , Croatia , the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia - post-SFOR strategy ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the joint debate on the following reports :
A4-0123 / 98 by Mr Schwaiger , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council Regulation amending Regulation 1628 / 96 relating to aid for Bosnia and Herzegovina , Croatia , the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( COM ( 98 ) 0018 - C4-0105 / 98-98 / 0023 ( CNS ) ) -A4-0106 / 98 by Mrs Daskalaki , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy , on a post-SFOR strategy in Bosnia and Herzegovina containing a proposal for a European Parliament recommendation to the Council
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating Mrs Daskalaki and Mr Schwaiger on their reports .
Admittedly neither of them is present , but I hope that they have not already given up hope that their reports will be considered and decisions about them made .
They are two very good reports , two short but pregnant reports , which also go in the right political direction .
What is more , both Mrs Daskalaki and Mr Schwaiger have worked very constructively with the other groups in the committee .
When we consider the situation , particularly in Bosnia-Herzegovina , we must weigh up the positive as well as the negative developments or non-developments there . On the one hand we must say that the development in Republic Srpska has been thoroughly positive .
We have there a president who is certainly no angel on the political scene , but who has nevertheless begun to cooperate with Europe and the USA .
We have a prime minister whom we have recently been able to receive in the European Parliament , Prime Minister Dodik , whose work is thoroughly constructive .
We can surely record this as one of the positive developments in Republic Srpska .
We have not yet reached the end , and we must be careful , because the nationalists may still gain the upper hand .
Secondly , we have made progress in economic and infrastructural development .
I was recently in Sarajevo , and the picture there today is quite different , not only compared to the war period , during which I also visited it , but also in the period afterwards , up to about nine months ago , when I was last there - and that applies not only to the infrastructure , but also the life of the people and their enjoyment of living , which is becoming evident again there .
On the negative side : the return of the refugees is still faltering .
I do not say that nothing is happening , but much too little is happening .
It 's a roundabout that no-one really wants to get going , and they are all waiting for each other .
The Croats are waiting for the Bosnians , the Bosnians for the Serbs , the Serbs for the Croats , or however they want to set the ball rolling .
In any case , it is still unsatisfactory , and I believe that we must do everything we can and that all of us must encourage the High Representative to continue to work there .
The second thing which is very serious is the situation in Kosovo , in Albania , in Macedonia and in Serbia itself .
We get the feeling , and the Bosnians are getting it again , that they are still in a very weak situation .
They are the only ones who have no supporting power in their area .
The Croats have one , the Serbs have one , and there is also the Kosovo problem , which is interpreted at least as a problem of the Islamic minority in a Christian environment .
I therefore believe that it is necessary to continue to have troops on the ground , even at lower strength , and perhaps with a stronger European engagement .
In that I can entirely support Mrs Daskalaki , who is just coming in , regarding her report and the Schwaiger report .
We need more efficiency , more decentralization and more coordination on the ground .
These are also some of those points to which the Commission led by Tom Spencer correctly referred .
I have been able to see these deficiencies for myself in the past few years at the Donus conference , in Sarajevo and in other places .
We have spent a lot of money , but not efficiently enough .
This must stop !
We must spend the money more efficiently .
There must be more coordination , and more must be decided on the spot .
I believe that it is impossible to control things centrally from Brussels to this extent , because we do believe that we have them under control .
We do not have them under control because our approach is a strongly centralist one .
I am therefore glad that the Commission has presented the proposals , and I am also glad that the Presidency is going in this direction .
That is due , not least , to the initiative of this Parliament .
In this way we can hope for a happy ending , the sooner the better .
Madam President , can I add my congratulations to both Mr Schwaiger and Mrs Daskalaki for their excellent reports .
I had the honour of leading the ad hoc delegation to Bosnia some weeks ago .
I have to say I came back very angry and rather ashamed that the European Union should be represented in quite such a way , should be quite so ineffective in a crisis of extraordinary proportions .
I was angry with the Commission ; but I would like tonight to pay tribute to the way the Commission has responded in the last three weeks to pressure from Parliament and in particular pay tribute to Hans van den Broek and to everyone involved in the Commission for the agreement they reached with Parliament on Monday night in the vote in the Foreign Affairs Committee .
I have to say that until about 5.25 this afternoon I was also extremely angry with the Council because Parliament had been very critical - the delegation had been very critical not only of the Commission , but also of the Council for its failure to coordinate on the spot in Bosnia , for its insistence on lunatically complicated tendering arrangements .
I want , however , in a rare mood of openness to congratulate Doug Henderson , the President-in-Office , for what I thought was an extremely constructive speech earlier this evening .
I was impressed by the way he commented on Parliament 's amendments , and I was impressed by the way he offered talks with Parliament to resolve this matter by the end of April .
I have therefore suggested to colleagues informally tonight a timetable that would meet his requirements and I have circulated that timetable to colleagues so that the groups can discuss it tomorrow morning .
That timetable , which would culminate in a parliamentary vote at the beginning of the next plenary , would allow us to have time for discussions with the Council and with the Budgets Committee so that we could honour our side of the bargain by releasing the ECU 30 million that could be immediately spent in Bosnia .
I think we are very close on this issue .
Everything that goodwill and intelligence and flexibility can do I promise , from my committee .
This is an issue where the cooperation of the three institutions here in Brussels and Strasbourg will actually , at the end of the day , contribute to the cooperation of all three institutions and the proper representation of the European Union in Bosnia where it matters .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first to complain that this debate has been held in two parts , as often happens , unfortunately , in this Parliament , with one Commissioner , Commissioner van den Broek , attending the first part , and then another Commissioner , Commissioner Flynn , a worthy representative of the Commission but someone less interested in Bosnia-Herzegovina : this is something reprehensible , I have to say .

Moreover , the Council is no longer here and what the political groups say is of no interest to anyone .
Having said that , I too want to congratulate Mrs Daskalaki and Mr Schwaiger for their excellent work .
The first thing we have to bear in mind is that with the Bosnia-Herzegovina question Europe has given off its worst impression of the last 40 years , since the Second World War in fact .
We have witnessed a massacre , a massacre a few steps away from home , without the European Union being able or knowing how to say a word .
After giving off this bad impression - the Americans had to intervene to find a solution ! - the EU seems to be showing its own inefficiencies , its own inability with regard to reconstruction too .
It is right that attention is drawn to what is happening with regard to reconstruction .
So what is happening ?
Simply , the political instability of Bosnia-Herzegovina remains , despite all the expenditure by the European countries , by the EU ; the central institutions are non-existent to such a point that we did not even know who to sign undertakings with ; the Brussels centralization , which Brussels wanted , which the European Commission wanted for control and transparency , has had negative effects ; it has actually been counterproductive .
The more Brussels asked for control and transparency , the more obviously fraud and embezzlement multiplied .
Allocations are already rare . European public opinion is already looking at us because of budget restrictions in every country .
So we can no longer allow ourselves to have this type of attitude . We should learn from Bosnia-Herzegovina to establish an innovative approach to Community aid : no longer non-refundable subsidies , but rather partnerships and returnable loans .
I think that only one independent plenipotentiary representative , with exceptional powers and with specific decision-making powers can help in this respect .
Europe is watching us !
Madam President , let me first stress the importance which the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party and I personally attach to the effectiveness of aid for the former Yugoslavia , so that reconstruction takes place quickly and people can return to their homes .
Against that background we were very concerned when we received the report from the Parliamentary delegation which recently visited the former Yugoslavia and returned home saying that the situation there with regard to aid is not being managed in a good and efficient way .
A large number of proposals were also made regarding how the aid efforts and administration could be improved so that the aid really got where it was meant to go .
As I understand things , the Commission has accepted the line proposed by Parliament and is prepared to ensure that a more efficient organization than the one we had before is created to take responsibility for these aid efforts in the former Yugoslavia .
We think that is good .
I also thought that what Mr Henderson said today gives us reason to believe that the Council is also going to ensure that it does whatever is in its power to make the efforts effective .
Against this background , I recommended to my group this evening that we should support Mr Schwaiger 's proposal tomorrow and vote the report through . The group unanimously supported my recommendation .
Let me finish by saying that if any conclusion may be drawn from this , it is that Parliament has performed a very important function , precisely the function which falls to Parliament , namely to ensure as a supervisory authority that when there is cause for criticism , that criticism is made , and to ensure that measures are taken to correct what has gone wrong .
Madam President , the Dayton Agreement was established by military might , by imposing military intervention and interference .
Two years later , our rapporteurs have made an assessment - both of them , and many speakers as well - and have found that something may have been achieved by military means but nothing non-military has been achieved at all .
The refugees have not gone home , arms may have brought peace but it is fragile , millions of ECU remain unabsorbed , the central administration does not function , the system of democratic liberties and human rights is not working properly . So what are the results of this militarily imposed Treaty ?
They have assessed the situation and I agree with their assessment .
I disagree , however , with their conclusions because what is it that they are asking for ? An extension of the military presence , and not only that , but its reinforcement too , they are recommending that to make its presence felt the European Union must play the tune of calling for mobile military forces , interventions by the WEU under NATO 's leadership , more and more military intervention , and for what ?
To get the same result , which cannot be cured by military presence and intervention , as we see from the self-evident outcome , from the two-year assessment of Dayton .
What is the issue here ?
Let the Bosnians , the Herzegovinans , the Croatians and the Serbs bury the dead you are responsible for because of the conflicts you created .
Let them bury their hatreds and passions and find for themselves how to cooperate peacefully , so that economic and social reconstruction and development can progress . That is how the European Union can show its presence - by staying out of it .
Leave those peoples alone , before you spread more general conflict in the Balkans .
Madam President , like Mr Caccavale , I actually find this a rather farcical parliamentary debate when the groups start to speak the moment the Presidency is no longer here , and we have a different Commissioner who is following up these matters .
I have been in this Parliament for twelve years now , but this really beats everything I have ever experienced . This is what happens when you are in the European Parliament .
As far as the core of the issue is concerned , the Green Group supports the two reports by Mr Schwaiger and Mrs Daskalaki .
I would like to start by speaking to Mrs Daskalaki 's report because it is clear that if a continued SFOR presence in BosniaHerzegovina is not guaranteed , anything might happen again .
So it is vital that the presence is continued , and it is clear that there have been plenty of signals from the United States to suggest that it is going to lessen its participation . What 's more , I think it is perfectly normal that the European countries accept responsibility for pursuing peace-keeping operations in what is a European country , after all .
To me , a very important point in Mrs Daskalaki 's report is that attention is rightly paid to the force which not only has to provide for a shift towards Europe , whereby Europe finally accepts its responsibilities , but also for a new relationship between the military and the police presence .
The UN group which will be deployed for policing operations will therefore be more prominent , and will focus on training local police , and everyone in Bosnia knows how important it is that this strategy is persevered with .
In conclusion , I would like to say a few things about Mr Schwaiger 's report .
To be honest , Mr Spencer , I am not as optimistic as you , because this Parliament came up with exactly the same analysis as the one expounded in Mr Schwaiger 's report .
We have known for two years that things are not working out this way , that the situation is untenable .
We also knew which changes were needed , and they have not been implemented .
As far as that is concerned both the Commission and the Council are most certainly not without responsibility , and I think this ought to be stated pointedly here .
I believe there is hope for the future .
I am always an optimist , so I am happy to go along with this and I think it is important in this context that Parliament keeps something in reserve not to give immediate approval to everything we are promised , but to see what will be decided at the Council on 27 and 28 April .
We will not give the green light until we know that what we are getting is what we should be getting .
If together we work towards that , ladies and gentlemen , we know we will have done something for Bosnia .
Ladies and gentlemen , the agenda is set by the party leaders , and this time in the knowledge that on Wednesday evening neither the Commission nor the Council can be present .
I just wanted to let you know this .
That is how it has been set .
I regret that there was no alternative , but is was not a surprise .
It was not evil intent on the part of the Commission , there was an agreement to do it in this way .
Madam President , as a member of the ad hoc delegation I was able to see for myself how difficult the situation for people in Bosnia is at this time .
Mr Schwaiger 's report pointed out , in many proposals , what action must be taken to bring about an improvement .
However , for me as a member of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , it is important that the coordination and preparation of specific projects in the context of an inclusive repatriation programme have the highest priority this year .
For this purpose , the efforts of the NGOs and other organizations on the ground must be more strongly supported and coordinated by the Commission .
Reconstruction has been delayed because mine clearance work is not yet finished .
Also , reconstruction of the whole infrastructure , and gas , water and electricity , and traffic links , schools and health care must be more strongly supported .
For this reason , the return of refugees cannot yet take place this year in some places , but must be properly prepared , so that the refugees themselves can decide to return .
If today too many refugees are sent back too early , the region may be destabilized , and that may permanently prevent the final repatriation .
Madam President , I too was in Sarajevo some time ago , where I heard the story about the parliament building .
The parliament building was going to be reconstructed with European aid as a symbol of effective decision-making and good practice .
Since that time it has remained ruined and it is now a symbol of the inefficient decision-making of the European Union .
It is in fact terribly sad that the European Union Ambassador told me at the time , " Look , you have floods of money from the European Union , but you have decisions from the USA ' .
Madam President , shortly after the war we used to make arrogant jokes about the Americans in the Netherlands , and we used to say : you have the money , we have the brains .
But now the situation seems to have been reversed .
At the moment it is the Europeans who have the money , so to speak , and it is the Americans who are making the intelligent and effective decisions .
We have to put this down to the fact that the European Union is made up of a number of Member States who are much more interested in their own gains when it comes to construction projects , rather than a union of individual members who are capable of outstepping themselves in order to meet their responsibility .
That is the painful reason why we are lagging behind the Americans and have started to act a bit like a satellite .
That is all we are really .
I welcome Mr Schwaiger 's report wholeheartedly .
I think it is excellent and well thought out , in particular when he says we should make ourselves more visible through decentralized decision-making processes , by increasing our presence with a clearer figurehead , with a large , effective staff and a wide remit to coordinate and take decisions .
I think this is a very important issue and I thoroughly welcome the fact that it has been given so much attention in this report .
The return of refugees , and the restoration of order in a strategically positioned enclave in Europe is , of course , of significant interest to Europe .
If this is successfully achieved , then the SFOR force should stay , because if refugees are starting to return to the area , then we will need a SFOR which tries to bridge the gap between military and civil aspects , and which is able to act during riots and to make arrests , if necessary .
I find this an excellent element in Mrs Daskalaki 's report as well , and I would like to offer my sincerest congratulations to both rapporteurs on the remarkable results they have achieved on behalf of this Parliament .
Madam President , I would like to concentrate for the moment on the Daskalaki report , which I think is excellent . I would like to emphasize a few of its points .
First , it makes quite clear that peaceful reconstruction work is obviously a priority after such a terrible war , but that unfortunately it can also be necessary to secure reconstruction militarily , as we are finding in the case of Bosnia .
I believe that it is very important that this is put in writing .
Secondly , this report appeals very clearly to Europe 's own responsibility in matters of securing peace and of reconstruction in this war region .
I consider this to be quite important , because the consequence that the Western European Union was activated is a quite excellent development , and since we know how important it is to develop further the common foreign and security policy of the European Union .
One thing has almost been forgotten yet again : that essentially it was the United States which took on liability for the failure of European security policy , and I would not like to imagine what would have happened if the USA had ended its involvement and we had probably left the country in a state of chaos again .
My plea , therefore , is that we should finally work consistently to construct a common foreign and security policy in the European Union , a common foreign and security policy which actually deserves the name .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Dayton peace agreements unfortunately continue to require to be secured militarily .
The Daskalaki report about a strategy for the period after the expiry of the SFOR mandate next June therefore comes at just the right time before the decision of the North Atlantic Council about the new provisional operation plan , which will then be confirmed by the NATO foreign ministers in May 1998 .
Securing a peace - perhaps we should rather say a state of non-war - must become more and more a European responsibility .
The demand that the Western European Union should organize military action in the context of a joint SFOR operation led by NATO with Austria also taking part would be an appropriate symbol of a European security policy in the Balkans .
Unfortunately the reconstruction of Bosnia leaves a great deal to be desired .
Not because the European Union has made too little money available for it - on the contrary , it is the biggest donor , with ECU 408 million last year - but because these resources , as the Schwaiger report shows in detail , are not being appropriately administered and distributed on the ground .
A senior official with appropriate power of decision can and must remedy this .
Bosnia-Herzegovina was and is a test case for the influence of the EU in this area , an influence which must be made much more effective , particularly in view of the new crisis in Kosovo .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the two reports with which we are dealing today are closely related , and anyone who , like me and others here , has followed events on the ground for years , realizes that without the presence of the SFOR soldiers the civilian peace process has no chance .
I would recommend to Mr Ephremidis that he should go to Sarajevo and its surroundings ; he would come back with the same realization .
He could not do otherwise .
But if you do not open your eyes , you do not change direction .
The soldiers prevent open hostilities , they sometimes help to seize war criminals , they support the reconstruction literally with their own hands , for example , by building bridges .
They - at least the Franco-German brigade - are also actively involved in the repatriation of refugees , because they systematically collect data and facts village by village , which are the necessary preconditions for return , and they then pass them on to the appropriate German authorities .
For our financial help to flow and reconstruction really to start , we need an instrument other than the PHARE programme , which , for its implementation on the recipients ' side , assumes structures which do not yet exist and will not exist for a long time .
Just imagine that the Marshall Plan had had to function in these circumstances after World War II .
We would still be waiting for its beneficial impact .
Thank heaven , the Commission is prepared to follow up the discoveries of the delegation which was in Bosnia , so that finally the financial aid is reaching its target .
For egoistic national reasons , the Council shared the guilt for the previous mismanagement , but in the main it passed the buck to the Commission .
The Council must finally accept Mr Schwaiger 's proposals , for the sake of Europe 's credibility .
We need a truly responsible plenipotentiary of Europe on the ground . Otherwise , we shall lose to the Americans what little is left of our credibility , influence and respect !
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Methane emissions .
The next item is the report ( A4-0120 / 98 ) by Mr Marset Campos on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection on the communication from the Commission to the Council and to the European Parliament on the strategy for reducing methane emissions ( COM ( 96 ) 0557 - C4-0001 / 97 )
Madam President , Commissioner , the Commission 's initiative on the reduction of methane emissions at European level is essentially correct and positive .
However , on the one hand , it is somewhat late given the commitments made and our support , demonstrated in Maastricht and Amsterdam , to lead our society towards a sustainable model .
And , on the other hand , it suffers from inadequacies in terms of the first-hand detailed studies on this issue at European level which could lay the foundations for specific , global proposals adjusted to the actual situation .
Finally , therefore , it is lacking in all the proposals it puts forward .
We in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection have approved this report with the very positive incorporation of the contributions made by both the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . The Commission 's communication is appropriate and positive since methane gas is the largest contributor to the " greenhouse effect ' after carbon dioxide .
Its impact is 62 times greater than that of carbon dioxide .
In addition , it affects the ozone layer because of the fact that it reacts with hydroxyl radicals .
Added to this , methane emissions increase by 1 % a year - almost 500 teragrammes per year . Since the average life of methane in the atmosphere is relatively short and varies between 8 and 17 years , it is more effective to combine the fight to reduce methane emissions , either through a decrease in emissions or combustion .
This initiative is somewhat tardy , since other industrialized countries - such as the United States , Australia and Canada - have effectively adopted global strategies intended to reduce emissions .
Nevertheless , we believe that the initiative is also insufficient since we do not have a detailed study in Europe on this issue - there has been one on the basis of national studies , but never a specific one - , and there are inadequacies in the proposals .
I would like to look at several of them .
In general , the initiative is positive since it sets out all the undertakings given under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change , the Kyoto Conference , the Fifth framework action programme on the environment " Towards Sustainability ' , as well as the Environment Council of 1994 and the demands of the Council 's Ad Hoc Group on Climate , in accordance with the Berlin Mandate .
However , some points need to be added which we believe to be important .
Firstly , we must urgently adopt an ambitious package of legislative , economic and social recommendations .
Secondly , we believe that we should establish a European Climate Agency to coordinate all measures , including those proposed here .
Thirdly , we consider it essential to provide greater access to gas pipelines for the most important sources of methane already mentioned .
Fourthly , we should incorporate three specific issues into the proposal . As regards agriculture , we must study European rice cultivation ; we must also look at livestock farming in a more realistic way to ensure that our livestock industry is not harmed in comparison to other livestock industries ; and we must thus give more consideration to the CAP in terms of its environmental impact .
In terms of landfill sites , the proposal must be included in our European energy policy , and as regards the use of energy , we must improve the control of leakages from all types of gas pipelines and from coalmines .
There is another aspect which is worth mentioning briefly : the improvement of research .
This is important because we believe that we are missing the train in terms of providing instruments and materials in a growing market , precisely on this issue of controlling methane emissions .
We should also provide economic assistance , tax exemptions and all sorts of benefits for those European companies which are achieving a reduction of methane emissions abroad .
And finally , we need to increase public awareness regarding these issues so that they also get involved and participate in an active way and that we are not merely dependent on legislative measures .
Madam President , I would first like to thank Mr Marset Campos for his really excellent report and also the recommendations which he has presented to Parliament .
But I would also like to express praise for the Commission , because the communication which it has presented to us is excellent and of much help for the debate .
Thirdly , if you will allow me , I would like to excuse my colleague Ulrich Stockmann , who has prepared an opinion for the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy .
I am speaking in his place .
Unfortunately he has had to undergo an operation and cannot be here today .
To get to the point : First , it occurs to me that we are living in a time of great surprises , because who would have thought ten or twenty years ago that such a commonplace molecule as methane would be the subject of an evening sitting of the European Parliament ?
This puts me in a reflective mood , because it is quite possible that in future we shall discover that other commonplace things are also vitally important .
Research exists to discover things which we do not know .
It is possible that in future we shall make some unpleasant discoveries which force us to reflect .
Second , I would like to note that when I talk about research , we should really do research not just with the purpose of solving problems , however important that is , but also to discover the unknown .
This is something unknown which we have actually discovered .
The problem which faces us in this context is that methane , like other gases which affect climate , has a global impact , but that we have no global decision centre .
I am therefore especially thankful that the idea of a Climate Agency , a European or perhaps even better an international Climate Agency , is really being considered .
I know that at first such a thing raises fears of a new bureaucracy .
But I ask , in a world in which there is no proper decision centre , where can global management be done if not in new institutions which we set up ?
We must do the calculations .
We must submit a global report , we must discuss in the parliaments and governments , and we must also act globally .
At the same time , and that is the paradox in this situation , we are not just dealing with a global subject , but with a decentralized one , because the sources from which the methane comes are distributed very diffusely over the whole world .
Mr Marset Campos has indicated what these sources are .
At the same time , we also need decentralized action , enlightenment , we need to educate the people who now participate directly or indirectly in the human production of methane .
There are many examples , which are also listed in the Commission 's communication .
But that brings me to the question of how these examples can be acted upon ?
What is the motive which causes people to carry out such action or to invest money in it ?
Not everyone reads the Commission 's communications .
Not everyone reads the decisions of the European Parliament , and even if people read them , I am not yet sure that they are personally motivated by them .
What moves people ?
There must be a material reason for taking action .
That brings us to the question : How is it financed ?
What is the personal profit , in the spheres of agriculture and waste disposal , of acting differently from the way we have had to act until now ?
I would like us to put the emphasis on that when we discuss climate in future .
How can the good advice that we give , the good analyses , actually be put into effect ?
That is in fact the central question , to which until now we have basically given no answer .
We always say that the Commission must make a proposal to us , the Commission has the right to make proposals .
It is a splendid right , but sometimes also an unpleasant duty , because the answers are not always immediately to hand .
Nevertheless we hope that in the future the Commission will make proposals to us in accordance with the maxim " We must do it ' rather than " We could do it , we ought to do it ' , and that it also explains to us how it is to be financed .
That would be my request to the Commission .
It is expressed in the decision .
I thank you for listening to me .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on his report and to thank him for the work he has put in on it .
On behalf of my group we welcome the report , although we have reservations over one or two of the paragraphs , particularly the recommendation on the European Climate Agency and paragraph 5 .
I do not think we will be supporting that .
We do not see any need to set up a separate agency and I do not imagine the Commission does either , although we noticed that Mrs Bjerregaard is not gracing us with her presence tonight .
The largest sources of methane in the environment are defined by the report and by the Commission document as livestock and landfill .
I wish Mr Flynn all success in pursuing Agenda 2000 , which is the only way , as far as I can see , that we are going to reduce the methane emissions from livestock in the end .
I want to concentrate very briefly on this issue of landfill .
The paper emphasizes the possibility of high levels of methane elimination .
I wish whoever had written this in the Commission had had a word with whoever was writing the directive on landfill .
When this point was taken up by the Committee on the Environment , I as rapporteur was told by various officials in the Commission that 90 % or at any rate 100 % elimination of methane emissions via energy recovery systems or flaring was virtually impossible .
Flaring might perhaps produce very high levels of methane capture but anything else , they said , could not go above about 70 % .
They were extremely pessimistic .
I now read in the Commission 's document - pages 12 and 13 of the English text - ' Several options can reduce methane emissions from landfills , some of them by up to 90 % . ' That was denied by the Commission again and again in the Committee on the Environment , and I think that is very regrettable .
What will now happen is that we have two Community instruments fighting against each other .
The landfill directive will now make it very uneconomic for landfill operators to invest in methane recovery systems because the Commission 's own instrument demands of them that they put less biodegradable waste into landfill progressively over a period up to 2010 .
The objectives set out in this strategy are therefore combatted by a proposal from the Commission .
I think that is regrettable and I do not suppose Mr Flynn will have anything very constructive to say about it , but I thought I would put it on the record .
I should like to thank Mr Marset Campos and all those who contributed to the debate .
The aim of the communication of the Commission is to examine the problems related to atmospheric methane emissions and to identify the main emission sources and sinks , to review some cost-effective mechanisms for reducing these emissions and to provide some options that could be used in a Community greenhouse gas emission reduction strategy .
The options focus on three sectors : agriculture , waste and energy .
The communication also provides a first response .
In the light of the Kyoto Agreement that aimed at reducing a basket of six greenhouse gases , including methane , by 8 % by the year 20082012 , it will be necessary to examine further the contribution that methane emission reduction can make to the Community 's overall target .
The report by Mr Marset Campos and the accompanying motion for a resolution show that he is fully in tune with the concerns that are set out in the Commission 's communication .
Moreover , the debate on this communication could not have come at a better time since , following the agreement on the protocol at Kyoto , the Commission is now very actively engaged in further reflections on how best to implement the commitments it has made with respect to emission reduction .
Reductions in methane , as the second most important greenhouse gas , will certainly be an important consideration in the Community 's post-Kyoto strategy .
Methane is the second most important greenhouse gas after CO2 .
Given that the major proportion of methane is man-made it is vital for these emissions to be restricted and reduced .
All of those who have contributed made that point very forcefully .
In 1990 agriculture accounted for 45 % , waste for 32 % and energy for 23 % of European Union methane emissions .
Calculations in the communication show that by 2010 a reduction of up to 15 % , compared with 1990 , is feasible based on current policies .
But a reduction of up to some 40 % or more in the same period is estimated to be the maximum technically feasible , assuming that significant policy changes are made .
The Commission can therefore largely share the views set out by you , Mr Marset Campos , in your report for addressing the emissions of methane .
On the motion for a resolution itself I would like to make a few specific points .
On paragraph 2 : the Commission has made some further studies , aimed at obtaining more detailed information on methane emissions .
Specifically as regards methane hydrates I can inform you that the Director-General for Research has an ongoing project on this particular topic .
This will be very welcome news to you .
On paragraph 3 : the Commission is in the process of drawing up a strategy to meet its Kyoto commitment of reducing its emissions of six greenhouse gases by 8 % by 2008-2012 compared with 1990 .
Mr Linkohr will be very anxious to have that kind of measurement achieved .
That is our aim .
The scope for reducing methane emissions will be an important consideration in this strategy .
That is the point you make .
On paragraph 5 : the Commission takes note of Parliament 's wish to see a European climate agency as a means of coordinating public and private climate protection .
I note the difference of opinion on both sides of the House as far as this particular recommendation is concerned .
It is an interesting idea .
I say to Mrs Jackson , who makes the point very well , that there are a number of implications that need further study in this regard .
On paragraph 9 : the Commission recognizes that gas leakage from old pipelines - a point made specifically by the rapporteur - in the former countries of the Soviet Union is an important source of methane emissions .
The deployment of European Union funds for repairs to these pipelines would certainly bring environmental benefit .
Such actions would have to be considered in the overall framework in so far as the overall priorities are concerned and the availability of money .
On paragraph 21 : the Commission certainly subscribes to the view that greater public awareness is essential if emission reductions are to be achieved .
This effort needs to be taken not only at Community level but also at national and local levels if it is to be really effective .
I welcome the contributions that have been made .
Even though my colleague Mrs Bjerregaard is not here , she can rest assured that I will bring the matters raised by you to her attention .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
Suitability of blood donors
The next item is the report ( A4-0112 / 98 ) by Mr Cabrol on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection on the proposal for a Council Recommendation on the suitability of blood and plasma donors and the screening of donated blood in the European Community ( COM ( 97 ) 0605 - C4-0027 / 98-97 / 0315 ( CNS ) )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the current Council recommendation applies essentially to the first section of the previous Commission communication which related to blood safety and self-sufficiency in the Union , for which I was rapporteur .
This first section is devoted to the safety of transfusions and more particularly to the two primary conditions of this safety : donor suitability and screening of donated blood .
Self-sufficiency is mentioned incidentally , when it is a question of volumes of blood donations .
Firstly with regard to donor suitability , the Council wishes to have exhaustive information on these donors , whose gift is clearly a generous one - this needs to be underlined as we are asking , in Amendment Nos 14 and 18 , for the application of the principle of voluntary donations - but it is not without consequence for the donor or for future potential recipients of transfusions .
This information must be encouraged - this is the objective of Amendment Nos 1 and 5 - in order to gain a better understanding of , and cooperation from , potential donors .
In order to find a donor who is at the origin of a contaminated donation , it is important to set up a register to include the name of the collection centre and precise identification of the donor in the form of a code number which would guarantee confidentiality of information .
It seems essential to us that statistics should be held centrally on a single register within the Union , with a unique identification code enabling precise traceability .
This is covered by Amendment Nos 8 and 11 .
To reduce as far as possible the harmful consequences that a donation could have on either the donor himself or on possible recipients , the Council is proposing a detailed questionnaire on donor criteria .
This questionnaire is in response to the demands of Parliament itself in its previous resolution on blood safety .
There are three points in this questionnaire worth drawing your attention to .
The first relates to risks connected with journeys outside of the European Union .
Of course , many illnesses only exist and can only be caught in some countries , for example , malaria .
Nevertheless , it would be useless to discriminate in this matter and to exclude certain third countries such as North America , where some illnesses are , nevertheless , endemic .
This is the objective of Amendment No 20 which corrects the original text in this sense .
The second point relates to sexual activity .
Wherever there is sexual activity , absolutely wherever , in no matter what country , even in the European Union , there is also the risk of contracting sexually transmitted diseases .
This is why we recommend voting against the two points in the Council 's questionnaire which mention sexual activity .
The first is aimed at Africa , we do not want this included , and the second is aimed at countries other than in Africa , for the same reason we do not want this included .
This removal would render Amendment No 21 null and void .
The third point relates to homosexual practices between men .
These practices still carry very high risks , the rectum holding up much less well to the virus than some other mucous membranes .
We therefore reject Amendment No 29 , which would limit the danger to high risk male homosexual relations , as if no other male homosexual relations carried a danger .
I repeat that , medically , all male homosexual relations carry risks , very considerable risks .
The exclusion of donors on the basis of these criteria could be definitive or temporary , depending on the case and the illness .
But in any case , absolute confidentiality must be guaranteed in order to respect the rights of donors and to maintain the generosity of the general public .
Amendment No 10 is intended in this direction .
Full and specific tests must be carried out on donated blood and plasma and we must be continually informed of the existence and validity of new viral markers .
This is the intended direction of Amendment Nos 7 , 9 and 13 .
But these tests only show positive after a certain period of time in the contaminated donor , a period during which antibodies are produced yet during which the antibodies are still not sufficient to be detected by the tests .
This is where the need for a questionnaire comes in , as it is the only way of removing these high risk donors during this period .
Finally , the Council makes recommendations on the volume of blood to be taken from donors , and the frequency of donations .
The standards advocated by the Council seem a little too high to us and we would rather recommend those of the Council of Europe .
This is covered by Amendment Nos 24 and 25 .
In conclusion , Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , apart from the important questions we have raised , we advocate voting for this recommendation and our amendments .
This text will undoubtedly contribute to greater safety in blood transfusions which , without reducing the risk to zero , will enable patients within the European Union to benefit from the lifesaving support of a blood transfusion when they need to .
Madam President , I support and , indeed , salute Mr Cabrol for the breadth of experience , knowledge and compassion that he has always brought to this subject .
I am speaking on behalf of our shadow rapporteur for the Group of the Party of European Socialists , Mr Needle , who cannot be with us , courtesy of Air France , who have done their best this week to make this a shadow Parliament .
All of us here want to see a speedy passage for this Council recommendation. my group is concerned that the proposal before us has no binding force .
We look to the Council of Health Ministers on 30 April .
In Amendment No 17 we call on the Member States to work together and with the Commission on binding legislation by the end of this year , and certainly no later than 1999 .
The Commissioner will know of the concern in my country , and probably in his also , at the danger , however remote , posed by new variant CJD in the matter of blood plasma products .
We are deeply concerned that there should be a field of safety and of common practices throughout the European Union in the matter of blood products and their safety .
My own view , and that of my group , on this is that , whilst the emphasis put on donor selection and the appropriate testing of donations is fairly adequate - and it has been outlined by Mr Cabrol in his remarks - we still need to look very carefully at the monitoring of recipients of blood transfusions .
We need to be certain that throughout the Community the same measures are in effect , the same points of contact are available and information is wisely considered , assessed and shared .
One thing that concerns my group very greatly is the issue of voluntary donations , and here I agree with Mr Cabrol .
It seems to me wrong that we should be legislating here on the basis that there is not a marked distinction between voluntary donations and paid donations .
We may be a single market but there is not a market in blood : there is a community in blood .
We are in the most literal sense blood brothers and blood sisters .
The book that has most influenced my life is that by Professor Richard Titmus called ' The Gift Relationship ' , which sets out how much the principle of altruism relates to the giving of blood .
We should do nothing in the course of this legislation that makes it harder for people to offer this most precious of donations .
But we should also do nothing that makes it harder for us to trace those who , for whatever reason , might spread an infection and endanger others .
We are wholly in support of Amendments Nos 1 , 3 and 18 , tabled by Mr Cabrol , and those on the issue of voluntary donation , which have been tabled by my group .
One last word on Amendment No 29 : we need to draw a distinction between unsafe practices between men and any sexual practices between men .
There are many unsafe sexual practices between the sexes , as well as between men , and we should not stigmatize the entire gay community in what we say tonight .
Madam President , I think we all agree that this proposal is aimed at establishing a Community strategy to improve confidence in the safety of the blood transfusion process .
And it is not a new proposal , since we already have an excellent directive from 1989 , which provided for quality , security and effectiveness in terms of medical products derived from plasma .
However , we must not forget that the Convention on European Pharmacopoeia , with an excellent technical monograph , has also been ratified .
Therefore , this proposal contributes by giving more security to the entire process . For that reason we give our full support to Professor Cabrol 's report , to which he has imparted the best of his knowledge and professional authority .
However , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection has approved several amendments to which I would like to draw the attention of the European Commission since , if they are approved , they would actually distort the proposal and the Community law which is currently in force .
I will look firstly at the reference to the Council of Europe 's recommendation .
It is not that I disagree with it , but there is an accepted Court of Justice doctrine that we should not make cross-references since they are based on different legislation and we would therefore lose legal security .
Secondly , Amendment No 14 refers to the establishment of the legal principle of voluntary and unpaid donations of blood or plasma .
But talking about the legal principle seems to me to be truly absurd .
As a political objective we should move towards self-sufficiency , but establishing a legal principle , if we realize what we are talking about , is unacceptable .
Maybe I should explain in this Parliament that the Community institutions all agree that every policy should be directed towards achieving full employment . But establishing the legal principle of full employment in the European Union would be truly absurd , despite the fact that we all want to see this objective realized .
Confusing a political orientation of an ethical nature with a legal principle is a legal aberration which should not be brought about by any report from this Parliament .
I would draw the attention of the European Commission to this question so that , although it is proposed here , it acts as a sort of filter , it carries out a reasonable job - as the European Commission usually does - and does away with this reference .
In the same way , I cannot accept the attempt to apply the same principles and demands to blood and products derived from it .
I would not need to provide any example here but blood does in fact undergo a determined treatment , while derived products are treated completely differently .
I trust in the European Commission 's good judgement to ensure that these amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment are properly done away with and that they are not taken into account .
The original proposal would be thus much better with the amendments tabled , which are also original , from Professor Cabrol .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the safety of donated blood is a matter of life and death .
That is why the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party supports the request by the rapporteur for binding legislation towards the end of next year on blood products , donated blood and blood plasma .
On behalf of my group , and of my colleague Mr Eisma who is not able to be present here tonight , I would like to draw attention to the following points .
First of all , we wish to underline that blood should be donated on a voluntary basis , and that donating blood should therefore be unpaid .
It is vital that the principles recommended by the World Health Organization , namely that donations should be unpaid , voluntary and anonymous , are implemented by the Member States in cases of medical intervention to the human body .
This has not been expressed clearly enough in the proposal , which is why we fully support Amendment Nos 14 and 18 which deal with this issue in greater depth .
Moreover , we consider it extremely important for health reasons that the amount of blood a donor is allowed to give per session is reduced from 800 to 650 millilitres .
Finally , we do not wish to refuse people giving blood purely on the basis of their sexual orientation .
We think it is essential that all applicant donors are fully aware of the risk that donated blood and plasma can transmit contagious diseases .
But it would be a form of discrimination to exclude a priori all homosexuals .
Homosexuals might only pose a risk when they engage in unsafe sexual practices .
I ask you to support the Liberal Group 's Amendment No 29 which deals with this subject , and consequently not to consider this group amongst the excluded groups in Appendix 5 .
Madam President , Commissioner , our group is in complete agreement with Professor Cabrol 's report on the Council 's proposal on the suitability of blood and plasma donors .
We also agree with the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Protection .
We would like to highlight three issues which have been sufficiently discussed : confidentiality and respect for donors , regardless of any stigma ; the need to create a central identification service in Europe - as already pointed out in other epidemiological reports ; and the adoption of all the precautions necessary to avoid the transmission of diseases or new risks .
Nevertheless , there are other aspects which we would like to underline . Firstly , the maximum quantity to be donated should be the same , independent of weight , since volume of blood and body mass are two different things , and there is no direct relation between the two quantities .
Secondly , in our view , it is very important that donations are voluntary since we must remember that AIDS in fact originated in North America due to the abuse of trade in blood from Haiti .
Madam President , faced with the dangers of using blood and blood products , one necessity alone should guide all our actions and attitudes : the safety of the sick and wounded .
This is based on two factors : the competence of the doctor providing the transfusion and the quality of the transfused product .
To treat the issue lightly , or to content oneself with an approximation on the subject is a criminal attitude which has already causes dozens and dozens of deaths , not only in France , I am told .
However , the text proposed to us by the Commission seems to contain , alongside sound demands , some outrageous remarks which I was surprised had got this far without being noticed .
The fact that it is considered far more dangerous to have a sexual encounter in Pretoria than in Bangkok leaves me truly confused .
On the other hand , it is a little ridiculous to make no mention of whether sexual relations are protected or not , whilst male homosexuality is rejected as a whole regardless of the methods practised when it relates to blood donations .
On the other hand , it seems inappropriate to become alarmed when the possibility of setting up a circle of transfusion centres or of tying them into a central body is considered , for in each of our countries national blood transfusion centres collect perfectly confidential statistics , which are coded and permit traceability .
I would like to indicate finally , Madam President , that the centralization of information at European level would seem to be as safe as that at national level - I say that for the benefit of certain worried people , particularly in my country where , as everyone knows , harmful political forces are developing .
Madam President , it is impossible to imagine modern medicine without blood donation .
It saves lives .
Yet there will also be risks attached to transfusions .
These risks should be limited as far as possible , and that is what this proposal aims to do .
Thankfully , we do not need to reinvent the wheel in Europe as far as blood screening is concerned .
Much important work has been carried out by the Council of Europe .
A reference to the recommendations made by the Council of Europe is therefore in order , and I wholeheartedly endorse Amendment No 1 .
But there are two things I would like to draw your attention to .
Firstly , I believe that in principle , donations must remain voluntary .
A paid donation is essentially no longer a real donation , because a quid pro quo in the shape of money is expected .
This is a step back .
Neither for the donor , nor for safety is it desirable that blood or blood products are donated for money .
There will be an increased chance of less safe donors coming forward , and the aspect of solidarity with one 's fellow human beings will be lost .
Secondly , I would like to add a little explanation to the amendments I have tabled .
In my amendments I point to the ISBT 128 system for the identification of donated blood .
ISBT stands for International Society for Blood Transfusion .
It is a recognized body in the world of blood transfusion .
The system I have just referred to amounts to a standardized , personal identification code which is allocated to each blood donation .
This system is recognized by the United States , Canada , and a number of European countries .
It would be obvious to choose this as the general standard for Europe .
Lastly , I would like to say something about safety .
I see the enclosed survey as an extremely important selection mechanism for donors .
The questions about sexual behaviour may come across as a little inappropriate , but we all know that certain types of sexual behaviour are more dangerous than others .
As long as the responses are well protected , this should not present any problems .
The safety of the people at the receiving end is more important in this case .
Finally , a word of thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Cabrol .
It is an excellent report .
Madam President , I ask for your indulgence in advance because I wish to take a few moments longer than anticipated as I want to deal with a lot of the amendments which are extremely important for blood and blood safety in the Community .
Parliament has voiced its concern in several reports and resolutions about the safety of blood and blood products and the attainment of self-sufficiency in the Community , and the Commission welcomes the committee 's report this evening .
Parliament has noted that the recommendation is a logical sequel to the Commission 's communication presented on blood safety and selfsufficiency .
It correctly pointed out that only the first two activities , that is donor suitability and screening of donations , were addressed .
These are the very first two phases in the blood transfusion chain .
The Commission considers it sensible first to focus on them .
But I can assure the honourable Members that steps are already under way to address the other identified activities in the development of the blood strategy .
I wish to thank Mr Cabrol for his contribution and also those others who have contributed this evening .
With regard to the amendments proposed by Parliament , the Commission is prepared to accept fully Amendments Nos 5 , part b. of 13 , and 23 , and to accept partially Amendment No 2 - which requires some editing ; No 9 , the intention of which is acceptable but will require the establishment of common criteria for the parameters to be collected that are comparable throughout the Community ; No 10 , the wording of which will have to reflect the fact that much of current practice is experience - rather than evidence-based - and efforts will need to be promoted to obtain good scientific evidence here ; No 11 : the intention here should be to have a unique coding system with relevant information communicated to all Member States and to the Commission and not a unique and common code ; part of No 15 : editing here too should reflect that although the risk is still theoretical , appropriate measures need to be taken to minimize any hazard associated with possible transmission of new variant CJD via blood components and manufactured plasma derivatives .
The Commission proposed such measures in its prospective donor deferral criteria .
Part of No 16 : we have to reflect here the need for common parameters at Community level and for the collection of epidemiological data .
Part of No 19 : rewording is necessary here due to potential legal difficulties with the term ' partner ' , which must be linked to legal and administrative provisions in the Member States .
Part of No 20 : although acceptable from the aspect of travel outside the European Union , it goes beyond the Commission 's intention of recommending Member States to pose certain questions and should , therefore , I suggest , be reformulated .
Part of No 21 , which exceeds the Commission 's intention of proposing that Member States pose questions if they so wish .
There are some additional amendments as well - Nos 27 and 28 - and that is dealt with under Amendment No 11 ; and No 29 , which is acceptable .
We would like to think a little further about the actual wording there .
The Commission finds the following amendments unacceptable .
I would like to go through them very quickly .
Amendment No 1 : it is important to recall that in adopting Directive 89 / 381 / EEC , which governs the placing on the market of medicinal products made from human blood and plasma , the Council agreed that Member States should encourage the voluntary and unpaid donations of blood and plasma as the starting material for the manufacture of medicinal products .
There is , however , no definition of such donations in the directive , and significant differences exist among the Member States as to what it really means in practice .
The definition of voluntary non-remunerative donation adopted by the Council of Europe is much more restrictive than what applies in most Member States and strict adherence to it in the Community may have an adverse affect on supplies .
Amendment No 3 .
Because the Commission considers that measures to be introduced at Community level should take into account , in addition to those of the Council Europe , national and international standards , guidelines and recommendations including those of the WHO and our major partners such as those in the Food and Drug Administration of the United States .
You must remember that considerable volumes of plasma and plasma products are used in the Community which originate in the United States .
The Commission considers therefore that any reference to international standards should be as general as possible .
Amendment No 4 which is unacceptable as written because the concern is not at the risk of new variant CJD to blood products but the still theoretical risk , not yet scientifically proven , that new variant CJD could be transmitted by them .
The use of plasma as an excipient in medicinal products coming from countries which have had no confirmed cases of new variant CJD is a recommended precautionary measure and the wording used of ' imported blood between Member States ' is totally lacking in clarity , I suggest .
Amendment No 6 would only lead to some confusion and final medicinal products like plasma derivatives , derived from blood and plasma , can already move freely in the internal market , as long as they meet requirements of quality , safety and efficacy and therefore may be shared with other Member States .
But the difficulty arises when labile components , for example red blood cells , platelets or plasma prior to fractionation , are prevented from being shared with other Member States .
Amendment No 7 is unacceptable as it implies that there are Member States that are not responsible for collecting blood and plasma , which of course is not the case in reality .
The second amendment is also unacceptable because many donors do not wish to be in registers and we have to bear that in mind .
Amendment No 8 is similar to Amendment No 7 and while a common donor identification and registration system is certainly the ideal , donors themselves , on whom the entire blood transfusion chain is dependent , are reluctant to be even on national registers and a single donor identification and registration system common to all Member States contradicts the Commission proposal for a mutually compatible system .
Amendment No 13 is unacceptable because the Commission uses the word ' blood ' in its generic sense .
With regard to 9c , whether the plasma is recovered from a whole blood donation or is collected through the process of plasmapheresis , it is a sample of the donor 's blood taken at the time of donation that is tested , not the plasma .
As far as Amendment No 14 is concerned , Directive 89 / 381 requires Member States to promote voluntary , unpaid donations for plasma used as source material for medicinal products .
The exact wording must be maintained here .
Amendment No 17 : first we oppose it because it is necessary to clarify what is meant by ' blood products ' .
The labile components that do not come under Community legislation and the plasma-derived products must adhere to existing pharmaceutical legislation in respect of quality , safety and efficacy .
Now with regard to the labile components , there is no legal basis for the Community to introduce binding legislation and Article 129 only provides for recommendations or incentive measures but excludes , of course , harmonization . In future harmonization legislation might be possible if and when the Amsterdam Treaty is ratified .
Amendment No 18 : the definition of voluntary , non-remunerated donation of the Council of Europe is more restrictive than the term ' unpaid ' as used in Directive 89 / 381 , and there are significant variations in the Member States as to what constitutes such donations .
Amendment No 24 regarding the proposed donation frequency stems from the implicit assumption by the authors that each and every donation is made at the maximum possible abstraction of blood volume .
In Amendment No 25 , the whole purpose of course of automated plasmapheresis is to arrive at volumes that may exceed 15 litres but in a way that is safe for the donor .
Now finally may I take the opportunity to make a further comment on new variant CJD because Mr Whitehead brought it up specifically .
For plasma-derived products the issue of the assessment of risk of new variant CJD in blood is under very close scrutiny by the Committee of Proprietary Medicinal Products which advises the European Medicines Evaluation Agency in collaboration with the Spongiform Encephalopathy Advisory Committee .
The issue is also under discussion in the Scientific Advisory Committee on Medicinal Products .
We are awaiting the advice of these bodies just now .
With regard to blood for transfusion there is no legal recourse , under Article 129 , for us to take any action apart from non-binding recommendations .
As I said earlier , we have already done this .
As Members will be aware , this is the first proposal for a Council recommendation from the Commission under Article 129 of the Treaty .
The Commission took the decision that you should be fully consulted even though some Member States in the Council had some initial hesitation , given that there is no formal requirement to do so under Article 129 .
Mr Cabrol 's report confirms to me that the Commission was right to do so .
I want to put it on record for you , Mr Cabrol , and for your colleagues , that I will insist that you continue to be consulted on all future recommendations under Article 129 .
Parliament must have the opportunity to actively contribute to recommendations with a bearing on public health .
The Commission considers that this recommendation is a major step along the road to giving effect to the Community blood strategy that the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament helped to put in place in the years 1994 to 1996 .
I regret the length of my reply , but this is a vitally important matter for all citizens of the European Union .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
1999 budget procedure - Adjustment of the financial perspective
Madam President , since we are having a debate on three reports together , and I am the rapporteur for two of them , we will look firstly at the motion for a resolution which , at first glance , is more technical ; that is , the report on the adjustment of the financial perspective , after the technical adjustment , to take account of the conditions of implementation .
I will then go on to look at the guidelines for the 1999 budget procedure in - if you do not mind - a lighter tone to make these late hours somewhat more agreeable .
The process of adjusting the financial perspective to take account of the conditions of implementation refers to the transfer of appropriations for commitments that were not implemented in the previous year from the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Fund to the new budget year and to the appropriations for payments . This would guarantee , when necessary , as stated in the Interinstitutional Agreement , an orderly progression in relation to the appropriations for commitments .
This year , we must take account of the fact that the adjustment is different from that of previous years , since 1999 is the last year of both the financial perspective and the Structural Fund programming period .
And this has led to the Commission transferring all the unused appropriations from 1997 to 1999 .
Taking all this into consideration , and looking at the conditions for implementation in accordance with paragraph 10 of the Interinstitutional Agreement , the Commission proposes transferring to the 1999 budget ECU 1 433 million which were unused for the Structural Funds in 1997 , and ECU 101 million of appropriations for commitments unused for the Cohesion Fund in the same year ; in other words , a total of ECU 1 534 million .
Taking into account previous adjustment decisions , we find ourselves with an increase in the Category 2 ceiling of approximately 18 % in relation to the 1998 budget .
Until now the Commission proposal has strictly adhered to paragraph 10 of the Interinstitutional Agreement .
Nevertheless , this is not the case as regards the proposal on adjusting the appropriations for payments . In this respect , the Commission adopts a position contrary to the strict application of the financial perspective provided for in paragraph 10 of the Agreement , since it proposes no increase in the ceiling for appropriations for payments , on the grounds that it will be perfectly possible to face up to requirements .
Although I know fully well that an adjustment in the appropriations for payments is not limited to Category 2 , I believe that the ceiling for appropriations for payments is underestimated and that the increase in Category 2 for 1999 will worsen to an even greater degree the proportion between the appropriations for commitments and the appropriations for payments .
In its arguments concerning the appropriations for payments , the Commission constantly makes reference to the Interinstitutional Agreement .
At one point , it even states that additional payments might have been made to the value of ECU 1 000 million above the appropriations for payments provided for in the budget for 1997 .
It is at the least surprising that the Commission proposes not to increase the ceiling for the appropriations for payments .
I believe that the Commission is combining two procedures : on the one hand , the financial perspective , which is a framework in itself ; and on the other hand , the 1999 budget , which sets out the estimated actual requirements .
I would insist that we keep these two procedures separate and consequently call for the overall ceiling for the appropriations for payments to be raised by ECU 300 million .
It remains to be seen whether the Council will accept this .
If it does not , there will be a new tripartite dialogue before the presentation of the draft budget .
Having said this , I will move on to a more light-hearted consideration of the guidelines for the 1999 budget procedure .
Since I have been a member of the Committee on Culture , I am taking this poetic licence .
I do not think I am being original when I say that politics is the art of the possible .
The budget is , in fact , the practical concretion of the principles of every Community policy that we debate and approve in this House .
Making policies always involves making decisions .
We will have to adhere to these guidelines which we are going to approve throughout the entire budget procedure which I hope - since we are now in spring - turns out to be a bed of roses , rather than a calvary , despite the fact that we are about to enter Holy Week .
We are therefore now going to approve certain guidelines rather than going into the financial aspects at the moment .
Eventually , when the Council 's first reading has taken place , it will be time to earmark a total figure for each heading and line .
I have tried to make this report as brief as possible so that the political priorities can be clearly distinguished .
I understand and am sorry about the fact that the views of certain committees are not reflected but I would thank them all for having made it possible to have clear and concise guidelines .
If we had done otherwise we would now find ourselves with a telephone directory which would prevent us from separating the wheat from the chaff .
As rapporteur , I have taken on board all the opinions of the committees except , of course , those which would contradict the resolution being approved .
The report aims to present the 1999 budget as a bridging budget between the financial perspective which is ending and that which we are discussing .
Since that year marks the end of the current financial perspective and the beginning of the consideration of the new one , with the debate on Agenda 2000 , this budget not only brings to a close an era , but also must be considered as a " bridging budget ' towards the future .
The millennium is ending and we have the honour of witnessing a historic change in our continent .
This will also be the first budget denominated in euros , our common currency , which will unite Europeans even further and which will promote economic growth .
In the medium term , we will see the enlargement of the European Union to include countries which were always European .
In addition , the Union will have to continue with its objective of economic and social cohesion because it is necessary to have solidarity between the regions , so that economic development and the new technologies do not lead to an increase in the differences between the rich and the poor .
We want to draw up a budget with its own meaning for 1999 ; a budget for the people and one which can respond to their expectations of the European Union .
This does not simply involve determining income and expenditure , but it must also be able to sound out the opinion of a political union in a changing world .
European citizens , through the Member States , have transferred authority to the Union , including part of their sovereignty , so that we can thus meet their needs more successfully .
In this respect , the report refers to Article F.3 of the Treaty which states that " the Union shall provide itself with the means necessary to attain its objectives and carry through its policies ' .
Therefore , the Union 's budget should be distinct from , and complement the budgets of , the Member States .
The EU budget and those of the Members States are not comparable since the tasks and perspectives of each one are different , as is their method of facing up to common challenges and problems affecting the citizens .
In order to fulfill its task , the Union must have an influence on those aspects where there is , let us say , a " European Value Added ' which justifies strengthened action on the part of the Union .
In addition , we must note that the European Parliament has acted and cooperated responsibly in recent financial years in order to ease the path towards convergence for the Member States .
And it will continue to do so , although it will not lose sight of the budget 's political significance .
Parliament is in favour of rigour , in the sense of a more efficient and rational use of financial resources .
I do not want to wave the teacher 's stick , but I must in order to reprimand the Council and the Member States for not having done their work , since in order to fulfill the commitments made at Edinburgh concerning the package for Structural Funds , and at Cannes , for the PHARE programme , this 1999 budget must face increases estimated at around 18 % for Category 2 appropriations and 36 % for Category 4 .
Moreover , we must condemn the scandalously inadequate implementation of the Structural Funds in certain Member States .
This does not represent a saving for the European Union , but a fraud against the citizens , who are deprived of European intervention which would help relieve their problems .
Nevertheless , Parliament must be clear on the fact that , in the budget procedure , the Council is neither an enemy nor an adversary nor a rival .
We should not mistake this for a war .
The Parliament and the Council share piano and stool in playing a " duet ' .
We need loyalty in the interinstitutional dialogue through which the two branches of the budgetary authority come to agreement on the score .
Among the main tasks of the melody to be interpreted are the priorities established in paragraph 3 of the report : the creation of employment through investment in infrastructure and research and development ; support for small and medium-sized enterprises ; and measures to combat youth unemployment .
We also want to develop the concept of the Europe of knowledge which encompasses education and training as well as research and development .
There is no doubt that Europe 's greatest potential is in its people , in the human value of the Europeans raised in an age-old society .
In the same way , the 1999 budget must pay careful attention to the environment , in accordance with the commitments made at the Kyoto Conference .
I will now conclude my speech , ladies and gentlemen .
Music has always united our countries , overcoming all sorts of frontiers and barriers .
I hope that the genius of our great composers enlightens us and that Parliament and the Council can emulate Arthur Rubinstein in the interpretation of this " suite ' which is now beginning .
Madam President , I would like to begin my speech regarding the sections of the other institutions by firstly stating my satisfaction at the decision taken by the Presidency , which adopted the preliminary draft budget yesterday .
This enables us to observe the timetable we set ourselves in committee , and observe the tighter deadlines we have this year , which could allow us to begin the budgetary conciliation procedure with the Council on 17 June , as planned .
I also hope that this year the budgetary conciliation with the Council will take place in the same spirit of reciprocal cooperation that meant that last year we avoided a second reading .
I will now look at the figures in heading 5 , administrative expenditure .
The forecasts indicate a 4 % increase , that is , ECU 182 million , compared with last year .
This means for example that for the European Parliament , as 20 % is allocated to Parliament , a margin of ECU 36 million .
For Parliament , but for the other institutions as well , this margin is obviously not a cost objective , but a cost ceiling .
This is because we cannot ask for less rigour for ourselves than that imposed on all the Member States at this particular time .
One of the lines I have indicated , with the consent of the Committee on Budgets in these guidelines , concerns firstly changing the nomenclature ; this is a requirement laid down by Article 19 of the Financial Regulation , which talks of harmonizing the nomenclature .
This will necessarily lead to greater facility in reading the budget and a greater transparency in it .
Here too , I have to give credit to Parliament for conforming to the decision taken by the Committee on Budgets , which goes back to the previous year , in the budget adopted yesterday to which this new nomenclature we had hoped for is appended .
The other guideline relates to the increase in the staffing structure , which in principle should be based on the anticipated rigour that applies to all the institutions .
Obviously , this cannot happen unless we do not have to provide for necessary and justified requirements which can arise in the various institutions , such as requirements connected with negotiating the enlargement .
We would like similar supporting documentation to revalue jobs , and I have asked all the institutions to provide information on the measures concerning the reorganization of labour and concerning mobility , on vacancies arising as a result of retirement , disablement or sickness , on recourse to auxiliary agents and even on recourse to interinstitutional competitions and the list of jobs that will be vacant in 1999 .
I have also confirmed the decisions taken by the European Parliament on its property programme and on exercise of the purchase option , on the transfer with regard to the property of the Court of Justice , on dealing with the problems of asbestos to be eliminated from its properties and the fitting-out of premises for the Committee of the Regions and the Economic and Social Committee .
In this connection , I wish to say that I consider it essential , before the conclusion of this budget procedure , to include a definitive solution for these two institutions , indicating specific times , costs and their final establishment .
I appreciate the decision of the Presidency to avoid following up the onerous request to build a new hemicycle in the building in rue Belliard , that would have cost at least ECU 16 million .
The Presidency has decided to make one of Parliament 's rooms available to the committees , following their transfer , to be used as a hemicycle .
The first reading will obviously deal with the results of the implementation of the previous budget .
Finally , a further guideline for all the institutions is the preparation of a detailed report , supplemented by the timetable on the consequences of the introduction of the euro for each institution and the computer problems for the year 2000 .
To conclude , Mr President , I hope that , in continuing their work , all the institutions will show a sense of responsibility according to the current experiences of the EU and the Member States , on the example of that unfortunately shown yesterday by the Presidency of this Parliament which limited the increase to 0.64 % compared with the previous year , well below the objective of a 2.5 % increase fixed by the Commission for administrative expenditure .
Madam President , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on the budget for 1999 , I greatly appreciated the fact that the general rapporteur , Mrs Dührkop , had started to consult the different sectors , in particular the agricultural sector , at a very early stage .
Both the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development are determined to continue the procedure followed for the 1998 budget as far as agricultural expenditure is concerned .
It is important that this procedure , which in the meantime has been christened the " Tillich-Mulder ' procedure , is also adopted by the Commission and the Council in equally positive terms .
The precise description of this procedure can be found in the working document of the Committee on Budgets , namely Working Document 12 of 2 February this year .
As far as the report at hand is concerned , I contributed to the more precise wording of paragraph 13 on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . Three points are emphasized in this paragraph .
The total figure set by the Commission for Category 1 in its draft budget , should not be taken as a ceiling .
This figure may be based on possible estimates , but these have no normative character as such .
The final figure in this budget category should continue to be adjusted for as long as possible on the basis of more current expenditure estimates , in other words , right up until the second reading .
A possible amendment for the Council and the Commission will then be a rather binding guideline .
Should cuts be necessary in the meantime , these should be made selectively for certain budget items , which must be looked at anew , and not across the board .
Finally , the problem of the reserve should be further clarified .
In the area of agriculture , where more clear-cut estimates will made in future , a reserve provided for by resources , is essential .
The reserve system which will have to be drafted in general terms could be used to fall back on in part , but general uniformity would sell short the specific character of the agricultural budget .
This clear method of approach guarantees a good basis for an effective agricultural budget policy , and gives Parliament a bigger involvement in the agricultural expenses than has been the case for many years , an experience which will be valued by the Commission and , hopefully , by the Council .
Madam President , in the budget for 1999 we are not just preparing for a new millennium , but we are also laying the foundation stone for the greatest challenges to European integration for many years .
Since the announcement from the Commission and the European Monetary Institute about monetary union , we now have fairly precise information about the timetable for a common currency as well as its prospects and the risks involved .
The continuation of the information campaign about the introduction of the euro remains an important matter , to prepare the European population fully for the conversion , because in this field we can look very positively into the future .
On the other hand we are already setting course for the ambitious project of expansion to the east in the next millennium .
There is much for us to do there , too .
So we must strive to accelerate further the completion of the internal market , to remove existing obstacles from our path .
We should therefore pay special attention to suitable measures such as the action plan for the internal market .
We must also strengthen the trust of the citizens in the problem-solving skills of the European Union .
This includes , above all , the ambitious driving forward of the employment initiative , on which we decided last year .
I would like to point out once again the role of small and medium-sized enterprises in creating jobs .
We have already heard this week that the measures to support small and medium-sized enterprises which have been provided are now almost too numerous to count .
Yet the resources are apparently far from exhausted in many fields .
We therefore need a comprehensive , precise evaluation by the Commission , so that suitable measures can be carried out within the next budget plan , and so that the efficiency of support for small and medium-sized enterprises can be effectively increased .
One more thing must be clear to us in this context .
The most effective support for companies is the kind which from the outset leaves the resources and effort in the companies .
Therefore , in the budget procedure , we should conform exactly to the principles of SLIM legislation , that is of a SLIM initiative , on which we have already voted today in this House , or to general bench marking .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy has naturally considered in detail the guidelines for the 1999 budget .
There are two particular subjects which we regard as particularly urgent .
They are , first , the transition from the fourth to the fifth research framework programme , and second , in the field of energy policy , the conversion of the Kyoto decisions into a clear policy of the European Union .
First I would like to thank the rapporteur for including both subjects in the guidelines .
We are conscious of this honour , because not every committee manages to have its subjects included in the guidelines .
On the other hand , the rapporteur promised us that in a kind of new Dührkop Dührkop procedure all opinions of the committees would be included in the decision .
Unfortunately that was rejected by the Committee on Budgets .
We regret that very much , Mrs Müller , because we are already conscious of the problems regarding the financial resources of the fifth research framework programme , and because we also know that , in particular , the question of how we are to handle the year 1999 in terms of budget policy is not altogether easy to answer .
It would have been very sensible if the Committee on Budgets had accepted the proposals of the Research Committee , so that , in particular , we can manage the transition next year in an orderly fashion .
We hope that during the first reading more precise numbers will be available , including those from the Council , so that we can make progress in providing financial resources to the specific programmes .
Regarding energy policy , there is an urgent need to act at European level .
I do not think that the statements in the guidelines do justice to this problem .
We hope that at first reading , which we as a committee will follow very closely , we shall succeed in getting support for our concerns , even in the Committee on Budgets .
Mr President , the 1999 budget exercise is getting under way in an atmosphere of serenity and interinstitutional cooperation .
There are encouraging signs that it will live up to the great challenges of the Union : employment creation , Economic and Monetary Union and the preparation of enlargement .
In 1999 Economic and Monetary Union will enter into its third stage .
The recent reports and the reactions have underlined the continuing determination of the Member States to improve the health of their public finances .
This climate of budgetary rigour cannot be ignored at Community level either .
The guidelines concerning the Community budget for 1999 show that all institutions are ready to assume their responsibilities in this respect .
Bringing the increase of payment appropriations roughly in line with the growth of national budgets - as proposed by Barbara Dührkop Dührkop - indicates a very responsible approach by the European Parliament .
Within a rigorous setting , the 1999 budget must meet the obligations of the Union and focus on growth and employment creation .
With regard to agricultural expenditure , the Commission expects - for the time being - credit requirements at the level of the 1998 budget .
Should these forecasts change significantly during the year , the Commission will follow the successful procedure last year and submit a late rectifying letter .
I take note of this procedure - it is called the Tillich-Mulder procedure in your report .
For the structural actions , 1999 marks the end of the current programming period .
The tentative agreement at the budgetary trialogue yesterday to increase the ceiling of category 2 by EURO 1534 million in commitments and the overall ceiling for payments by EURO 300 million paves the way for correct conclusion of this programme .
For internal policies , the institutions should jointly underline the efforts to contribute to growth and employment creation : the fifth research framework programme - for which a satisfactory agreement must be found well before the end of the year - the reinforcement of the Trans-European networks and the ' employment and growth initiative ' are the principal priorities in this respect . The ' employment and growth initiative ' is a joint success of the European Parliament and the Council .
It is a three-year programme and should therefore continue to be the focus for the 1999 and 2000 budgets .
On external action , the particular emphasis will be the transformation of PHARE into an effective pre-accession instrument .
The Commission will propose reinforcing PHARE by ECU 150 million in a supplementary and amending budget for 1998 to bring its multi-annual envelope into line with the decisions of the Cannes summit .
Naturally , this proposal will have to be accompanied by a detailed assessment of the scope for implementation .
On these elements there seems to be a convergence of views among the institutions .
It is also encouraging that yesterday 's budgetary trialogue agreed to relaunch discussions on the question of ' legal bases ' at a technical level .
It is in this framework that the Commission will discuss and adopt the preliminary draft budget for 1999 at the end of this month .
I have every hope that the reinforced interinstitutional cooperation which has permitted a successful 1998 budget will again bear fruit for the next year .
This would then perfectly set the tone for the next interinstitutional agreement which we should discuss in the months to come .
Madam President , if Mrs Dührkop Dührkop can wax lyrical at this late hour I am sure you will allow me a little bit of levity if I say first of all that Commissioner Liikanen has virtually stolen my speech .
He said the things that I was going to say and when he began by saying that this is a budget which is surrounded by serenity , following Barbara Dührkop 's analogy with playing a piano . I am reminded of Eric Morecambe , the great comedian from the UK who is now dead .
There was a sketch where Eric Morecambe is playing and is making a real honky-tonk noise .
It sounds absolutely awful and André Previn says , ' you are playing all the wrong notes , ' and Eric says , ' I am playing the right notes , but not necessarily in the right order . ' That has always seemed to be the way we have done the budget in the past , and Barbara 's analogy with playing a piano is not too far out , because this year is different .
I said it when Helen Liddell first came to the Budgets meeting .
We do not deal with the Commission like this - we even had a Scots interpreter in the English language booth doing it with a Scots accent for Helen Liddell .
It seems that everything is going so well and that is good .
I think it shows the partnership that is being developed and a maturity towards the budget from the three institutions involved .
On Mr Viola 's report , I think we have to say that the fact that it is unamended and went through Committee unamended shows the consensus from all the groups as far as these guidelines are concerned - what we expect from the budgets of the other institutions .
We congratulate Mr Viola on the work he has done and we hope that consistency will continue as we go through the year .
On the Dührkop report on the adjustment of the financial perspective , the trialogue which occurred earlier this week , as Commissioner Liikanen said , has been extremely fruitful , carried out in an atmosphere of cooperation where the three institutions want to get a settlement .
It is not an adversarial situation where we are trying to score points off one another ; instead we are actually trying to get a budget which we can all agree to and this adjustment of the financial perspective .
One hopes that when Mrs Liddell goes to the Council she can come back and report to Parliament that the additional resources that have been provisionally agreed can be agreed in total .
It would be a major achievement if we could see that .
On the main report , the political group which I represent as coordinator supports it throughout - to such an extent that we wanted it to be kept , like Mrs Dührkop 's , as short as possible .
As to the amendments which have been proposed , we agreed last week not to support any amendments , and I say this mainly for colleagues like Mr Brinkhorst .
We see nothing wrong with his Amendment No 1 , but we actually think it is better placed within the first reading .
On this occasion we would not be inclined to support it .
Having said that , several of my colleagues see no reason why we should not support it , and I remain to be persuaded that we should support it between now and voting time tomorrow ; so do not give up hope yet , Mr Brinkhorst .
If we do vote against , let me make it clear that it will not be because we disagree with the content of that report , but because we took a stand to keep this report as short as possible .
We can apply that to many other amendments , but please try to understand that it is not for dogmatic reasons , it really is a matter of simplicity .
It is a budget , as Commissioner Liikanen said , of prudence : we use the terms ' a citizens ' budget ' and ' a taxpayers ' budget ' in the same sentence and I think that is what we are trying to achieve with these guidelines .
When we look at the priorities , as far as our group is concerned the main priority is about job creation , about creation of employment ; no matter how we do it , whether it be through infrastructure , whether it be through research and development , whether it be through support for small and medium enterprises .
That is the thrust of our approach to this budget .
We also support the phrase ' Europe of knowledge ' which Mrs Dührkop has introduced - one would expect her to give priority to education and training , having known her for many years ; and we would want to see European funds spent in the area of education and training and research and development . The thrust of the report you can find in paragraph 8 , and I think we can give our full support to what it says there .
At the end of the day it is about getting that agreement , about making sure that the three institutions are working together .
And who knows , at this rate we may end up with one reading of the budget .
Oh that it were so !
Madam President , I would like to state that I agree with the budgetary guidelines contained in Mrs Dührkop Dührkop 's report .
This agreement indicates that , apart from the discrepancies in terms of economic policies , there is a common concern among the groups of this House as regards European problems in fighting unemployment and strengthening the European dimension of the Community budget .
It is hoped that the 1999 budget procedure will maintain a similar procedural basis and form as that used in 1998 , when the European Parliament was able to defend its own priorities before the Council , thereby achieving the extension of the ad hoc procedure including that of the late rectifying letter to the PDB , not to mention the almost unanimous commitment of this House to defend appropriations earmarked in the PDB for the Structural Funds in Category 2 .
It is true that this year the process is even more complex since it marks both the end of the current financial perspective and the beginning of Agenda 2000 and the problem of using up the remaining appropriations for commitments .
Our opinion is that the appropriations provided for in Edinburgh for 1999 should be strictly respected , and among the existing alternatives we should choose that which guarantees that every last ecu available will be fully committed for the Structural Funds for Category 2 .
We will continue to show that the current financial perspective should be the basis for the next perspective , particularly as regards the percentage of own resources : taking 1.27 % as a base and not as a ceiling should be the financial expression of the European effort for enlargement .
Ladies and gentlemen , there is a common link between this evening 's discussion on the guidelines for the 1999 budget exercise and yesterday 's debate on the procedure for discharge of the 1996 financial year which has of course not escaped you .
The link is the importance recognized in the execution of the budget and the fight against fraud , whilst proposing to make the 1999 budget the " taxpayer 's ' and the " citizen 's ' budget .
Indeed , having arrived at a crucial and decisive stage in its development , with the creation of the euro and the commencement of accession negotiations , Europe needs to be explained to its citizens and to be understood by them more than ever before .
Europe can only be credible and can only inspire confidence if the tax payers ' money is managed soundly .
The rapporteur 's second concern is to make the 1999 budget the budget of the people and on this point also , I like the sound of what she is saying .
The public must be convinced that Europe is made for them and it seems to me extremely important to strengthen social and economic cohesion .
Without this understanding they will end up punishing us , there is no doubt about this .
More than a management budget or a simple " bridging ' budget , the 1999 budget could , above all , be a pivotal budget which will determine the conditions of the financial future of the European Union .
With the new financial perspective , with a new interinstitutional agreement at the beginning of the third stage of Economic and Monetary Union and within the context of the Agenda 2000 negotiations , the 1999 budget will be seen as a budget for revival , whilst at the same time taking up the already well known priorities which must be continued : budgetary action for jobs - a commitment in the 1998 budget gained support from the European Council of Luxembourg in November 1997 - priority to jobs through investment in infrastructure and research and development , support to SMEs , measures to combat youth unemployment , and to provide education and training for a " Europe of knowledge ' .
A pivotal budget , a revivalist budget , but a realistic budget as well , one which recognizes that the increase in appropriations for payment for 1999 must not surpass the average growth in Member States ' budgets in relation to the 1998 budget , but within certain acceptable conditions such as respect for the Edinburgh objectives for Structural Funds .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Union for Europe Group and I support the rapporteur 's approach , and are convinced that the budget exercise will commence auspiciously well .
Madam President , the significance of the debate on the budget at this stage is , as Commissioner Liikanen said , that it gives joint guidelines for the Commission in its forthcoming preliminary draft budget .
From listening to the debate so far it seems that we are going to have a very easy ride .
The Commissioner has pre-empted matters by referring to a number of points in Mrs Dührkop 's report .
During the life of this Parliament we have seen significant progress .
When Parliament itself give clear and concise guidelines it will have an impact on the Commission 's preliminary draft budget .
I congratulate Mrs Dührkop for being very concise and having the courage to inject useful but limited guidelines on the number of sites .
She has withstood the temptation of becoming a telephone directory , as she herself said .
The ELDR largely share the priorities expressed in the House by many others .

Let me just concentrate on one point raised by Mr Wynn , who was so kind as to say that the Socialist Group , having not finalized its view , still thought that for reasons of principle it should not vote for particular amendments which our group would like to put forward .
I would hope that Mr Wynn could reconsider this point .
It concerns the Treaty of Amsterdam .
That Treaty will enter into force by 1999 .
It will be useful for the Commission to understand the signals from Parliament that it is already taking the view that the Schengen information system and Eurodac , which are key elements in transforming the first pillar into an area of freedom , security and justice will actually be incorporated .
We hope , therefore , that you can go one step further so that we can give this guideline to the Commission to introduce it in the preliminary budget .
Madam President , notwithstanding the serenity mentioned by Commissioner Liikanen , we are aware that the current budgetary process is particularly important and complex .
It is the last of the present financial framework , and it also acts as a sort of bridge to the next framework , while some see it as the closing stage of a cycle .
Mrs Barbara Dührkop , therefore , does not have an easy task .
I sincerely hope that this is not the beginning of the calvary that she mentions in her statement .
With regard to the report , I would like to begin by saying that we agreed with much of what it contains .
It goes without saying that we identify with the priorities of employment , education , vocational training , environment , more intensive control of programmes and development policy .
We welcome the clear request that , regarding Structural Funds , Edinburgh should be respected , and we draw attention to the importance accorded to monitoring execution and to the efficient use of funds .
However , there are other points that we also consider to be important but on which we diverge .
Firstly , we consider the pursuit of those priorities to be incompatible with the budgetary restraint that continues to be advocated .
Such restraint is also , although not explicitly , a real priority of this as of previous budgets .
But , in our view , it is not possible to fulfill the ambitious priorities listed with the limited means that will consequently be available to the Union .
Moreover , we do not agree with the proposal contained in paragraph 10 of the report , despite the positive amendment already introduced at the suggestion of the rapporteur whereby this budget will cease to be the sole foundation and become one of the foundations of future financial perspectives .
In this connection , we consider that the proposal of the Committee on Regional Policy , contained in the amendment relating to this point , is much more reasonable .
Indeed , we do not understand how this budget can be even one of the foundations of future financial perspectives .
As stated in the report , it may be a bridge , but not a foundation .
The foundation for future financial perspectives can and should be confined to current financial perspectives .
That is , moreover , consistent with what we earlier approved when we voted for the Colom i Naval report , specifically regarding the ceiling of 1.27 % or , more correctly , of 1.13 % of GNP for payments at the end of the period , as is proposed by the Commission .
Meanwhile , and still on the same point , we have serious reservations regarding the creation of a preallocated reserve .
We are in no doubt that the aim is to contain spending , since the creation of the reserve is explicitly connected with reducing the " burden on taxpayers ' .
However , the text does not clearly define either the mechanism whereby this objective is to be achieved , or even its practical consequences .
In all events , we fear that it will certainly have the effect of negating the concept of Community funds as we understand them today .
These are the reasons why we will vote for the report provided the proposal of the Committee on Regional Policy is approved .
Madam President , I would first like to thank Mrs Dührkop and Mr Viola sincerely for their reports .
I believe that they are balanced guidelines , and it seems particularly important to me that we should build a so-called bridging budget , which begins to mark out our vision for expansion in the years 2000 to 2006 .
I am particularly glad about the setting of priorities , and that the rapporteur has observed the canon of priorities so consistently , to give it special emphasis , and I am obviously in particular glad about the priority for the post-Kyoto process with the new budget for 1999 , which allows us to make a decisive contribution .
At this point I would like to announce to the rapporteur some fireworks , good proposals from my party , fireworks which on this occasion do not produce any CO2 .
I would like to make , on behalf of my party , proposals which aim at information campaigns to encourage the use of products whose manufacture uses little energy .
I would like to promote restructuring in the research budget , modern energy-saving technologies which lead to a real breakthrough .
I would like the rapporteur to promote pilot projects in the budget , heating insulation for private houses , offices and energy-intensive industries .
And of course , particularly in view of the newcomers in the European Union , I would like to put through a realignment of the SAVE and ALTENER programmes .
Last but not least , a million solar panels , a programme for the acceptance of photo-voltaics .
I believe that if the rapporteur , as she has shown until now , is disposed to ' putting butter on the fish ' , and to allowing the priorities to be followed by deeds , a real contribution to the post-Kyoto process can be made in the next budget .
I hope so , and in this spirit I hope for continued good cooperation .
Madam President , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , the new buildings in Brussels also created work , at least in Brussels .
But I really wanted to say something about the 1999 budget : Commissioner , your speech was not bad , but the one which you made about the budget ratification was better , because you made it in French !
You yourself classified it as more sexy .
As for the 1999 budget , I would like to make five points .
First : the 1999 budget is a bridging budget , as Mrs Müller has already said , because no one can still be of the opinion that we can discuss the 1999 budget without bearing in mind that the new financial perspective for 2000 to 2006 is being dealt with simultaneously .
Second : this means that we must come to terms with the difficulties that the 1999 budget has produced .
No one can explain away the fact that an 18 % rate of growth in the appropriations for commitments for Structural Funds is of a dimension which is beyond the discussions and the possibilities of a budget discussion .
I would like to quote a sentence : ' This is not of this world . '
It is appropriate here if people believe , as someone once wrote in Edinburgh , that the matter can simply be prolonged .
Third : in the case of the foreign policy programmes , we have a spending situation which is equally haywire .
If resources of ECU 2 300 000 000 were not committed and ECU 3 200 000 000 were not paid out within the PHARE programme alone , it must be clearly said that in 1999 it makes no sense to increase the PHARE programme by 36 % , only to put into the budget cashbox money which was deducted from other foreign policies by 10 % reductions .
Projects in South Africa , South America and Asia , and all sorts of NGO programmes , are suffering as a result , just to present something which actually will not happen in the budget year .
These are the problems which confront us when we discuss the 1999 budget .
We have , that is Mrs Dührkop Dührkop has found a formulation in paragraph 8 of her guidelines , in which , as never before in this House , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , she states in writing that Parliament is only prepared to join in creating a 1999 budget growth rate which is on the level of the budget growth rates of the Member States .
We have never before committed ourselves to such a condition .
But if that is what is wanted , the problems which I have just mentioned must be solved .
And if we want to solve them , we shall have to find ways whereby the future financial perspective can be announced at the same time .
That must be based on more flexibility , and on the principle that no Member State can be forced to effect expenditure that takes money from the Community budget , if it itself is not prepared to take this money .
In the informal three-way discussion , and in the three-way discussion on Tuesday , I said , " The 1999 budget will only materialize - and I say this here very clearly , above all so that it is on record for the Council - if there is an interinstitutional agreement between the three institutions about the questions of the legal bases . '
Please , let no one hide behind the legal process which has been initiated before the European Court of Justice .
We need a solution to this problem in principle .
Parliament is ready for it , and I have the impression that the other two institutions are too .
But prepare yourselves - I am not fooling around - there will be no 1999 budget if this problem is not solved .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , we started the 1998 budget procedure during or around the time of the Ajax Amsterdam football match .
This evening there is also a football match , between Real Madrid and Borussia Dortmund .
I shall come back to this point again at the end .
Mr Fabre-Aubrespy mentioned the first of April . We would surely rather have seen the football match , but the seriousness of the situation , namely the 1999 budget discussion , keeps us fixed in the House at this hour .
For the first time , information policy is not firmly anchored in the guidelines .
We have assumed that we shall have a viable concept between the Commission and the European Parliament of how information policy in 1998 is finally to be controlled .
However , unfortunately this does not seem to be the case , and I would like to remind at least those who have been elected from this House as representatives to the Bureau or the Conference of Presidents to look again at the budget decisions of 1996 , 1997 and 1998 in paragraphs 18 of the 1998 guidelines , 30 , 31 and 32 of the 1998 first reading , and 11 of the 1998 second reading , and paragraphs 9 of the 1997 guidelines , 17 , 48 , 49 and 50 of the 1997 first reading , because precisely in view of the morning discussion today that is certainly not unimportant for the Bureau and the Conference of Presidents .
But now to the content of the guidelines before us .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Dührkop , you have in paragraph 2 , I believe , a mistake which only originates in the German version , because again it refers to an employment budget .
That might be a problem for our party , but I know that you mean a budget for more employment , and therefore I ask you to make an alteration , at least before the vote tomorrow .
In the fourth starred point of paragraph 8 , again at least in the German version , there is such an unfortunate formulation that I do not understand it at all .
In paragraph 9 , I consider that your own formulation is excellent , and I believe that it hits the nail on the head .
Therefore , our party will apply for a split vote , above all on the question of a vote on the critical mass and the policy of the Commission , because in our opinion this does not belong to it in principle .
We consider that your formulation is better .
In paragraph 15 , which concerns the employment initiative which was defined and voted on in the 1998 procedure , the second part is at least unclear , if not actually wrong .
We have quite clearly declared ourselves for the three main aims of this employment initiative , and also voted for them .
At midday today we finally voted on the Pronk report as the legal basis , and we also said that small and medium-sized enterprises should be taken into account in the field of the third system together with others , but what it says there now is that they should be given priority .
That is not what we voted for .
As far as the amendments before us are concerned , we agree entirely with the submitter of the first amendment , Mr Brinkhorst , at least as regards its aims , but we have not yet formed a final opinion .
To come back to the football match : today in Spain , in Madrid , the match was delayed by an hour because the goalposts fell down .
Since Mrs Dührkop comes from near Barcelona , and such a thing never happens in Barcelona , I wish the rapporteur , and the other rapporteur Mr Viola , great success in remaining standing throughout the 1999 budget discussions .
Madam President , I wish to begin by congratulating the two rapporteurs , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop and Mr Viola , on having produced guideline resolutions which are just that .
They are guidelines and they have strenuously resisted what so often happens if people try to turn the guidelines into some sort of advance and premature first reading .
What we have here is a very clear view of principle .
I merely want to refer to a couple of paragraphs in Mrs Dührkop Dührkop 's excellent report and underline them , in particular recital D where she emphasizes that what we have to concentrate on in the budget procedure is the whole question of the collection of revenues so as to avoid wastage .
We spend so much time dealing with expenditure that we have to prioritize the proper collection of own resources as a major , fundamental and integral part of the budget procedure .
The other point I would highly commend her for is the incorporation in paragraph 9 of her report of the response to the challenge laid down by Commissioner Liikanen some two years ago about the policies of critical mass .
Today in the guidelines motion he has Parliament 's response , and we hope that , having had Parliament 's response , we get preliminary draft estimates that reflect that response in a way that we can see .
If you read paragraph 9 carefully , Mrs Dührkop has there accepted the challenge that it means looking at those policies which should be continued and even reinforced , but also at those which should no longer be thus considered .
So it has bitten the bullet , it is a serious response , and one which I commend .
For the rest of my time , I want to turn to Mr Viola 's report which , again , is excellent .
The points I would underline in his report are as follows : in paragraph 4 he makes the very important point about the European civil service .
I hope when we are talking about the European civil service as we proceed into the detail of the budget , we will perhaps extend some of the thoughts set out there and talk about both appointment and promotion being exclusively actions which should take place on merit .
This should be the only criterion for appointment and promotion within the European civil service .
I note and welcome in paragraph 5 the view that no new post ought to be created in 1999 , and I hope that , as we progress into the budgetary procedure , the caveat expressed there is one that can be dropped .
I commend very fully all the points that are laid out in clear chronological sequence in paragraph 8 of the report , where there are a whole series of matters on which this House , as part of the budgetary authority , needs further information .
I particularly turn to paragraph 9 - property policy .
Today , as has already been recalled , is 1 April .
I received , I suppose , what has been the most complicated April Fool 's Day hoax in the form of what purports to be a report to the European Parliament from the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions , a report that would have us believe that something like ECU 36 million is going to be spent on converting the Belliard I and II buildings to meet their purpose .
I say to them : nice try on April Fool 's Day but we look forward to receiving the genuine report on what should be made available for the conversion of those buildings .
Yet there are serious challenges before us in the buildings area , and I am sure that , in the approach that Mr Viola is taking , he will continue with the same level of serious scrutiny as we have had in the past .
The only area that I see seriously lacking in the Viola report - but I think we can take it for granted - is in relation to communications policy .
We have lots of discussions coming up on communications policy .
I just want to add one thought , and I say it with great respect to you , Madam President , as something you can take back to the Bureau .
I am increasingly of the view that to understand what Parliament 's Bureau actually does and decides you have to be a Kremlinologist to read their minutes and get any meaning out of them .
So at this time when we are talking about communications policy , you can perhaps translate into the Bureau minutes the same degree of clarity , lucidity and transparency that this Parliament is trying to instil into the European Central Bank .
It would be a great service to parliamentary democracy .
Madam President , I should first like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Dührkop , on an excellent report on the guidelines .
As you might expect as the Committee on Budgets ' rapporteur for the satellite agencies , I would like to concentrate particularly on paragraph 18 in her report .
This has appeared again this year in the guidelines .
The question is why should we have a paragraph on the satellite agencies again .
Many Members of this House and members of the Committee on Budgets will think that with Parliament 's acceptance of the Kellett-Bowman report on matters relating to satellite agencies , the matter has been done and dusted .
This is not so .
Mr Liikanen has used the word ' serenity ' but , as an Americanist , I would always say that ' eternal vigilance ' is the key .
With the satellite agencies eternal vigilance is certainly the key as far as we are concerned .
While we want to pursue our paragraph in the guidelines , there is the question of the annuality of the budget procedure .
Over the last three years , great strides have been made in presenting the budget lines for the satellite agencies .
We have insisted on a number of guiding principles which I am glad the agencies have taken up .
And these have been pursued with the help of Mr Liikanen and his colleagues in the Commission .
What are these guidelines ?
Firstly , there are prior information and prior spending patterns .
We are looking at the way in which resources have been used for previous years , i.e. the take-up or utilization of each agency 's budget .
This must play a role in the future allocation of agency funding in the European Union .
When we look at this year 's Kellett-Bowman report on the discharge , we see that for Dublin there was an underspend of ECU 140 000 ; for Thessaloniki an underspend of ECU 1.28 million . There are reasons for this , but these come into play when we look at future spending patterns .
I am sure the Commissioner is aware of these . However , most importantly , we are concerned to look at the work programme which is set out and properly costed .
That work programme must be agreed with the various policy committees .
The second issue is transparency .
What we have tried to ensure is that the agencies come forward with a staffing organigramme .
We have succeeded in persuading the agencies to do this , but the work programmes are costed and we can see horizontally through Title I , Title II and Title III expenditure of the agencies ' report , what each project is going to cost .
This is most important for us as a Budgets Committee , more important for the substantive committees , and it will be important for the rapporteur for the Committee on Budgetary Control when we come to look at the discharge later on .
We are making progress here .
My last point concerns accountability .
The key issue is how we allocate resources .
As Mrs Dührkop , Mr Tomlinson and Mr Wynn have said , we are utilizing EU citizens money ' .
This must be seen to be done in a manner which is transparent not only to Parliament but also to the client group of the agency and the citizenship itself .
To achieve these goals , we have established and will continue to hold regular meetings with the agency heads and the rapporteurs of the substantive committees .
That process will continue this year .
How can we conclude ?
Mr Liikanen made the point about ' serenity ' .
He said that peace has broken out .
It certainly has .
Peace has broken out with the agencies .
We have a new process set up , but that vigilance is going to be important .
I know that one of his colleagues , Mr Bangemann , said about Alicante that we must be vigilant .
The Budget Committee of Alicante is spending ECU 24 million on a new building about which the Commission knew very little and about which Parliament was not even informed .
Vigilance is the key , Mr Liikanen !
We must tighten up procedures and we will monitor them both through the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Madam President , I too wish to congratulate Mrs Dührkop on her specific and essential report and recall that , within the framework of the rigour imposed by the Union and the Member States this year , the 1999 budget , as the rapporteur mentioned , should be the first budget of the implementation of the Treaty of Amsterdam , and should therefore contain choices that relate to the innovations of the Treaty itself .
This means that the budget should favour employment , as has been point out , through investment in infrastructure , support for small and medium-sized enterprises , investment in research and development , but also support for measures within the framework of local employment initiatives and regional pacts for the third system , in line - unlike what Mr Tillich maintained - with the commitment assumed by the European Parliament last October , as precisely stated by Mrs Dührkop in her report .
Training and refresher courses are considered to be two of the key instruments for developing adaptability and entrepreneurship and , above all , for enabling young people and women to find jobs .
These are the guidelines , and they were also recalled at the Extraordinary Luxembourg Summit .
That is why the LEONARDO and SOCRATES programmes and , more generally , education and training programmes need adequate financing .
Social dialogue , which is given an ever more important role by the Treaty itself , should find the necessary corresponding provisions and strengthening measures in the budget .
Mrs Dührkop rightly considers that the 1999 budget should be the citizens ' budget , aimed at enhancing and improving economic and social cohesion .
In this context , the activities and networks of nongovernmental organizations , which make a fundamental contribution to the development of the European social policy for the elderly , the disabled and for the fight against social exclusion and which represent an essential means for citizens to take part in the construction of Europe , should continue to receive adequate support .
I wish to conclude by taking up a point , mentioned by Mr Samland , that seems particularly important to me : an essential condition for ending the procedure on a positive note is for the Council to sign the agreement on the legal bases .
I do not think the Council has any alibis any more from this point of view , and so I wish to conclude the debate - as I am the last one to speak - with this commitment : the Minutes of this meeting should be forwarded to the Council so that it knows that Parliament is no longer prepared , this year , not to reach an agreement on this matter .
Madam President , although it might be out of the ordinary in terms of procedure , I would like to say to Mr Tillich - and this is very important - that I am from San Sebastián and that I am a Real Madrid supporter because otherwise I would have problems with my two children when I go back home .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12.00 noon .
However , I would like to draw your attention to one more thing .
You still have the opportunity , for 24 more minutes , to play an April Fool 's trick or have one played on you .
Be careful !
( The sitting was closed at 11.35 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of Wednesday 1 April have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I wish to comment on the Verbatim Report of Proceedings , to which someone has drawn my attention .
I do not usually read my own speeches , but someone read this out to me .
There are two words in it which I would like to have deleted , because they were addressed to another Member and were not part of my speech .
The words are : ' Be quiet ' .
Someone annoyed me , and I asked him rather sharply to be quiet .
He really did annoy me .
This was not addressed to Mrs Lalumière , and so must be deleted from the Verbatim Report of Proceedings .
Thank you , Mr von Habsburg . In any case , that is not part of the Minutes but of the Verbatim Report of Proceedings .
The problem will be solved .
Mr President , I have some sympathy with Mr von Habsburg .
Nevertheless , our proceedings are supposed to be recorded accurately and that clearly is an accurate part of the proceedings .
I think he was entirely right in his comments but I think we should have the full rich tapestry of this House recorded rather than some sanitized version that suits us if we want to look holier than thou .
Mr President , it arises from the Minutes and the session news , which record my splendid contribution in which I attacked the British Government for its failure to join the single currency , thereby sacrificing 100 000 jobs in Britain .
Unfortunately it says that I am a member of the Party of European Socialists , and I am sure that they would not want to be embarrassed by that .
Perhaps we could have it corrected to recognize that I am an independent Labour member who sits with the Green Group in the Parliament .
Mr President , we decided yesterday that the debate on the Schaffner report should go ahead , but that we would let the voting wait .
Of course , the delay arose because the High Level Panel 's report was only in French .
I forgot to point out something at the time which I hope is quite obvious , namely that the deadline for tabling amendments also depends on when voting is to take place . In other words , the groups should be able to table amendments once we all have the text and can read it .
That is what I would like .
Mrs Lindholm , I think your comment is justified .
I would like to say that the debate will take place , although there will be no vote .
It is only common sense that the deadline for tabling amendments must be extended , and that will be done .
( The Minutes were approved )
Rules of Procedure ( new Rule 44a )
The next item is the report ( A4-0054 / 98 ) by Mr Crowley , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on insertion of a new Rule 44a on other reports and the annual reports of other institutions in Parliament 's Rules of Procedure .
Since for some reason beyond his control the rapporteur is not yet here , you will understand if I call on Mr Ford to speak .
So we are starting the debate with Mr Ford 's speech .
Mr President , I was going to suggest that maybe we should take Mr Dell 'Alba 's report first , which is going to be very short and is also on the Rules , but if you wish to do it the other way round , I am quite happy to start .
Maybe it will give Mr Crowley a few minutes to arrive if Mr Dell 'Alba is with us .
Mr Ford , your idea is extremely helpful , and I might have suggested it myself if Mr Dell 'Alba had been here .
But he is not here either , so I would therefore ask you to open the debate .
I cannot go on to the other report because Mr Dell 'Alba is not here .
Mr President , thank you very much .
I was going to rise to congratulate Mr Crowley on this report .
I still congratulate him in his absence .
It is a report that actually clarifies the situation with respect to the proliferating number of annual reports that we have in this House .
There was some difficulty in the Rules Committee initially and this report took some time before it finally emerged from the Rules Committee but when it did emerge it did so unanimously .
We have now got an agreement , at least in the Rules Committee , across the House with respect to this whole plethora of annual reports and it means that we have a clearly laid down procedure that we can follow in future and we will not have the constant debate about what route , what institutional route , a particular report should follow .
The Socialist Group will therefore be supporting the report and I congratulate Mr Crowley on it .
Thank you for your comments , Mr Ford , and for having helped me to get our work started .
Mr President , flexibility is the name of the game in political and economic systems these days and I think that Mr Crowley 's report is to be welcomed because it is a contribution to this flexibility .
Mr Ford has already pointed out , and I am sure that Mr Crowley would have done so had he been here , that we lack flexibility in the organization of one aspect of our work : the response we have to reports that come from committees or outside bodies .
Mr Crowley 's report restores that flexibility to Parliament , to the Conference of Presidents and to the relevant committees and I welcome it on that account .
There was some suggestion in the Committee that perhaps this report did not formally change the position but simply reordered and clarified it .
If that is so I would welcome it because I think that it is not merely the function of the Rules of Procedure to provide a minimum framework , a simply reductionist approach to the rules , but to encourage the right and rational outcomes .
Over the coming months and years , time in the plenary will be at a premium and it is undoubtedly right that Mr Crowley 's report gives us the opportunity to be more flexible , to be more rational and to be more successful .

Since we are having difficulty in getting Mr Crowley and Mr Dell 'Alba , let me make a general remark about the work of the Rules of Procedure Committee .
Sadly , with the exception of course of the people who are here today , attendance at the Rules of Procedure Committee is not always of the best , and yet the curious thing is that - like education - the Rules of Procedure are something that everybody has an opinion on , both in the groups and in the plenary .
I would like to think that in future the very interesting matters that we discuss in the Rules of Procedure Committee will attract the attention from all colleagues that they deserve .
Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Crowley for this excellent report and to comment on the utter Irishness of it , because not only is the rapporteur not there but it is a non-solution to a non-problem .
You could not in fact make a better job of it .
It is rather striking that the rapporteur for the next report , Mr Dell 'Alba , is not there either .
Oh , he has just come in !
Perfect .
That is timing !
The fact is that we used to have just a single annual report by the Commission .
Now we have a proliferation of different annual reports by different institutions .
It turns out , however , that there is a difference between , let us say , those annual reports that are presented by the institutions as required by the Treaty and the other annual reports .
What I would have liked to have seen in the report by Mr Crowley was for us to do something with the reports , and that is not indicated .
We just have a debate , or we do not .
That is a non-solution .
Mr President , like the other speakers , I would like to start by thanking the rapporteur , who is not present , for an excellent report .
Of course , the aim of this report is actually to try to simplify Parliament 's treatment of all the annual reports we have to deal with .
In his report , I think the rapporteur counted 25 different annual reports which are dealt with in depth in this Parliament , which means that we can handle two or three annual reports at most in each part-session .
Furthermore , this seems to be a growing trend .
If it carries on like this , I think we will find in a few years ' time that most of our work involves dealing with such annual reports .
I do not think there is any other Parliament in the world that examines and pronounces in such detail on what different authorities have done in the past year .
I also think there is a link between these large volumes of opinions which are generated on annual reports and the low turnout at voting in our Parliament .
Last year - that is , before we had a financial incentive to take part in votes - the average turnout here in the Chamber was between 50 % and 60 % , which I believe is the lowest in any democratically elected assembly in the world .
When I am out and about talking to people , they often ask me why so few Members of Parliament vote .
The simplest answer is that an awful lot of our work involves expressing views which are virtually meaningless .
If we can simplify these matters with the Crowley report , so that we do not spend so much time producing views on these reports , but deal with the main and most important questions instead , I think we will have done something to make this Parliament 's work much easier .
That said , I would like to thank the current rapporteur , and I will be listening very carefully to what he himself has to say .
Mr President , it is a very interesting innovation that this debate be rounded up with a contribution from the rapporteur , and why not !
I wish to welcome Mr Crowley 's report .
This is a useful adaptation of the Rules of Procedure .
There was nothing quite so preposterous as to see this Parliament debating time after time reports on reports , especially , for example , the report that comes every year from the Committee on Institutional Affairs - usually with Mr Valverde López as rapporteur - where Parliament receives the annual reports on European Union from the European Council .
It is a report , of course , on the previous year .
We usually receive it half way through the next year .
The Institutional Committee then drafts a report on this report , and we end up debating a year and a half later the events of a year and a half before on the basis of a report on a report .
This was , of course , nonsense , and there are many examples of this nonsense .
This change to the Rules of Procedure will enable us to get rid of this sort of nonsense , and where we do not have a very good reason for having a special report on a report , or a special debate on a report , we will no longer need to do so .
So I welcome this change to the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , I will not need the five minutes as my esteemed colleagues have covered the most essential parts of the report .
I wish to apologize to you , Mr President , and to the House .
Unfortunately , I had a puncture in my wheelchair this morning and that is what delayed my arrival - I had to get it repaired .
I would like Members to be reassured that this is not an attempt to get certain issues off the agenda and stop them being debated within Parliament or to prevent committees from drawing up reports that they feel are politically important for those committees .
Rather , it is an attempt to try to bring into line the proper workings of this Parliament , to give more time for this House and this Chamber to respond more rapidly to the ever-changing political events that are taking place .
My colleague , Mr Corbett , has already mentioned that with certain reports we are debating a report on a report .
I would go even further and say that in other annual reports that have come before this Parliament , not only are we dealing with a report which may be two years old but we are also regurgitating and recycling information that was put in an annual report three or four years ago , and yet we feel that it all has to be included again each year , year on end .
That certainly wastes the time of this Parliament ; it puts the services under tremendous pressure to be translating into 11 working languages huge rafts of documents which every Member does not read , which every Member does not take notice of and , most importantly of all , which the public and the media ignore totally .
The reason why there was some difficulty with this report initially was that certain Members who felt that issues of importance to them - I would cite Mr Ford , who had an annual report on racism in the European Union - were afraid that they would be knocked off the agenda .
I hope that my amendment which was agreed in committee will overcome those problems for them .
It also requires a bit of diligence from the Conference of Presidents to ensure that they do not derive undue power from the little bit of leeway which we have given them in this report .
Finally , I wish to say to the House and to Members that , with all of my heart and all the persuasive argument that I can muster , I commend this report to the House .
I also wish to inform Members that , because of the changes taking place in the Treaty of Amsterdam in the way this House operates , we will be dealing with more reports from the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities in this Parliament that will be far more wide-ranging and innovative in changing the way this Parliament operates .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 noon .
Modification of Rule 141 of the Rules of Procedure
The next item is the report ( A4-0111 / 98 ) by Mr Dell 'Alba , on behalf of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , on amending Rule 141 on subcommittees .
Mr President , I am sorry I was not able to help with a possible reversal of the order of the two reports . Having said that , I would like to start by explaining my report .
I must say , I am very pleased it has finally arrived in the Chamber , because the question is an important one . In particular , it helps to correct a situation we are aware of , which has not prevented our work but which , I believe , should be corrected from the point of view of the Rules of Procedure .
What is it about ?
The Rules of Procedure , in their current form and interpretation , give us to understand that the subcommittees , of which there are three in this Parliament , can only be composed of full or substitute members of the main committee .
This has led to practical difficulties in application , at the level of the political groups .
We are aware of the complex nature of these subcommittees . I am thinking particularly of the Subcommittee on Human Rights , which deals with human rights worldwide , and the fact that many of those countries , such as those in the third world , fall within the remit , so to speak , of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , for example .
Consequently , there is widespread interest , not only among the members of the main committee - in this case the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy - but also in the other committees represented in the Subcommittee on Human Rights . We have found the same interest in the other two subcommittees , albeit to a lesser extent .
So these rules and this interpretation of the Rules of Procedure have been ignored by the European Parliament which , through its political groups , has appointed to the subcommittees representatives who are not members of the main committee , as shown by the statistics in the annex to my report . This has created a breach , if not of the Rules of Procedure , at least of their interpretation .
We have heard the question asked by the chairman in response to a request from several members of the Subcommittee on Human Rights , and the Committee on the Rules of Procedure was greatly embarrassed . We either had to reassert the right - a right which had been violated - or , I would not say adapt to the reality , but recognize that , in fact , this situation might not be ideal .
Being responsible for this report , I have tried to summarize the opinions on both sides , reaching a solution that may seem to be a compromise but which in fact seemed the best way to guarantee both the fundamental link with the main committee and also the flexibility we consider essential to ensure the greater participation , the greater involvement of everyone in the important activities of the subcommittees . As we well know , such activities very often include reflection , discussion and investigation rather than legislative and operational matters .
So it did not seem to compromise the general rules to propose this amendment to the Rules of Procedure , which we will vote on later .
The formula is simple : that full members of the subcommittees should be full or substitute members of the main committee . In this way we are maintaining the fundamental link I mentioned , and maintaining the principle that the position of chairman of these subcommittees will therefore necessarily fall to members of the main committee , but we are not specifying and therefore leaving the door open to the fact that substitutes who are members of Parliament but not full or substitute members of the main committee may be appointed .
This seemed to be an elegant way of accepting the practice of this House , allowing other members to join the subcommittees and , in so doing , maintaining two principles : the fundamental link , but also the opportunity for greater involvement .
That is the proposal we are making and we hope Parliament will see fit to approve it .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Dell 'Alba on his report on the membership of subcommittees .
As he has told us , there are three subcommittees at the moment : security , human rights and monetary affairs .
It has been clear for some time that people outside the foreign affairs remit - such as those involved with development - are interested in particular in the membership of the Subcommittee on Human Rights .
Also , there has been some interest from the committee on which I sit , which is the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs and which deals with human rights in the European Union but is rather interested in human rights amongst the applicant countries that technically , at the moment , are dealt with by the Subcommittee on Human Rights of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy .
We welcome Mr Dell 'Alba 's proposal to clarify the situation as it stands , which means that only full members of a subcommittee must be drawn from the membership of the committee ; therefore , by analogy , implying that substitutes on subcommittees can be drawn from other committees as well .
I note that Rule 163 ( 3 ) says that unless we specify otherwise at the time of the vote - maybe by an oral amendment - these rules come into operation on the first day of the next part-session .
The next part-session will start on 11 May - so that the adjournment , as Mr Corbett has just told me , will be the longest in our history , from March until May - and at that date we will find that the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs is not affected , but that suddenly two members of the Subcommittee on Security and Disarmament will no longer be eligible to be members , along with three members of the Subcommittee on Human Rights .
We need to clarify that .
Certainly the Socialist Group will be happy to accept that this new rule change comes into force at the beginning of the next Parliament .
But that is something for Mr Dell 'Alba to propose , or else the consequences will be as I state .

Finally , I thank Mr Dell 'Alba again on resolving a problem which , unlike Mr Wijsenbeek 's intervention last time , certainly has a political dimension and is one that we are interested in resolving .
Mr President , like Mr Ford , I should like to congratulate Mr Dell 'Alba on an excellent report .
In describing it he seemed a little reticent about calling it a compromise .
Perhaps to his Italian radical temperament the idea of compromise is one that is a little more suspicious than it is to the pragmatic British .
On the contrary , I would regard it as a great benefit and advantage of the report that it is a very sensible compromise between two desires , two considerations , one of which is to have a wide range of opinion and expertise working in the subcommittees , while the other is to have a clear line of responsibility between the subcommittees and their principal committees .
I am not entirely sure that , if we adopt it as it is , it will have the effects that Mr Ford fears .
After all , we have ignored the provisions of the interpretation up until now .
It would be slightly surprising if we became more dogmatic and more draconian in our application as a result of what we might adopt today .
One final point : quite rightly , Mr Dell 'Alba did not make a strong point of the proposition that in reality the present interpretation is ignored .
I would not want to be committed to the view that if a rule is ignored it should necessarily be changed .
If it is a bad rule it should be changed ; if it is a good rule it should be applied .
That is something that is of wider general application than simply to the matter of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Dell 'Alba on his report .
It is a short report but also a significant one .
It has been quite a long time in committee , it has had a long gestation period , but even if Mr Ford is proposing - and I think he is correct to do so - that we delay its birth , it will still be very important .
It is always the responsibility of the parent committee to ensure that it knows what is going on in its subcommittees .
The purpose of a subcommittee is to report back to the main committee .
So the parent committee has to be sure that the subcommittees are clear in their purpose , that they are being consistent in the work that they do , and that there is continuity between the subcommittee and the main committee .
The previous rule , which was quite clear , was being ignored .
I take Mr Donnelly 's point that just because something is being ignored you should not necessarily change it .
But there was an anomaly in the way the previous ruling was being interpreted , so that you could even have a subcommittee meeting - although it may never have done so - where none of the members of the subcommittee were actually members of the full committee .
Now , with this rule change , it is quite clear that the full members will have to be members of the main committee .
We considered having the majority of the members , but in the end we have settled for the full members .
That will make certain that the committees are not just independent but that there is interdependence between the subcommittee and the main committee .
It is for those reasons that I will be supporting the report .
Mr President , like the other speakers , I would like to start by thanking Mr Dell 'Alba for an excellent report .
As I see it , it meets two requirements .
Firstly , it reinforces the links between a subcommittee and the main committee by stipulating that all the full members must also belong to the main committee .
On the other hand , it also permits a certain degree of flexibility by allowing the substitutes to come from another committee .
That may be necessary of course because , as Mr Dell 'Alba says , there are some cases where matters need to be coordinated .
So it is a good thing for members from other committees to be included in dealing with such matters .
Some people have expressed fears about this structure , because it could mean that a rapporteur belonging to a subcommittee might be a member of another main committee . In other words , they could be a substitute in the subcommittee and then become rapporteur for a matter which was then taken up by the main committee .
That would mean that someone who was not a member of the main committee could present a report on that committee 's behalf .
As I see it , this is a purely theoretical risk , since appointing the rapporteurs on individual matters is still the job of the main committee .
Presumably we can rely on the main committees not to appoint any rapporteurs who are not their own members .
Having said that , I would like to thank Mr Dell 'Alba once again for an excellent report which I am certain will be passed by a large majority today .
Mr President , I would like to take up Mr Ford 's suggestion , which I think is a wise one .
With the agreement of the chairman of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , I would therefore like to propose that it should be recorded in the Minutes that these rules come into force after the summer recess , on Monday 14 September , to allow us to adapt to the situation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.00 noon .
Report of the High Level Panel on the free movement of persons
The next item is the report ( A4-0108 / 98 ) by Mrs Schaffner , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the report of the High Level Panel on the free movement of persons , chaired by Mrs Simone Veil ( C40181 / 97 ) .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the High Level Panel has done an excellent piece of work .
As Mrs Schaffner said , this is of course a problem which we in this Parliament have been aware of for years .
But it is an important task which needs to be carried out now , at a time when I believe mobility must increase and continue to increase with the euro .
We know that progress has been made with the other three freedoms , but that has not been the case in this field , partly because of a lack of legal instruments but also , I believe , because the political will is not there .
Also , we have weakened the position of citizens of nonMember States far too much .
There is a weakness in one respect , and I would like to point out that not even the High Level Panel has really agreed on how tax matters are to be resolved .
The report also reflects the fact that national legislation has ceased to reflect human reality .
We have a number of different kinds of mobility : moving completely from one Member State to another ; working in border areas and living in one Member State and working in another ; and having permanent links with a number of Member States .
This is a familiar feature of the Commissioner 's homeland and my own .
We have experienced cars being seized when the authorities in one of these two countries take the view that the person in question is actually domiciled in the other .
I would therefore like to emphasize the proposal of the working group that , in regard to taxation , we need a common definition of residence .
I would like to ask the Commission what action it has taken in the light of the High Level Panel 's report.1 I also think that an important element in the argument is that there is a legal basis in the Treaty , Article 100 , which has provided authority for coordinatio on other matters of taxation .
I also think we should adopt the proposal that Member States should be able to read other Member States ' so-called " smart cards ' when it comes to entitlement to social security benefits .
Only an expert can deal with the jungle of the E111 form and so on .
It is now time to put this on the agenda .
Finally , I would like to point out that there is an error in the Swedish version when it comes to the national ombudsmen 's duties , but this does not apply to the other language versions .
Mr President , first of all I wish to express my sincere thanks to the rapporteur .
She had a difficult task to accomplish .
On behalf of my colleague Anne-Karin Glase , who cannot be here today , I wish to present extracts from her opinion on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs .
The complexity of the overall problem meant that the committee had to restrict itself to questions of access to employment and social and family status .
The objective of the EURES network established in 1994 is to create transparency in the European employment market .
However , the fact that the employment market database has too little to offer is still the weak point of this system .
EURES is not well enough known either to businesses or to employees , and so is not getting enough information or use .
One problem is the recognition of proof of qualifications in the private sector .
As far as the non-regulated professions are concerned , unfortunately neither employers nor employees recognize the value of the qualifications demanded or offered in other relevant employment markets .
Earlier attempts to address this matter failed because of rapid job changes and because only basic educational qualifications are taken into account , not professional experience or further training , among other things .
Meanwhile , the regulated professions have achieved quite satisfactory results , with the exception of a few unsolved problems .
The situation in the public sector is another matter , because freedom of movement is far less well developed .
Being a national of the country in question is often a requirement for employment .
Free movement involves the social rights and family status of EU citizens .
The provisions based on Regulations 1408 / 71 and 574 / 72 have made effective coordination between very different national insurance models possible , but there are still some matters to be resolved .
Such matters are of two types : those which can be resolved within the scope of existing regulations , and others for which this has not yet been possible because of the differences between national legislations .
The full principle of free movement also includes the right to take family members to the host country , but it turns out that in many cases social benefits are reserved for nationals only .
Another set of problems arises if the spouse is a national of a third country .
A detailed examination should be made of which stipulations based on Regulation 1408 / 71 apply here .
With regard to divorce , minimum protection should be maintained for a specific period , in order not to create potential pressure on the spouse due to any dependency .
However , I fail to understand why some circles in the European Parliament are trying to make previously unjustified immigration possible on the basis of family status .
This trend is expressed , for example , in paragraphs 9 and 11 of our opinion , and also goes against the vote of the Group of the European People 's Party .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , further to the excellent work by the High Level Panel chaired by Mrs Veil , Mrs Schaffner has submitted an excellent piece of work as the European Parliament 's rapporteur .
Although I have to say that my opinions differ from Mrs Schaffner 's on almost all aspects - I shall explain why shortly - I must compliment her .
She has produced some very careful work , and made it easier for us to understand the essence of the interpretation of free movement on the Conservative side of the Chamber .
So , many thanks to Mrs Schaffner for having made her report so clear .
Clear explanations are easier to handle , and help to highlight distinctions .
Mrs Veil makes 80 proposals and recommendations on how to overcome the difficulties confronting EU citizens , as described by the rapporteur and the draftsman of the opinion , in order to take advantage of the freedom of movement specified by the Maastricht Treaty .
I have the impression that the Schaffner report appreciates what Mrs Veil says , but then describes how the difficulties which Mrs Veil wishes to eliminate could be accentuated .
The crucial factor - and I am grateful to Mr Schiedermeier for having spoken so clearly when standing in for Mrs Glase - is that we do make distinctions .
Firstly , who benefits from freedom of movement ?
" The citizens of the Union ' , everyone says .
According to Mrs Schaffner , only nationals of an EU Member State are citizens of the Union .
People who are long-term residents of the European Union , legally and with all the necessary permits , are not citizens of the Union but third country nationals , and must therefore be treated differently .
Let us consider , for example , the US businessman who works for Chase Manhattan Bank in Frankfurt , lives there with his family , earns and spends his money there and participates in local life .
He is only allowed to do so in Germany .
If he is transferred to another country , a very difficult phase in this man 's life in the European Union begins .
He must overcome a wealth of permit provisos from the European Union against third party nationals .
I deliberately mention the US businessman , because I do not want to make it easy for you always to speak of the people you are really thinking about in the debate about third country nationals .
That is why I refer to this US businessman .
I think it is a good idea to set up information and advice bureaux on European citizenship , although I do not think it is particularly sensible for European citizens to receive advice there from students , Mrs Schaffner .
I think qualified legal advice should be given by fully trained people , though I do not wish to belittle the status of students , who are sometimes cleverer than Members or lawyers , as we know .
The term " freedom of movement ' in the Maastricht Treaty concerns people being allowed to exist with equal rights , as well as capital , services and goods .
That is why it is stated that capital , services , goods and persons have freedom of movement in the European Union .
We guaranteed this from 1 January 1993 .
Your report shows that you can take goods , services and capital wherever you want in the European Union , at any time of the day or night .
Freedom of movement of persons , however , belongs to the Union of Mistrust , which you want , and which is far from reality .
Thank you , Mr Nassauer .
With regard to what you said at the beginning of your speech - could you please put your headphones on - regarding your comment on speaking time , I would like to say that , in the absence of Mr Newman , the Socialist Group merely distributed their time between two speakers : one minute for Mr Schulz and one minute , which has yet to come , for Mrs Zimmermann .

That right is available to the political groups and is not up to the Chair , and that is why an extra minute was allotted to Mr Schulz .
So far as the power of the Chair to allow a little more time for Members to speak is concerned , all the political groups have had the benefit of my indulgent discretion in that respect .
Mr President , Mrs Schaffner 's report raises issues which cause financial , political and social problems to those who either live or move within the borders of the European Union .
I wish to offer my warm congratulations to Mrs Schaffner for attempting to provide answers and propose solutions to these problems .
In this sense , the report is extremely forward-looking and not at all conservative .
If it were conservative it would not propose solutions or face up to the problems . However , it is forward-looking in that it sees the problems , confronts them and proposes solutions to them .
The problem , however , is not whether there is Community legislation on all these issues .
We all know very well that the three institutional bodies have dealt with these issues .
The problem is that national legislation in the Member States either does not exist or has not been harmonized in a common direction , along common political lines which would make it easier to solve these problems .
A third point I would like to mention is that my group will of course be delighted to vote in favour of the report , but we disagree - for very specific and fundamental reasons - with Amendments Nos 8 and 9 and with the second part of Amendment No 11 . We are under an obligation , firstly , to solve the problems of the European citizen by strengthening European cohesion and secondly , to deal with the problems of people from third countries .
Mr President , soon the new single European currency , the euro , will be introduced .
This is the finishing touch to the free movement of capital and goods .
Mr Schulz was of course right in saying that the free movement of capital and goods is being fully taken care of with the introduction of the euro , but we are not quite there yet as far as the free movement of people is concerned .
The Simone Veil High Level Panel has done excellent work , and I would like to say to the banks in question that I am proud that Mrs Veil was once the chairman of the Group of the European Liberal , Democratic and Reform Party in this House , as well the President of this Parliament .
We can recognize her liberal approach in this text .
But for people to move around freely is not yet as easy as is sometimes suggested .
May I remind everyone that we debated and adopted three guidelines proposed by Commissioner Monti .
Those are now with the Council and everything has suddenly gone quiet .
They deal with the abolition of internal border controls ; the unimpeded travel of people from other countries , that is third countries ; and the abolition of restrictions on workers ' residency .
The ball is now in the court of the Council of Ministers , and I believe Parliament should use the present debate to draw attention to this .
Organizational measures must be taken , certainly , as well as other measures .
I will deal with one of these organizational measures .
We believe that in the next European Commission , one Commissioner should be responsible for the entire field of the free movement of people .
Furthermore , complaints bureaux are very important , but it is also important for civil servants , particularly at the European level , to become more helpful and citizen-friendly .
Mr President , I would like to conclude with one sentence .
The Veil Panel has produced good work , and so has the rapporteur ; it is now up to European policy makers and civil servants .
Mr President , the free movement of persons in the European Union must be one of the objectives in the construction of a political Europe , taking into account the fact that free movement and its effective implementation are intimately linked to the concept of citizenship of the Union .
Many things must be improved in order to achieve truly free movement of persons in the Union , and the report by the High Level Panel , chaired by Mrs Simone Veil , recognizes this in its conclusions and recommendations . It underlines , in particular , the fact that the main problem in this field concerns the actual application of directives and regulations rather than a lack of legislation .
I would like to point out that both the report by the High Level Panel and Mrs Schaffner 's report highlighted the problems connected with the free movement of citizens of the European Union , paying less attention to the problems related to the numerous citizens of third countries .
If we want to build an integrated Europe , but one which both shows solidarity and is open to the social and cultural contributions of other civilizations , we must also take care to improve and increase the transparency of the legal status of nationals from third countries .
In order to have a true citizenship which takes account of people from third countries , the procedures for granting visas must be improved , there must be better information and openness in these procedures , and the right to family reunification must be extended and strengthened , while always ensuring respect for fundamental rights and the right to dignified treatment and privacy .
In this respect , it is also essential to do away with unequal treatment between EU citizens and nationals of third countries , which exists because of certain national laws on aliens .
According to the Treaties , the free movement of persons should also apply to people from third countries who are legally resident in the Union . We must therefore demand that they be treated in the same way as any citizen in the Union in terms of their political , social and economic rights .
Finally , we must support a Europe which believes that its convergence with other cultures and civilizations is socially and culturally enriching and is not a danger for public order or internal security .
We want an open and united Europe ; not a Europe which has turned into a veritable fortress .
Mr President , the report on the free movement of persons from the High Level Panel chaired by Simone Veil is well received by Mrs Schaffner .
It is perhaps possible that Mrs Schaffner is right to some extent at least .
But despite the report 's very good , detailed explanatory section , it is impossible to relate Mrs Schaffner 's report to the High Level Panel document , as this is only available in French .
I sincerely hope there will soon be an end to this unacceptable situation , in which essential documents are lacking in one or more languages .
It undermines public support and trust in both MEPs and Parliament itself .
As my French is not that good , I can only comment on the Schaffner report itself .
The main conclusion of the report is that free movement has largely become a reality .
I think there are many EU citizens who would not agree , and who time and time again have problems themselves or meet people who have .
Nor can the problem be reduced to an administrative , bureaucratic matter , but depends of course on whether the Council is prepared to do what it should have done on 1 January 1993 .
This deadline has been postponed time and time again , and the question is , when will it end ?
What surprises me greatly as a Swede is that no account has been taken of the experience and knowhow which the Scandinavian passport system , which has existed for forty years , has to offer .
This is a different approach , but I believe it has a great deal to offer .
Mrs Schaffner makes a clear distinction between EU citizens and those of non-Member States .
She even argues in favour of discrimination .
In paragraph 23 we read : ' Calls on the Commission to make it clear that workers from non-Community countries are not entitled to the full freedom of movement of Union citizens ' within the Union .
We believe this is totally unacceptable .
Free movement must apply to everyone who is lawfully in the Union .
Freedom of movement is not just about showing your passport .
Mrs Schaffner also looks favourably upon the compensatory measures .
The Green Group in the European Parliament has always distanced itself from compensatory measures , and we do so again now .
There cannot be any freedom of movement with them .
We are moving into a grey area of controls .
We are also opposed to the report 's assumption that the Schengen Agreement and the Treaty of Amsterdam are already clear and ratified .
Two countries will be holding referenda on the Treaty of Amsterdam : we do not know how these will go .
The European Union and Parliament must not go so far that democracy becomes a sham .
Mr President , the Schaffner report is a good report and the usual congratulations must make way for genuine thanks for the quality of this work .
It covers the conclusions of the report published by the High Level Panel ordered by the Commission , and its text unambiguously underlines the obstacles and reticence which are still hindering the free movement of persons , even though the dissenting voices are somewhat more muted .
But to tell it as it really is , the quite scandalous and completely unacceptable situation in which we find ourselves is the fault of the Council , the Member States and the national governments .
Scandalous because the Treaties imposed the establishment of true freedom of movement as of 31 December 1992 and it is now 1998 .
Scandalous because , despite the iterative judgments given by the Court of Justice which upheld the Treaties , things have hardly moved on at all .
And scandalous because the governments of the Member States continue to drag their feet when it comes to implementing that freedom which is most important in the eyes of our fellow citizens .
We have actually been very rigorous in making arrangements to allow capital , services and merchandise to move freely yet when it comes to people , the Member States and governments have used all sorts of delaying tactics to hinder the initiatives from Parliament and the Commission , whose aim is to create a veritable union of European citizens free to move about as they choose .
The Council is the main institution responsible for this resistance .
Their timidity , the restrictions and the barely hidden sacred cows are holding back our national officials .
The Member States who are sitting on the directives governing freedom of movement should be sanctioned for non-application of the Council 's decisions , however timid .
As for the national governments , they remain faithful to their traditions of conservatism and faint heartedness and refuse to apply the directives , thus adding to the already large number of petitions on the freedom of movement and appeals to the European Ombudsman .
The Commission itself uses a great deal of restraint when applying its right to take action against Member States who are in default .
I would like to take this opportunity to welcome the initiative to compile all the provisions relating to free movement into a single clear document so that these texts finally become accessible to the citizens and practitioners of European law .
The proposal to hand over responsibility for the free movement of persons to a single Commissioner is in the same spirit and should be actively supported .
However , the report remains tarnished with a worrying failing . In paragraph 23 , it mentions that workers who are citizens of third countries do not enjoy the same freedom of movement as EU citizens .
They are only allowed to stay or work in a different Member State as a result of the freedom of movement of services by right accorded to their employers .
This situation is quite simply unacceptable .
We must arrive at a situation in which anyone legally residing and working in the territory of a Member State of the Union is entitled to do so in any other Member State .
The practice of granting freedom of movement to the employer as opposed to the individual must be completely stamped out .
I believe that the two amendments proposed by Mrs Zimmermann , Nos 8 and 9 , should replace the original text .
Whether or not they are adopted by Parliament will determine how the members of the Group of the European Radical Alliance use their vote .
Mr President , the High Level Panel report on the freedom of movement of persons in Europe has perhaps disappointed some of its initiators because it does not put forward any fundamental modifications to the existing legislation , and that is perhaps why it is so difficult for Members of Parliament to obtain a translation of this text .
Anyway , the report seems to say that the general legal framework is already in place , and that first and foremost it is a question of applying the existing texts .
As I am in the fortunate position of speaking and writing French , I have been able to understand the basic report and can inform my colleagues that this text is totally without bias and hence sits very well with all the rest of the literature on the subject .
For example , the report does not systematically wage war on border checks on people travelling between different Member States and even states , and I quote , " that the removal of such border controls should not be done to the detriment of security ' .
Similarly , the report painstakingly avoids confusing the freedom of movement of European citizens with that of citizens of third countries , a mistake which is all too easily made in our circles .
Better still , it emphasizes the fact that the right to free movement of European citizens , as set out in the Treaty , should not necessarily be taken to imply the right to move about or stay without completing all the specific formalities .
Finally , the High Level Panel has burst yet another bubble by explaining that the free movement of citizens of Member States does not mean that they should necessarily enjoy the same rights everywhere .
On the contrary , each Member State should be able to retain a certain number of specific laws and the situation should not arise in which , in order to simplify the lives of 5.5 million people voluntarily living outside their own country , they complicate the lives of 360 million other Europeans who live at home and ask for nothing .
We would hope that common sense could be applied in all European policies , especially the single currency .
Once this framework has been reasonably established it becomes easier to examine the proposals put forward , which are not all equal .
Some are contestable at times , such as those concerning public office . Others however are more useful , such as the arrangements for retaining certain welfare benefit rights when working in several Member States successively .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Schaffner on her report , which has proved to be moderate in its approach to free movement . It is full of good intentions .
Moreover , there lies within it the desire to strengthen external border controls , implement new means of redress for individuals who encounter problems when exercising their rights , modernize social security rights and encourage language training and cultural exchanges . This we can be proud of .
However , this should not prevent us from criticizing certain unacceptable points .
Mrs Schaffner is effectively proposing to narrow the range of public office posts reserved for nationals and thereby , it seems to me , relax public office access criteria .
Under no circumstances can we allow a situation in which public office might be threatened where national preference still prevails .
In France , as in nearly all the other European countries , public office is reserved for nationals , and that is how it should remain .
The report also proposes a more flexible interpretation of the rules governing family reunification .
As far as I am concerned , I have always defended the notion of family because I believe it is the guarantee of our nations ' survival .
However , the notion of family reunification cannot be extended infinitely , and it absolutely must not be used as a pretext for opening the flood gates to a wave of new immigrants into a Member State - immigrants who , to meet the entry criteria , merely have to claim to have a distant relative already resident within the territory .
The report also proposes improving the situation of third-country citizens resident in a Member State .
But is it not the case that everything is already in place to accept them and absorb them into the adoptive country ?
In France , foreigners legally established within the territory enjoy the same rights , the same privileges , as any French person born in the country .
Should they expect more ?
We do not believe so , for that would be discriminatory .
Finally , this report sets out to favour the free movement of citizens of the Member States of Europe .
All well and good . However , we must not miss the wood for the trees .
It has been clearly demonstrated that the Schengen Agreement cannot yet be applied to the letter because of the catastrophic consequences it has for the security of the Member States .
Removing internal border controls and replacing them with hypothetical common external borders means the free movement , trade and consumption of drugs , illegal immigration , insecurity and international crime , all of which continues to escalate .
We must look at the evidence : regrettably , the uniform conditions necessary for a European space without borders - conditions of national security , full employment and social calm - are not yet in place .
So yes , as it says in Mrs Schaffner 's report , we do propose to strengthen border controls but , ladies and gentlemen , this must be counterbalanced by a coherent , dissuasive and harmonized immigration policy , increased cooperation between the police forces and the courts , and harmonization of the methods for acquiring nationality which must be based on affiliation and a restrictive policy on family reunification .
Madam Commissioner , I am glad you are here today .
Ladies and gentlemen , I think we are deluding ourselves if we believe that the free movement of persons in Europe has already been achieved .
Many of us have commented on the many restrictions .
But I think the report of the High Level Panel chaired by Simone Veil also shows how changes can be brought about .
It is quite clear from the 80 points included what the problems are - problems with which I myself have been very familiar for 27 or 28 years , I must say .
I am Dutch and have lived in Germany since 1970 .
' So what ? ' you might think .
" You are a citizen of the Union , so that is not a problem . '
I could tell you of many problems which I still experience .
Of course , I now have a German diplomatic passport which makes things a bit easier .
But I also have a residence permit , which is crazy , but that is the way it is .
This applies to many of us if we want to take advantage of what is actually in the Maastricht Treaty .
The Maastricht Treaty also states that there could be many more people like myself whose nationality is other than that of the country they represent .
But it also states that we are entitled to take up employment in one country and live in another country , for example like transfrontier workers , who live in one country and have insurance in another .
I come from the Aachen border region , and I am aware of all these problems and the difficulties which exist .
But what happens if these people get divorced , as happens in almost one in three marriages ?
Major problems then arise regarding entitlements to pensions , social security benefits , family allowances , and so on .
I could go on and on .
I welcome the fact that we are tackling this problem and that much of it is addressed in the Veil report .
But I have been talking about people who have a European Union passport .
Suppose we now consider those people who do not have a European Union passport , or who have not changed their nationality , whether consciously or unconsciously , perhaps for the same reasons as myself , but have lived here for 30 years .
We brought them here to work for us .
You could say they have done their bit , and now they are out on their own .
These people have a great many problems .
Mr Schiedermeier says that perhaps they want to come in by the back door , but I would like to tell him about a problem I have at the moment .
The family in question has German nationality . Two children went to school abroad , but were not in Germany when they were 16 , which means they have no right of residence .
Six children live in Germany and have a right of residence , as have their father and mother .
The other two must go back .
What sort of a country is that , if we send these people back , if we do not give these people the opportunity of being able to stay with us ?
When we see that only Germans are accepted into the public sector - I was in the public sector myself for 30 years - and that many provisos apply to non-Germans , that there are no permanent residence permits , and so on , then I think we still have a very long way to go .
I hope our amendments are accepted , because that would then also let us show the Member States where we are heading at the start of the 21st century , namely towards a common Europe , where all citizens have the same rights and the same opportunities to cooperate in building this Europe , irrespective of nationality .
Mr President , it is not very often that , in order to rightly praise the work of a rapporteur , I can agree with the words of Mr Schulz .
But in fact , Mr President , I believe two things can be said about Mrs Schaffner 's report : it is balanced and it agrees with the Treaty in force .
Mr Schulz has said the report is " Maastrichtian ' .
Well , if that is what he wants to call it , then it is " Maastrichtian ' .
It is in line with the text of the Treaty in force and I am therefore in favour of it .
Mr President , I agree with many of the points raised so far , so allow me to look at two more general points which I believe are relevant .
Firstly , we live in a frontier territory where everything that has been done so far casts both light and shadow .
Of course there have been shadows , Mr Schulz , but there has also been light , and many achievements .
And in response to an excellent speech by Mr Pradier , I would raise my first point . Mr Pradier , in fact the fourth freedom still remains to be developed , but we must not forget that one of the great successes of the Maastricht Treaty is that through Article 8 it bestows a political nature upon this fourth freedom , this free movement of persons and , if that is the case , it must also be the derived law .
So as well as the free movement of goods and capital , as well as the free movement of services - not forgetting , Mr Pradier , that behind every service , as you pointed out , there is normally a person who has the rights that any social and democratic country recognizes - the fourth freedom , the free movement of persons , is the fundamental political crux which transfers the centre of gravity of the European Union from the relationship between consumer and market to the relationship between citizen and rights .
That is a great achievement , and that is how we must highlight it and all its consequences .
Of course , from now on , the Amsterdam Treaty presents us with a challenge : incorporating into the acquis communautaire that which up until now has been , as I said , the frontier territory of the third pillar , in particular the free movement of persons .
That is our challenge and there is no doubt that it will present many problems .
However , it is also included in the Amsterdam Treaty ; that is a great achievement and one which will have to be developed with all due caution .
The second point which I believe is relevant and has not been mentioned is the need to guarantee and consolidate the direct effect of Article 8A . If Articles 8 and 8A are purely supplementary legal bases for the adoption of the rules of derived law , then the right of movement and residence of the citizens of the Union is based on the Treaty itself and not on the directives .
This must be remembered .
These rights are inseparable from EU citizenship , as are the other rights contained in paragraphs b ) , c ) and d ) of Article 8 .
The report from Mrs Veil 's High Level Panel supports this theory of the direct effect , and demands that every EU citizen should be able to invoke it in establishing the application of the principle of non-discrimination .
We would point out that the Court of Justice has not yet given a ruling , and we hope that in the near future , when it gives its ruling , it will help to consolidate this theory .
As regards the Commission , we must point out that in the proceedings brought before the Court , the Commission has maintained this theory of direct effect .
However , in the second report on citizenship , which is being debated in Parliament at this moment , the Commission only makes an ambiguous statement : that it would be logical if Articles 8 and 8A together generated rights relating to entrance and residence .
Nevertheless , in the last analysis it resorts to the legal bases of Articles 49 , 54 , 56 and 6 of the Treaty .
I will finish , Mr President , by saying that I think we must also point out that we are still lacking a single legal base for free movement .
In my view , these are the fundamental challenges which must be developed , from now on and with the Amsterdam Treaty in hand .
Mr President , of the four freedoms mentioned in relation to the internal market , the free movement of persons still poses some problems .
But that is no surprise .
Did the people who drew up the Treaty realize how broadly this freedom might be interpreted ?
And could they imagine how far-reaching the consequences of the free movement of persons might be ?
The abolition of internal borders was in reality only possible in combination with compensatory measures and a very strong external frontier .
Has this really been so useful to the citizens in the end ?
All the same , the strengthening of the Union was an unavoidable consequence of the ideal of open borders .
Mrs Schaffner 's reports discusses the High Level Panel 's contribution to the debate on the free movement of persons .
To my mind , it goes a little too far , for example in its interpretation of the Treaty 's regulations and in its exaltation of so-called " European citizenship ' , an imaginary concept which is far removed from the people , but is forced upon them through promotional campaigns .
The amendments from both the Green Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the Party of European Socialists are truly unacceptable .
As far as the Greens are concerned , I would like to say this . The reference to the anti-discrimination article in the Treaty of Amsterdam is superfluous in a report on the free movement of persons .
But if you are going to quote , make sure it is complete . Why table an amendment which lists sexual preference and age as well as disabilities , but leaves out gender , race , and religion or belief .
Through their amendments , the Socialists clearly want to give people from third countries more rights than EU citizens .
The logic of this escapes me .
At present a French citizen can settle freely in the Netherlands , as long as he can support himself .
The person concerned is not a Dutch citizen , after all , covered by Dutch legislation .
This is a restriction , but to my mind a necessary restriction , otherwise there would be all kinds of social abuse in the various Member States .
If there are restrictions for EU citizens , than why should these not apply to citizens from third countries ?
Indeed , why should they get more freedoms than EU citizens ?
These amendments are unrealistic , and if they are adopted we will most certainly vote against the report .
Mr President , on behalf of the representatives of the Alleanza Nazionale , in expressing our keen appreciation for Mrs Schaffner , we also wish to say that the High Level Panel 's report shows considerable awareness of the vastness of the problems in the field of the free movement of persons .
Even if there have been considerable improvements over the course of the years , there is a need to eliminate the distortions that continue to delay the full application of the rules on the matter .
Reading Mrs Veil 's report , we can see how the main problems relating to the free movement of persons are caused not so much by a gap in the legislation but rather by the non-application of the directives and regulations , which are at times obsessively complex .
There is also a problem with adapting Community law to national law , as in many cases the former is only partly included rather than in full .
So we need to put everything in order . We should try to regulate the various aspects of this question with single directives or regulations , thus avoiding the problem of complex , indecipherable regulations .
At the same time , citizens ' rights will be better defined through this process of simplification .
Citizens who decide to settle in another Member State of the Union should be able to benefit from the same treatment as citizens who do not leave their countries of origin , and not be penalized for making that choice .
The fundamental concept should be unique , based on equal treatment and the combating of discrimination out of respect for human rights .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by making an appeal to the European Parliament and all my colleagues . This Parliament has always been the driving force behind the principle of the free of movement of persons as a fundamental freedom .
I hope this will continue to be the case during the debate and the vote on Mrs Schaffner 's report .
The European Parliament must continue to counter the tendency found in many Member States to turn in on themselves and erect institutional and actual barriers to the free movement of persons , and even to discriminate against citizens on the basis of their nationality .
In my speech I would like to go into a particular point , namely the status of third countries in the context of the free movement of persons .
In my country , Belgium , a debate is taking place at present on the local election voting rights of migrants who have been resident in our country for many years .
My party , the Socialist Party , has been won over to this , but it is a terribly difficult debate , which has to cut across people 's fears , people 's racist reflexes .
However , it is incredible how many other forms of discrimination exist alongside this one against people from third countries , who are in fact permanently resident in Europe .
The right of residence , of being able to work in paid employment , or to become self-employed and even , Mr Schiedermeier , the right to live with one 's family - a fundamental human right laid down in international conventions - are not evident to these people , and are even challenged by you .
Even though the High Level Panel had a limited mandate , it makes good recommendations .
I believe we should support these in this Parliament .
Or do we think that a Turkish migrant from Genk in Belgium should not be able to look for work in Aachen in Germany , 35 km away , whilst his Italian neighbour is able to do so ?
Do we think it is normal that a young Turkish person should have to apply for a visa to follow his football team on a trip to London , whilst his Spanish friend can do so without one ?
Do we think it is normal that people from third countries cannot invite their ill relatives to come over here if they can guarantee that they can support them ?
Or is it humane to make a woman who has been abandoned by her husband leave the country , for the simple reason that she is not a European Union citizen ?
My group , ladies and gentlemen , supports the abolition of all types of discrimination between citizens of Member States , and between EU citizens and citizens of third countries who are permanently resident here .
That is the purport of a number of our amendments .
I note incidentally that both the Veil High Level Panel and a number of proposals tabled recently by the Commission take quite a big step in that direction , and I hope you will be able to endorse our philosophy .
But after this debate I no longer harbour any illusions about the attitude of some of the political groups in this Parliament .
I would like to thank in advance the members of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , the Greens , and all the others who will support our amendments willingly .
Mr President , to the citizen , freedom of movement within the Union is perhaps the most concrete expression of what Europe means .
People can live and work in different countries and decide in which country they want to live , in the long or short term .
In the referendum on whether Sweden should join the EU , freedom of movement was one of the decisive arguments in favour of membership , but many transfrontier workers still have problems drawing their pensions and supplementary pensions , and problems when they want to register in another country .
Freedom of movement is on the way to becoming a reality , but some governments are dragging their heels .
There are reasons for showing them up as examples and a warning .
So we will take up Mrs Thors ' topic .
The EU prohibits discriminating against citizens of other countries , but is it in accordance with the Treaty to discriminate against your own ?
In Sweden , a large number of knowledge-intensive companies are having problems finding well-trained people .
Ericsson , the telecoms company , has threatened to move its entire development department and corporate management to another country if it cannot get foreign people with leading-edge skills to move to Sweden .
But they do not want to do so for tax reasons .
To solve the problem of high taxation , the Swedish Government wants to introduce special tax exemptions on the grounds of nationality .
Ordinary Swedish workers will have to keep on living with income tax at over 50 % , while at the same time , well-trained , highly mobile workers get tax relief - and this , according to my information , with the support of the Commission , which is thus directly supporting tax dumping for localizing businesses .
This exception for highly-trained workers will protect the high taxation policy which otherwise would become impossible .
Otherwise , freedom of movement would lead to lower taxes and equalized conditions between Member States .
The prevailing competition on tax has shown that a lower tax burden favours companies .
But if they are discriminated against if they stay in their country , and forced to pay tax to their homeland if they leave , then confidence in the EU will evaporate .
In our country , we are now seeing the principle of living standards dictated by nationality , which enshrines the principle of unequal pay for the same work .
Scandinavia is a very good example when it comes to a passport union , but it is an equally poor example when it comes to tax .
There is still a lot to be done when it comes to freedom of movement and freedom itself .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Madam Commissioner , I too would like to thank the rapporteur and the High Level Panel , chaired by Mrs Veil , for their work .
I believe that one of the most important successes of the European Union is the single market , which covers much more than the purely economic field .
This single market also involves new freedoms and opportunities for citizens in their roles as employees , consumers or members of a family .
So today , Community citizenship has taken on a new dimension .
Nevertheless , we must be aware of the fact that there are still many difficulties to be faced in order to achieve the complete freedom of movement which should have been possible since 1993 .
The general conclusion is that the existing legislation is adequate .
So the problem that needs to be solved is ensuring that Community rules are effectively applied and , in my view , that is a great challenge .
As a member of the Committee on Petitions and the Committee on Culture , Youth , Unemployment and the Media , I can assure you that the existing problems , mainly relating to the recognition of professional and academic qualifications and residence permits , as well as such day-to-day issues as the use of motor vehicles , have direct repercussions on the private and personal lives of citizens and their families .
Nor must we forget that the lack of available information is to a large extent responsible not only for the obstacles to free movement , but also for a great deal of disappointment when citizens realize that their expectations are not compatible with Community law .
For example , many people are not aware of the steps which must be taken to ensure that their contributions to social welfare benefits are recognized in another Member State .
Or to give another example , the costs of transferring money abroad are a serious difficulty for those people - such as pensioners - who live outside their own country for a considerable period of time .
In my view - and I agree with the report in this respect - gaps such as these could be filled by improving the public information campaigns on the rights of Europeans .
In the same way , it is essential to promote administrative cooperation between national and Community bodies and institutions , with a view to achieving transparency and comprehension of Community legislation . That would make it easier for citizens to ascertain their rights and obligations .
It would also be extremely useful to have the opportunity to run training courses for people working in administrative bodies , covering the most commonly encountered problems , so they can be resolved at a level which is closer to the citizens .
Finally , I would like to emphasize the measures presented in the field of education .
The study of foreign languages , cultural exchanges , and a consideration of the difficulties facing trainees and people with grants or scholarships are all problems which must be given special attention .
Ladies and gentlemen , the construction of a common educational territory is , in my opinion , the most important support needed in order to achieve our ultimate objective , the building of an area of true freedom and security within the European Union , towards which we must all strive .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome Mrs Schaffner 's report on the report on the free movement of persons produced by the High Level Panel chaired by Simone Veil .
Of the four fundamental freedoms , it is the freedom of movement and the right to reside anywhere in the Union which are really taking a long , long time to introduce .
That was why the Commission set up the High Level Panel .
Their task was to examine any concrete obstacles to the free movement of persons within the Union , and to propose appropriate solutions .
The High Level Panel concludes that legislation on the free movement of persons already largely exists , and that most problems can be identified and solved without the legislation being amended .
The Panel considers that the main problem is the implementation of these rights .
To make it easier for individuals to exercise their rights in practice , the Panel has formulated 80 recommendations , which mainly concern : better information ; which rights apply to the freedom of movement ; increased cooperation between Member States ; better training for national civil servants ; and how to make it easier for people to seek work in another Member State .
I think today 's debate is precisely about all these problems .
The report touches on citizens of non-Member States .
It mainly deals with how to coordinate the social security system which needs to be extended to cover those citizens completely or partially .
The High Level Panel also recommends more mobility for citizens of third countries who work in service companies .
The report is also in favour of mobility for the family members of citizens of third countries , but I would also have expected it to come up with more statements of principle when it comes to citizens of third countries residing legally in our fifteen Member States .
I believe they expect things of us .
Mrs Schaffner , the rapporteur , supports the many valuable recommendations from the High Level Panel .
A number of these recommendations will also be debated here in Parliament , for example in relation to the proposal on supplementary pension rights for workers moving within the Union , and the proposal to extend the social security system to citizens of third countries moving within the Community .
I share Mrs Schaffner 's view that real work is required in the area of information , as regards both the citizens and the authorities .
As Parliament knows , the Commission has also taken a number of initiatives in this field , such as the EU 's Information Programme for the European Citizen which was launched in 1996 , and the Carolus programme for the exchange of civil servants between Member States ' administrations .
The aim here is that the legislation covering freedom of movement in the single market should also be applied in practice by all our civil servants .
In other words , we need civil servants who provide a good service to all our citizens .
In reply to the report 's exhortations to the Commission , I would also like to mention two important measures which have been taken and will help to ensure that the principle of the free movement of persons becomes a reality .
The first initiative is a plan of action for the single market .
One of the aims of this plan is to create a single market which will benefit all citizens .
In order to achieve this , work is now in progress to abolish personal ID checks at borders ; review the provisions on housing ; defend social rights ; and make it easier for people to move around in the labour market within the EU .
Action is also being taken to improve dialogue with the citizens .
The other initiative I would like to mention is a plan of action for the free movement of employees , which the Commission of course adopted in November 1997 , and which also affects some of the recommendations from the High Level Panel .
The second proposal made by the High Level Panel will be found in the Amsterdam Treaty .
On this point , the Commission is working to implement these amendments to the Treaty in the shape of practical policies as quickly as possible .
I believe both the High Level Panel 's report and the Schaffner report provide a good basis for further discussion on what concrete action is needed to achieve real freedom of movement for the citizens of Europe .
Thank you very much , Mrs Gradin .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be postponed until the High Level Panel 's report is available in all languages .
Enlargement and cooperation in the field of justice and home affairs
The next item is the report ( A4-0107 / 98 ) by Mr Posselt , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the implications of enlargement of the European Union for cooperation in the field of justice and home affairs .
Mr Schulz wishes to speak on a point of order .
Mr President , I refer to Rule 96 of the Rules of Procedure and would ask you not to open the debate now .
My reasons are as follows . We have 6 minutes left before voting begins .
Anyone who regularly spends time in the Chamber knows what will happen here in a few minutes time : a very undisciplined mass of Members will pour in , with no interest in any debate . They are only interested in the fact that voting is about to begin , and have no interest in the debate .
That is unfortunate for Mr Posselt , the rapporteur , and Mrs Spaak , the draftsman of opinion , and also for those who are still to speak this afternoon .
However , it is our duty to carry out these debates in a reasonably acceptable manner , and that is no longer possible .
Secondly , Mr President , I would ask you to convey the protest of at least the Social Democrat members of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs to the Bureau of the European Parliament .
Every time , we have the extraordinary pleasure of having to debate our reports at a time like this , which I think is inappropriate in view of the importance of the topics .
Perhaps that could be taken into account in future scheduling .
It is up to the Presidency to decide whether or not to postpone a debate .
I can see from your applause that you are in agreement with this , but I will give the floor to the rapporteur , Mr Posselt , to allow him to state his position .
Mr President , I regret the circumstances which have led Mr Schulz to make his justified comment .
But I think it is completely justified , and I would like to state quite categorically that I wish to protest at the way this part-session is being conducted , both on behalf of my group , and as rapporteur .
I have absolutely no objection if these reports are discussed on Thursday afternoon or Friday morning .
I will certainly be here , and I think that each day and hour of the part-session is as important as any other .
However , I also think there are specific topics which are of interest to a wide public , and the extremely important matter pertaining to the Rules of Procedures which we discussed this morning , which is very important to us internally but is of no public interest , is quite definitely not one of them .
I wish to protest at the absurdity of us debating matters pertaining to Parliament 's Rules of Procedure in the morning , at the most effective time for press coverage , and then postponing the important topics which are of public interest until the evening .
In accordance with what you have just said , I put it to the House that the debate should be postponed until 5.00 p.m. this evening .
( Parliament gave its assent )
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12.00 noon )

Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I have the pleasure of welcoming today a delegation of 12 members of the Maltese Parliament , headed by Mr Spiteri , who are seated in the official gallery .
The delegation has come to Strasbourg for the tenth meeting of the Joint Parliamentary Committee .
Today they have attended meetings with their colleagues from the European Parliament , concerning both Agenda 2000 and Malta 's relations with the European Union and its future prospects . There were discussions on the different fields of culture , education , research and development , cooperation on policies concerning immigration and the fight against terrorism and drugs , and the Union 's Mediterranean policy , particularly the Euro-Mediterranean process .
I hope they have a pleasant stay and a very fruitful debate .
Mr Chichester wishes to speak on a point of order .
Mr President , I wanted to thank you for allowing a gap between the debates this morning and the votes at 12 noon to allow Members to come in and take their seats .
I am sorry some colleagues have been so tardy in doing so but thank you anyway .
Votes
Mr Dell 'Alba has the floor to make a clarification about when this would come into force .
Mr President , I simply wish to confirm what I requested during the debate : that this regulation should come into force on 14 September , so as to give the subcommittees concerned time to adapt to these new regulations .
( Parliament adopted the decision )
Mr President , I would ask for a revision to be made of the translations in the different language versions , in particular the German version , where I have noted that certain translations could give rise to misunderstandings .
Before the vote on paragraph 8
Mr President , before you call a vote on compromise Amendment No 22 , I would like to intervene regarding paragraph 8 in its entirety .
If adopted , this amendment will replace two amendments : Amendment No 11 by the Group of the European United Left and Amendment No 19 by the Europe of Nations Group .
Naturally , as this is a compromise amendment , it is put to the vote beforehand .
Well , our Amendment No 19 , which referred to paragraph 8 , sixth indent , had two objectives : one , to add the words ' more rigorous use ' ; the other , to delete part of the text .
I wanted to say that I am quite prepared to remove the addition of our Amendment No 19 , but could we vote separately on the words Amendment No 19 was aiming to delete , in other words , the sixth indent of paragraph 8A - ' the possible incorporation of the EDF into the community budget ' ?
That is my request .

You are right , Mr Fabre-Aubrespy , the compromise amendment does not exclude the amendments to which you have referred . They will be voted on afterwards .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , we have now taken a vote on this report .
I assume - gentlemen of the Council of Ministers please take note - that the fact that Parliament has just voted in favour of the motion does not mean that transfer of the reserve resources will happen automatically , but we expect that the assurances given by the Council presidency to this House will also be observed in implementing the resolution in the Council of Ministers .
Should that not be the case , the resources will remain in the reserve fund , to make it clear to those who must pass a resolution on this in the Council that this opinion is not just one for the wastepaper bin , but that it must be adopted into the directive as we have discussed it here .
Mr President , what Mr Samland of the Committee on Budgets has just said was obvious to us , of course .
This view is shared unreservedly by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy .
I think the Council and its Presidency are aware that they now have to act to make funds available for Bosnia-Herzogovina .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy fully supports what Mr Samland said .
Mr President , yesterday when Mr Henderson responded to my requests to comment on the various points , I had the impression that he was willing to talk and will remain so over the coming weeks .
Further to this vote , however , I will interpret my duty as representative of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Security and Defence Policy and of Parliament to mean that I can have a discussion with Mr Henderson on the points to which he has not yet been able to agree , so that we can assert our view as far as possible .
Some major points concerning the Commission 's capacity to act are still to be implemented .
We must push this through , in the interests not only of Parliament , but also of the European Union as a whole , so that our aid in Bosnia-Herzegovina can finally be effective and we can catch up with the Americans .
Mr President , I do not want a debate but just so that we understand the relationship between what the Foreign Affairs Committee was recommending and what my colleague , the chairman of the Budgets Committee , has just said , can I just for the record confirm that I was impressed by what Mr Henderson said yesterday as President-in-Office of the Council in responding to our amendments from the seat of the Presidency .
I am convinced that there will be time now before a final decision is taken in Council for discussions to continue .
I do not wish to delay , and neither did the Foreign Affairs Committee at any moment wish to delay , the delivery of aid to Bosnia or indeed to delay this regulation .
I think it is important , on the wider issue of our relationship with the Council on CFSP and other matters , that there be absolute consensus among the groups of this House which is why I did not press this matter , as you know we could have done , earlier .
I am content now to rest on the assurances we had from Mr Henderson and I am sure now this will actually lead to progress and I will sit down before you hit the hammer .
Thank you very much , Mr Spencer , but your speech would have been more appropriate during the explanations of vote .
We will continue with the votes .
Mr President , I shall be voting against this amendment which refers to the 128 encoding system , for two reasons .
First of all , the author has been unable to explain to me what this system is , and I would like to say that when someone proposes an amendment with references such as this one , they should at least supply the documents to which it refers .
My other reason for voting against this amendment is that I have finally been able to find out what it is about .
It is in fact a very expensive , primarily American bar code system to replace a very simple Eurocode system which will cost next to nothing .
There is therefore no doubt in my mind that this amendment should be rejected .
After the vote on the text of Annex 2 ( 8 )
Mr President , I am terribly sorry to have to point out that there were no voting machines working in this whole row of seats , which can be proved . And we would all have voted against the motion .
They did not work .
I am very sorry .
This will be recorded in the Minutes and the officials will go and test it .
Mr President , on this side too , there was a whole row , an entire block of voting machines which did not work .
Could you repeat the vote please ?
Because I have a feeling there was a more serious reason for them not working . I have a feeling they were switched off .
Mr Wijsenbeek , since you were once the chairman of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities , you know that once the result of a vote has been given , it cannot be repeated .
There may have been an error in the interpretation of what I said .
I think that was the case .
( The President repeated the vote )
Mr President , I do not know why , but during these last few votes there was a clear divergence between the numbers you read out and the numbers listed on my group 's voting list , which in fact correspond with the numbers some of the other groups have .
That is why there is clearly some confusion over exactly what we are voting on .
Could you please call out the numbers , Mr President ?
Because I have votes here , for example , on Amendments Nos 21 and 25 , and on a number of original sections of texts , but it is not completely clear what is covered .
I think this is an important subject , so I want to know exactly what we are voting on .
Mr de Vries , we have just put the original text of Annex 2 ( 8 ) to the vote .
After the vote on Annex 3
Mr President , I would like to inform you that I am present in the Chamber , I am voting and my machine is voting .
Thank you very much , Mr Falconer .
That will be noted .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , on a point of order .
Could you inform the House , before we start Mrs Lalumière 's report , whether there are any appels nominaux in the course of the vote ?
I believe there is no roll-call vote , Mrs Jackson .
I will announce it as the texts are put to the vote .
Mr President , does not the advice you just issued to Mrs Jackson defeat the object of the exercise ?
If we know there are no roll-call votes we can all go out now and have lunch !
Mr Falconer , I am sure the Members of this House do not need to be told in advance whether or not there are any roll-call votes in order to fulfil their duty .
Before the vote on Amendment No 5
Mr President , as the objectives of the amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party and the Group of the Party of European Socialists accommodate each other very well , we also agree with the amendment of the Socialist Group if they agree to insert the word ' democratic ' before the word ' Russia ' .
The sentence would then read : ' considers that the European Union must develop special links with a democratic Russia ... ' .
( Parliament approved the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , the air in here is not just very warm , but stifling . It is affecting our concentration .
May I ask to have it checked so that the air in this Chamber is better at 3.00 p.m.
I will pass this on to the House 's services so that they can confirm your request and look into the matter .
The European Parliament report on the guidelines for the forthcoming 1999 budget is written in diplomatic language and is at pains to mask the two major contradictions which need to be addressed , that of the Structural Funds and that of the single currency , not to mention the question of enlargement which will come later .
On the subject of Structural Funds , the application of the 1993-1999 financial forecasts , approved by the 1992 Edinburgh Summit , would , given the late payments , give the 1999 budget a figure of 1.325 % of Community GNP in credit commitments and 1.235 % in payment credits , in other words considerably above the ceiling of 1.10 % allocated in January during the orientation debate ( which in turn was lower than the maximum of 1.27 % allocated in Edinburgh ) .
This progression raises the question of Structural Fund inflation and the fund 's usefulness , which has already been highlighted by my group in a recent study entitled ' Welfare Europe or Europe of the Nations ' .
It also raises the question of the legal nature of the interinstitutional agreements such as Edinburgh which claim to definitively link Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
It is quite clear that these agreements do not have the status of a Treaty and that the Council in particular still has the right to change its mind when circumstances dictate .
The second problem concerns the implementation of the single currency .
We can predict with certainty that this will lead to an increase in Community spending on inter-regional rebalancing .
This guideline will go against Member States ' wishes to continue to reduce their public deficits in the years to come ( as the figure of 3 % is a ceiling , not an ideal level ) , and in a wider sense to keep Community expenditure within reasonable limits .
Will this upwards pressure on expenditure be felt in the next year if the euro comes into effect on 1 January 1999 ?
The resolution of the European Parliament suggests that this will come to nothing , and that is perhaps true since the full effects of the new system will not be felt immediately .
However , Parliament is prudently arranging an escape route by stating that the Union 's budget must always conform to the terms of article F3 of the Treaty of European Union , according to which : ' the Union shall equip itself with the necessary means to achieve its objectives and carry out its policies effectively ' .
The Commission has set out the guidelines for the pre-draft of the budget by highlighting the need to adopt a strict budget in order to alleviate the tasks expected of Member States preparing for EMU .
The budget is intended to increase by 3 % whilst monetary depreciation in the Member States stands at 1.8 % on average .
In real terms , the increase in the budget should therefore be of the order of 1.2 % .
However , when the principal budget items are analyzed , the wide range of the changes becomes clear : namely + 8 % for the Structural Funds , + 3 % for the programmes aimed at the central and eastern European and Mediterranean countries , + 3 % for internal policies and 0 % for the agricultural budget .

We can therefore deduce that the agricultural budget is considered by the Commission to be a secondary item , despite the fact that in 1997 , farmers ' incomes dropped by roughly 3 % and agricultural expenditure was significantly lower than provided for in the agricultural section of the guidelines .
Our group is asking for an increase in agricultural spending in 1999 of an amount equivalent to that put forward in the pre-draft of the budget and in the draft of the 1998 budget .
It is important to reiterate that the final 1998 budget was reduced by ECU 550 million .
To this end , our group has submitted six amendments to the conclusions of Mrs Dührkop Dührkop 's report .
In fact it needs repeating that it is essential to continue to subsidize incomes according to the measures set out in the 1992 CAP reforms , or else the credibility of the CAP - the aim of which is to guarantee a viable rural environment - would be jeopardized .
An examination of the agricultural proposals of the Santer Package , presented to us on 18 March last , raises a great many questions about the future of the CAP .
If the principle of income subsidies is flouted in the draft 1999 budget , our fears will be fully justified .
Given the state of mind of the Commission and the European Parliament , we wanted to reiterate in another amendment the compulsory nature of agricultural spending in terms both of the level of pricing and of income subsidies .
Finally , as rapporteur for the 1998-1999 agricultural prices , I have been able to carry out a detailed analysis of the Commission 's proposals .
As Commissioner Fischler said , the package price remains stable virtually in its entirety .
In reality , as I have already told my colleagues in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , agricultural prices and subsidies will see a twofold drop : firstly due to the 1.8 % monetary depreciation in relation to the previous year and secondly , as of 1 January 1999 , a drop of approximately 3 % for those Member States participating in the euro , due to the withdrawal of the green ECU .
There is no trace of any compensation for the loss of income associated with the green ECU in the budget pre-draft .
The farmers are therefore going to get the impression that they alone are financing the implementation of the euro , both through the resultant budgetary constraints and through the withdrawal of the green ECU .
This situation cannot be tolerated !
The 1999 budget will be the last European Union budget before the Council of Ministers adopts the new 2000-2006 financial perspectives and the euro becomes a reality .
Mrs Dührkop Dührkop has found herself on the horns of a difficult dilemma , namely how to maintain the strict budgetary controls adopted by the Member States whilst incorporating into the European budget the financial consequences of the third stage of economic and monetary union , the Treaty of Amsterdam , Agenda 2000 , and the pre-accession of the central and eastern European countries .
There is no response to this question in the report .
On the contrary , Mrs Dührkop Dührkop attempts to reconcile conflicting interests without identifying actual priorities and satisfying the various parties and lobbies who enjoy the Community manna .
With the exception of agriculture , which is strictly ring-fenced , there seem to be no strict budgetary controls .
Paradoxically , with the ECU 150 million adopted at the Luxembourg Summit , employment looks like the poor relation in the European budget .
In truth , only simple cosmetic measures have been taken .
This budgetary conformism accurately sums up the budgetary guidelines of the European Parliament for 1999 .
It does not break with its bad traditions , which we have challenged on numerous occasions , namely : clientelism , fraud , wastage , politicization and United Nations embezzlement .
Cabrol report ( A4-0112 / 98 )
I always pay attention to the work our colleague Mr Cabrol does in this House because he contributes valuable and extremely precise professional help , together with a tremendous sense of responsibility in the area of public health .
I also believe that the amendments proposed by the rapporteur point towards increased safety for both donors and recipients .
In that sense , they can restore confidence to both parties , which is something that is much needed .
However , we must not forget the problems associated with a lack of blood and derived products within the European Union .
The quality and safety criteria are happily taken into account by the Commission .
These measures will be instrumental in wiping out the stigmas caused by the contaminated blood crisis and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in France and in Europe .
Although we might consider that there is now virtually no risk as regards AIDS , it is vital that we take all known measures to eradicate all risks of transmitting the BSE agent .
Mr Cabrol 's amendments meet this safety requirement .
As regards imported blood , we must , at all costs , avoid repeating past errors so that the recipients of blood transfusions can once again have complete confidence in the procedure .
There is a heightened duty of transparency and vigilance .
Finally , I would like to insist upon blood and plasma donations remaining free .
That is the only way to avoid corruption .
This point needed repeating , and that has been done in the report .
There are many of us who fight for this - whether blood donors like myself or not - and who support these proposals .
Timely and reliable clinical and laboratory control is a necessary precondition for the collection and provision of blood .
In this connection , the proposals contained in the Cabrol report are especially significant and are a positive step aimed to guarantee the monitoring which must be carried out both on the donors and on the storing and availability of blood supplies and blood products .
We consider that , to avoid a repetition of the defective monitoring procedures that are becoming ever more widespread in the EU , resulting in the spread of serious diseases that have justifiably given rise to social unease , responsibility for the collection and provision of blood and blood products must be assumed exclusively by public organizations which have the necessary experience and infrastructure . At the same time we must ensure that this vital treatment , which offers substantial help to those suffering from serious chronic conditions or diseases which require the immediate intervention of the medical services , does not become a means for unaccountable large multinational corporations to indulge in profiteering .
Moreover , the products of blood donation , which must be voluntary and not undertaken in return for payment , must be made available free of charge for those in need .
The coincidental problem of the long-term lack of blood at national level calls for common regulations to be implemented by national bodies , with a permanent system of continuous intercommunication on the system of blood donation , existing supplies , and methods for storing and transporting these supplies . This will ensure the timely and safe use of these reserves throughout Europe .
We cannot legislate for morals .
However , it behoves us to guarantee all those preconditions that will ward off anything that is opposed to individual and social rights to health and life .
Raising the awareness of the general public , ensuring the highest level of scientific research , and monitoring national and scientific bodies to prevent the production of products which will threaten an individual 's health , are necessary safeguards against the criminal phenomena of distributing contaminated blood and blood products .
We accept the need for checks on the blood that is collected , and we demand regular analysis and monitoring of data on the indicators of viral diseases in an attempt to prevent the danger of them spreading . However , we must denounce attempts to create a new apartheid with the proposals that have been made regarding the exclusion of donors who have travelled to Africa .
Moreover , we must express our deepest concern about attempts to introduce , under the guise of health protection measures , the unacceptable measures provided for in the Schengen Agreement concerning the invasion of an individual 's private life through the setting up of questionnaires relating to their sexual behaviour and sexual relations . These measures do not avert any danger whatsoever - they are merely being used as a pretext to make the violation of the private life and dignity of the individual both socially acceptable and commonplace .
I would like to thank and congratulate Professor Cabrol on his report on the Council 's recommendation concerning the admissibility of blood and plasma donors and the tests carried out on blood donor samples in the European Union .
I would like to make a point of restating that both on ethical grounds and in order to guarantee the safety of blood products , blood donors and blood users , it is absolutely vital that donations remain free and are done on a voluntary basis .
This text should pave the way for achieving the highest level of safety .
The donor exclusion criteria which should prevail throughout Community territory , as set out in Annex 5 - with the exception of the criteria excluding homosexual men which seemed to me to be wholly discriminatory - will help to provide this level of safety , which each citizen has a right to expect .
Furthermore , the setting up of a single donor registration and identification system common to all the Member States certainly constitutes a step forward .
It will be much quicker to consult the resultant centralized database and this will provide an added product safety measure .
Needless to say , this data must remain strictly confidential , and one of the main guarantees of this is the donor identification encoding system which is unique and common to all the States .
It might seem astonishing that a Member should vote against a report whose goals he shares .
Of course , everybody is in favour of improving the safety of transfusions and therefore of surrounding blood donations with precautions aimed at protecting the health of the recipients .
But the guarantee so given must be on technical grounds and must not disguise political , moral or religious beliefs .
It therefore seems to me that the Council 's recommendation - barely improved by the proposals of our committee and its rapporteur - distances itself from concerns for public health to give a normative legal value to highly discriminatory prejudices .
In the first place , building a database of people excluded from giving blood is contrary to the principal of confidentiality which must go hand in hand with the detection and treatment of certain illnesses , particularly AIDS .
Even if it were possible to guarantee the confidentiality of the database , it would still supply personal information about these illnesses to persons other than the sufferers and the doctors treating them , which is in contradiction to the rules adopted in most countries of the Union .
Above all , section 5 of the explanatory statement , recitals 21 and 25 , and paragraph 5 of the recommendation of Annex 2 of this text are completely unacceptable when taken together .
It emerges that from the Council 's point of view , the following are excluded from giving blood and should possibly be filed as such : homosexual men ; persons who have had sexual relations in Africa ; and persons who have been sexually active in another country - to be specified - other than Africa .
In addition , journeys outside Western Europe and North America should also be declared .
What emerges from these proposals is that for the pseudo-scientists who drew up this text , the threat posed by a person cannot be attributed to risky behaviour - which is something that everybody could understand and accept - but to their sexual orientation , the place where they live and their race .
The European Parliament would be doing itself a service by refusing such proposals a great deal more energetically than has the rapporteur .
We have already seen through other recent reports that the road to hell is often paved with good intentions .
Our very legitimate compassion for the victims of transfusion accidents must not be allowed to eclipse the principles of non-discrimination upon which the European Union is founded , nor should it be allowed to encroach in even the slightest way on essential civil liberties .
The Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of Mr Cabrol 's report .
The report , which is a recommendation to Member States , underpins the Danish desire for voluntary and unpaid blood donations .
Article 129 of the Amsterdam Treaty introduces a high level of health protection in Community policy , including measures aimed at setting high standards with regard to quality and safety of organs and substances of human origin , blood and plasma .
This is to prevent blood and plasma from becoming common commodities .
I would like to congratulate our colleague , Professor Cabrol , on his report on the Council 's recommendation concerning the admissibility of blood and plasma donors and on the screening methods used for blood donations in the European Community .
This recommendation is aimed at providing a high level of safety , and for this reason donations must be both voluntary and free .
Donors must also answer a series of questions which are listed in Annex 2 , and must meet certain criteria which are listed in Annex 5 and which , of course , should not be discriminatory .
A single , common system for the whole Community territory for the purpose of identifying and registering donors and related data would provide much quicker access and consultation .
The confidentiality of such information would , furthermore , be guaranteed by an identification encoding system .
Lalumière report ( A4-0060 / 98 )
Mr President , I abstained from the voting on the Lalumière report , although it is really excellent .
However , some amendments have diluted the report somewhat .
The report does justice to the task , accurately describing Russia as one of the European Union 's major partners and specifying a clear strategy for the European Union 's cooperation with Russia .
However , I regret that talking about the question of Russia 's membership or non-membership of the European Union gave the impression that this was under discussion .
It was not , and is not , under discussion .
If that is made clear , I think we may be content with the report .
Mr President , I voted in favour of Mrs Lalumière 's report .
It is an extremely important one .
However , I would like to point out that some of its content does not entirely reflect my own views on foreign and security policy , especially in connection with EU / WEU / NATO- Russian cooperation .
But I think it is essential that the EU should give its support in any way it can to developing relations and cooperation between NATO and Russia .
That is why this report is an important one .
I voted for it , although I cannot completely agree the solutions which were approved in the part-session .
This report , on a subject which is acknowledged to be difficult , and presented by our colleague Catherine Lalumière , is important for several reasons and great care has gone into producing it .
This is no less that we would have expected from its author , whom I would like to congratulate most warmly .
Although everybody can rejoice at the economic and democratic transition which is forging steadily on , real questions and worries remain .
I believe it is vital to enter into real collaboration against organized crime since this appears as an ever growing threat not only in Russia , but in the whole of Europe .
Needless to say , this collaboration will not be possible without the participation of Russia , by means of a frontal assault on the corruption which is endemic to the country .
This effort will also provide a solid basis for lasting and healthy economic relations between the European Union and Russia .
There can be no true area of free exchange without this pre-condition .
We must be able to say this to our Russian counterparts . But are they capable of listening ?
With the dismantling of the USSR and its satellites came the hope of a peaceful and stable Europe .
However , the reality is far from this .
Of course , we might legitimately think that the risk of a major conflict has gone , but Yugoslavia and Kosovo are there to remind us that low intensity conflicts can still arise which could lead to major crises .
Finally , whilst reiterating my support for this text , I would also like to emphasize that I share Mrs Lalumière 's position on not inviting Russia to join the European Union .
It seems to me that this is a position which none of the parties want .
It would be far better for another democratic body to be organized in the East around Russia , which could negotiate economic , cultural and political agreements with the European Union .
Relations between Member States of the European Union and Russia can only be based on equality and mutual benefit .
Institutions expressing the interests of large multinational corporations are making concerted efforts to make the people of Russia serve their illegal interests . Unfortunately the European Union , in complying with the dictates pronounced by NATO , is also attempting to form in Russia a developmental model which is consistent with its own interests , while remaining indifferent not only to the repercussions this will have on the Russian people but also to the dangers of destabilization and conflagration in the region .
Following the overthrow of the USSR and the promotion and support , direct or indirect , of the so-called Russian Mafia , which controls a large section of the economic and therefore the social life of the country , plans are being pushed through to strengthen the process of democratization , which aims to completely marginalize the Russian people and to subject them to the geopolitical dictates of NATO and the USA .
The enlargements of NATO and of the European Union aim to create a new border , which will bring NATO forces and interests into direct contact with Russia .
It is to be noted that European Union strategy with regard to Russia promotes reform of the latter 's political structure , by means of funding programmes , and especially by means of the TACIS programme , to the point where the need for the emergence of a middle class to support political power is underlined .
In the context of the new carving up of the markets , there is an attempt by large monopolistic interests in the European Union to secure the Russian market for their own economic and geopolitical interests , thereby intensifying the exploitation of working people .
We support proposals which are aimed at direct contact and dialogue between analogous bodies and institutions in Russia , the European Union and its Member States , whose aim will be to look for opportunities and to fashion agreements for the development of cooperation on all sides . Such cooperation will fulfil the need to create an area of peace and prosperity in Europe and to avoid friction and conflict between the various parties .
We are radically opposed , however , to the substance given today by the European Union to the promotion of a dialogue , the sole aim of which is to overcome the resistance of this country to accepting the leading role of the USA , closely followed by the European Union , in Europe and throughout the world .
It is crucial for the European Union radically to change its position , to reexamine the objectives it has set itself and the methods it uses , and to accept the significant role that Russia is being called upon to play in developments both in Europe and further afield . The European Union must recognize the fact that only through equal relations based on mutual benefit will peace and stability be guaranteed in the region , and it must allow Russia to heal the wounds caused by the overthrow of the USSR in the way it chooses .
Russia is an unstable country in terms of democracy .
What we have to prevent at all costs is the construction of an EU and European partnership which Russia perceives as a threat .
This can be done by integrating Russia in European cooperation as far as possible .
This includes NATO , which the report does not cover .
To keep on building the EU up towards a kind of EU state is the worst possible way of establishing good relations with Russia .
The Group of Independents for a Europe of Nations has voted in favour of Mrs Lalumière 's own-initiative report on the future of our relations with Russia .
The general tone of the text is correct when it highlights the fact that the current weakening of Russia represents a transition in its history , and that the equilibrium of the European continent will largely be determined in the coming years by the role Russia plays .
Our own development is also linked to that of Russia : we need only think of the vast untapped energy reserves and natural resources in Siberia , which Russia must exploit with our active help .
The priority given by the rapporteur to consolidating Russian society is completely pertinent .
Let us not confuse the Russia of today with an emerging country whose financial difficulties can be alleviated with traditional financial aid .
First of all , the new democratic Russia needs us to take into consideration the huge efforts it must make to overcome the legacy of 80 years of communism .
We must help Russia overcome the traumas left behind by 80 years of a planned economy and abnegation of political and social life by single party rule , the outcome of which is the absence of an elite trained in anything other than nomenklatura , the absence of a middle-class , and the absence of a long period of maturation of a civil society .
Gaps like these cannot be made up in one day !
They must start from scratch : after a very long and painful hiatus , Russia must get back to the dynamism and poise it enjoyed at the beginning of the century , which the revolution of 1917 stopped dead in its tracks .
The Lalumière report has the merit of deliberately placing itself outside the two stereotypical visions of today 's Russia , namely the anecdotal and catastrophic view disseminated all too frequently by our media and the menacing view maintained by those who have not yet understood the magnitude of the transformations which have already taken place and who want to think of Yeltsin 's Russia as simply a continuation of Brezhnev 's USSR .
However , those who knew Brezhnev 's USSR and witnessed the first Russian democratic presidential elections are in a position to measure the chasm separating the two eras .
The Russian people fairly and squarely turned the page and rejected the Communist regime in free and open elections .
It is with this Russia , which has emerged from the Soviet Union which had engulfed and disfigured it , that we must increase our ties .
We must renew the old links and develop new relationships at all levels , the main one being , of course , intergovernmental relations , a point on which the rapporteur remains much too discrete .
It is actually up to the heads of state and government and those who want to see an active Russian policy to break free from the attitude of distant observation which has been all too prevalent up till now , to draw up guidelines for intensive cooperation with ambitious and bold objectives , and to resolutely back the Russian reformers .
We should congratulate ourselves on the confident atmosphere surrounding the recent tripartite summit between the Presidents of France and Russia and the German Chancellor .
The Community cooperation programmes can make a useful contribution towards the development of a vast partnership in all domains .
True , as set out in paragraph 31 , strict controls over the funds allocated to Russia must be observed , but the rapporteur could have insisted in a symmetrical article on the need for the Commission to exercise equally strict controls over its own services operating on Russian soil , which have not always given the impression of integrity and professionalism which we would all like to promote .
Whatever happens , the Member States of the European Union must guard against their actions being driven by the politics of the bloc which the Russians themselves rejected , which would carry the risk of very quickly erecting a new and completely artificial wall on the continent of Europe .
Certainly , security - our security - now involves cooperation with Russia .
In this respect , it is particularly regrettable that the majority of the European members of NATO allowed Washington to impose an enlargement of the organization upon them , an act guaranteed to further raise the suspicions of the Russian leaders and mar Russian opinion rather than inspire confidence .
It is high time Europeans overcame their reluctance , their mistrust , their stubborn prejudices and the inertia generated by years of the Cold War and fundamentally changed their approach to defence and the way it should be organized by closely linking it with Russia .
( The sitting was suspended at 13.34 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Topical and urgent debate
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B4-0391 / 98 by Mr Bertens and Mr Eisma , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on the forest fires in Brazil ; -B4-0396 / 98 by Mr Dell 'Alba and others , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the forest fires devastating the north of Brazil ; -B4-0404 / 98 by Mr Azzolini and others , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on tropical forest fires in South America and South-East Asia ; -B4-0405 / 98 by Mr González Álvarez and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the forest fires in Brazil ; -B4-0410 / 98 by Mrs van Putten and Mr Newens , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the forest fires in Latin America and South-East Asia ; -B4-0415 / 98 by Mr Habsburg-Lothringen and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the serious problems caused by the weather phenomenon El Niño in particular in Peru and Ecuador ; -B4-0418 / 98 by Mr Telkämper and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the new forest fires in South-East Asia ; -B4-0421 / 98 by Mrs Aelvoet and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the forest fires in Brazil .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , in Latin America , Brazil and Asia the world 's lungs are on fire .
Kalimantan and Brazil have been ravaged by massive fires for weeks .
The Brazilian Government is refusing help - let us not beat around the bush - and in doing so appears to be supporting the large landowners .
It is a disgrace that short-term economic gain is pursued this way , at the expense of the most beautiful and most vital parts of the natural world .
Europe should not stand idly by .
It is in our interest that these fires should be extinguished as soon as possible .
We should put pressure on the countries concerned to accept all international support , and the European Union should give technical aid alongside the United Nations towards actually extinguishing the fires .
Existing European Union budget lines are not being effectively utilized , or at least not sufficiently .
Obviously , structural measures must also be taken to prevent a repeat of these disasters .
Countries in South-East Asia and Latin America must implement effective legislation and take different measures to combat the slash-and-burn methods , or manage them better .
The Commission should also move more quickly in drawing up guidelines for importing tropical hardwood into the Union .
More support must be given to the sustainable management of crops , whilst the Mega-Rice project should be examined critically , at the very least .
We must prevent erosion and further deforestation .
The Union could take the initiative and organize an international conference on the issue .
I hope Parliament will support my amendment on this shortly .
Lastly , Mr President , El Niño is blamed for everything .
Let those countries remember that El Niño will have grown up before too long , and that the situation will only get worse .
For the moment , they can still control this child .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Commissioner , I would like to put a preliminary question in this debate on disasters .
The European Parliament has considered this phenomenon , this problem of disasters , with remarkable regularity every month . We take decisions , but most of the time we have no idea how those decisions are followed up .
What I mean is those decisions do not get any further than being mere declarations of intent or solidarity , because any possibility for financial support to mitigate the effects of disasters has been withdrawn from the Budget .
That is why , following up a suggestion we put forward here three or four months ago , we think the Commission should implement a Community strategy defining not only the kind of actions to take but also how they should be followed up , with regular constant monitoring of results .
In this case we are not dealing with a disaster on European territory , but one in a particularly sensitive and important area , namely Amazonia , the very lung of the world .
And the news from Amazonia is worrying .
According to a note I received today from the Brazilian Embassy , the most recent reports indicate that there are twenty fires burning along a line stretching nearly 400 kilometres .
Satellite photographs also show fires of similar intensity in Guyana , and of greater intensity in Venezuela .
The note also emphasizes that there are nearly a thousand firemen in the area , particularly from the Argentine Fire Brigade , awaiting the arrival of a further 500 men and specialists from the United Nations .
What happens in Amazonia or the great tropical forests - whether in Indonesia or Africa - is obviously of world-wide concern .
This , therefore , is a problem of international concern and responsibility , which requires an international combination of efforts , assistance and solidarity .
I do not think it is enough to accuse those countries of inertia or negligence .
In our opinion , so far as Amazonia is concerned , there should be an international treaty or agreement involving all the countries of the Amazon , under the auspices of the United Nations , clearly defining a policy of protection and sustained development for the whole of that area .
The international community should contribute to the technical effort in terms of human and financial resources .
In our opinion , the European Union also has an important role to play here .
We support the proposal put forward in the joint motion for a resolution on the G8 meeting .
We think that would be an forum of sufficient importance , with the necessary powers to hammer out a solution to this problem .
Finally , I should like to ask when there will be a clear common EU policy on forests .
We do not think the present policy is bold or supportive enough , particularly as regards the reforestation of the southern regions , which are threatened with increasing desertification .
We should not leave the protection of forests to others .
It is also in the interests of the world that we Europeans should look after our own .
Mr President , there is no doubt that the tropical forest fires in Indonesia were started by criminals and that the Indonesian Government is certainly implicated .
We are familiar with the system of concessions .
There is always a promoter on hand to slip a bulging envelope to a member of the government or a member of their family , then , once the tropical wood has been exploited , the land is turned into plantations .
I think that the NGOs ' appeals for a boycott of tropical wood are completely justified , and now more so than ever .
We must find a system which guarantees transparency for consumers , particularly by supporting certification systems such as the Forests Stewardship Council system .
Mr President , first of all I would like to state that I am very pleased that this resolution means we are examining the forest fires in Brazil and Indonesia .
However , our urgency gives rise to a dual approach to a certain extent , because we are combining two elements here : the ' self-induced ' if you like , or environmental disasters and forest fires caused by man ; and the El Niño phenomenon , which has had a far more widespread effect than the forest fires .
Both must be dealt with , both are necessary , and I would say that these are two disasters which complement each other , but are not necessary connected .
We are currently talking about Brazil and Indonesia .
When we add El Niño to this , it will be many more countries tomorrow , and perhaps even ourselves the day after that .
I received some information from the Peruvian Embassy this morning about the damage caused in that country so far by El Niño .
The number of dead is currently around 300 , with 70 000 homeless , 15 000 homes destroyed , 120 bridges broken , the main hydroelectric plant at Machu Pichu completely wrecked by landslides , and about US $ 1.2 billion 's worth of damage .

That is about 3.5 % of the country 's gross domestic product .
If we consider the scale of the destruction - which affects not only Peru but also Ecuador , and could just as easily affect Brazil or Indonesia - it is very clear to me that far greater international solidarity is required of us . We must discuss in more detail firstly how we can exert influence to mitigate the effects of the El Niño phenomenon as much as possible , and secondly how we can cope with these disasters and also exert a certain amount of pressure on the appropriate governments .
I would like to state in this respect that it is very regrettable that the plenary session of the Earth Summit in New York in 1997 rejected the international Global Forest Convention , which was tabled by the European Union , amongst others .
As we are talking about forest fires so much , I would like to take this opportunity to ask the Commission and those responsible to table this Convention again at the next possible opportunity , because it is urgently required at international level .
Mr President , on 15 January about 40 000 indigenous people and small peasants lost their villages , provisions and fields .
So far , a quarter of the Brazilian state of Roraima has been destroyed by forest fires .
This is as much as Belgium and the Netherlands put together .
The Brazilian Government , however , has been more than reluctant to help , and even more reluctant to ask for international aid .
The first time it asked for this was only two weeks ago and , by that time , the international press had already pushed the alarm bells and the President finally had to admit that there was a catastrophe in the region .
It is not just a catastrophe , it is also a man-made tragedy .
The Government does nothing to stop the fires because there are big-money interests involved .
Brazil has given large concessions to international mining companies but , as the area is rich in mineral resources , the Indian reservations have always been an obstacle to the mining companies ' interests .
As far as they are concerned , the full destruction of the area is welcome because it is the easiest way of getting rid of the indigenous problem .
According to scientists , it will take about a hundred years or more before the people there will have forests and a normal , natural life again .
That is to say that for about a hundred years there will be no Indians to annoy the mining interests .
The Indians have the right to use the land but do not have the right to what is underneath it .
In other words , they will not get a penny from the mining .
What is more , not even the Brazilian people will profit from the mining resources which will be sent out of the country to the industrialized countries .
I really think it is very tokenistic to ask for some aid programmes for the area .
We really need to ask whether the economic model of plundering natural resources , without any regard for the people or the ecology , is acceptable .
What is going on here is neoliberalism , which is very similar to neocolonialism , and it is being done with the help of the Brazilian Government .
If this is the outcome of our international trade agreements , I really think we have to start changing this situation and changing it quickly .
Mr President , destructive fires on a vast scale in both South America and South-East Asia have caused unprecedented damage to the world 's rainforests over the last year .
In the state of Roraima in Brazil , reports indicate that 700 000 hectares of pasture and forest were destroyed in three months and , up to very recently , a line of fire stretched for some 400 kilometres .
Mercifully , heavy rain has now come to the aid of the firefighters from Brazil , Argentina and Venezuela who have been seeking to stop the advance of this disastrous conflagration , and many of the fires have been put out .
It is vital , however , that a new strategy be adopted if the rainforests are to survive .
Amazonia is the home of an incredibly rich variety of plant life , terrestrial species and several hundred AmerIndian cultures .
Rainforests everywhere also have enormous importance for environmental and climatic conditions throughout the world .
It is deeply worrying that greater resources were not made available at an earlier stage to fight the fires .
Preparations need to be made for a much more effective and earlier response in future .
The European Union , its Member States and the United Nations should participate .
Perhaps the matter can be given priority at the so-called G8 meeting in May , taking place in Birmingham in the United Kingdom .
The El Niño phenomenon made a large contribution , but the fires were largely caused by slash-and-burn methods of agriculture , and then got out of control .
What occurred this year could be a forerunner of still worse fires in the future .
It is vital that preventive steps be taken beforehand .
Land reform to provide the landless with alternatives to clearing the forests , effective legislation and provision of guidance to prevent reckless burning are desperately required .
As in South-East Asia , logging should be stopped .
Destruction of the forests should be brought to a halt .
In 1995 , apart from fires , 29 000 square kilometres of forest were cleared - an all-time high .
Although the Brazilian Government restricted clearing to 20 % of any holding , holdings of less than 250 hectares were exempted .
While we respect the sovereign rights of the people of developing countries , protection of the rainforest and the prevention of fires is in their interests even more than those of the world as a whole .
International assistance has been provided through the World Bank , but the experiences of the last year in South-East Asia and South America underline the need for a new strategy to be adopted now .
I very much hope that the Commission will be prepared to tell us something about the input it is prepared to make in the process of working out and implementing such a new strategy .
Mr President , the environmental tragedies that have affected Brazil and South-East Asia are further proof , if that were necessary , that market forces should not and cannot be the only guidelines followed by the national and international communities .
Many natural and other disasters in recent years , and many of the unsustainable situations with regard to environmental pollution suffered by capitals worldwide , are the result of a lack of self-control of the imaginary market rules .
The market , for example , requires an ever greater number of cars to be produced and sold , but the same market does not care that our European cities are already full of cars , that our children no longer have any space to play in , that the air is unbreathable and the historic centres are sustaining irreparable damage to their cultural wealth .
All this affirms that it is not market forces but politics - and , therefore , the primary interests of the people and communities - that should direct or guide our ways of life .
We now come to the point we are dealing with : the fires and destruction of the tropical forests in Amazonia and South-East Asia .
There is no doubt that these devastating fires are the result of commercial greed and a blinkered outlook on life .
You need to be blind and insensitive not to see the disastrous consequences for everyone , and for the speculators themselves , resulting from these natural disasters : hectares and hectares of forest going up in smoke coincide with the overheating of the earth 's atmosphere , with the creation of phenomena such as the greenhouse effect and El Niño causing flooding , hurricanes and extraordinary climatic changes worldwide .
Politics are therefore not dying , and should not die .
Nation states or supranational communities , such as the European Union in part , should do everything possible .
They should reach agreements and find the appropriate means of pressure so that these states or speculators with no interest in health or the future of the earth 's atmosphere are made to see reason , within the scope of the international community .
If the Black Sea is one of the most polluting seas in the world and this sea flows into the Mediterranean , the coastal countries cannot fail to intervene to end this lethal pollution .
The same applies to the fires in the Asian tropical and subtropical forests .
Mr President , I will use this additional time you have granted me to welcome Commissioner Pinheiro and to welcome the decision of the Commission which , in Solomonic fashion , as we are dealing with Asia and Latin America , thought of asking the Commissioner responsible for Africa to reply .
We are certainly very concerned , and we are pleased that it has been possible to include this subject as an absolute priority among the urgent matters to be dealt with at this sitting .
We are very aware that , beyond El Niño , human responsibility is very high , both in the Asian continent and with regard to the Brazilian authorities , which are still delaying the arrival of the United Nations mission that should have become operational several days ago .
I have to say , however , that we are very concerned , Commissioner Pinheiro , about the state of use of the EU budget line for tropical forests , which was keenly desired by our Parliament , a line which , as you know , in the same way as many lines relating to foreign actions , has sustained considerable delays of execution .
We are asking for one more effort to be made , with this resolution .
Mr President , the European Commission is very closely following the latest developments in South-East Asia , and in particular in Indonesia , ever since the outbreak of large-scale forest fires in 1997 .
While rains have occurred in Sumatra and Java , the rest of the country is dry and may continue to be dry until May 1998 .
The recurrence of fire hotspots was detected on 19 January with prevailing fires occurring mostly in the northern areas of East Kalimantan where rain has not fallen since December 1997 .
As you are aware , the Commission in the short term has no other means of responding than with humanitarian assistance .
I am pleased to say that my colleague , Emma Bonino , through ECHO has allocated more than ECU 1.5 million to alleviate the acute needs of food and health care in Indonesia , in particular in the regions most severely affected by the fires and drought .
The funds have been channelled through the International Committee of the Red Cross and also Médecins sans frontières de Belgique .
A mission will be carried out by ECHO to Indonesia in April to assess further humanitarian needs in vulnerable areas , including Kalimantan .
The mission will enable the Commission to programme its assistance in 1998 to areas where humanitarian needs are most urgent .
Also , and in a more long-term perspective , the Commission and Member States in Jakarta set up in 1997 a joint European Union Fire Response Group ( EUFREG ) composed of forest fire experts from various Commission and Member State projects in Indonesia .
The task of the Response Group is to provide the Government with relevant information and advice if needed , to monitor and assess the situation on a day-to-day basis and to assess possible needs , for example , regarding fire-fighting equipment , to improve the efficiency of measures taken by the Government .
At the same time , the Commission is working with the United Nations Disaster Assessment and Coordination ( UNDAC ) team in order to assess the regional impact on a short and long-term basis of phenomena such as El Niño .
We will continue to fund the project on fire prevention and control in South Sumatra which we hope will be a pilot case that could be extended to other regions .
As regards Brazil , we have heard today that , thanks to the rain that has fallen in the last few hours , roughly 90 % of the fires are now virtually extinguished and this is good news .
As far as we understand , more than 34 000 sq km have been devastated by this fire in Roraima .
In the short term , the European Community Humanitarian Office - ECHO - envisages channelling funds towards the communities affected by the forest fires , namely indigenous communities .
Several European non-governmental organizations have shown their interest in working in the affected areas .
ECHO is proceeding to analyse their requests for funding , and a meeting is being held today , 2 April , at the Delegation of the European Commission in Brasilia .
At this meeting , among others , are participating Oxfam , the Indigenous Council of Roraima and representatives of Member State embassies to coordinate European aid .
However , as several honourable Members have mentioned , the problem is not just a short-term problem : it is also the long-term prospects for sustainable management and a sustainable policy in tropical forests .
I am happy to say that the European Union has been financing some projects in that regard .
One known as PRODESQ concerns fire monitoring and afforestation control and the second one , known as ECOFORCA , aims at developing and applying low-cost monitoring technologies for the detection of fire in forest areas .
Besides these two specific projects , there is a larger one under the acronym of PP-G7 which encompasses not only the promotion and conservation of sustainable forest management but also some programmes on research and some pilot cases with regard to some of the communities .
We think that , regardless of all these efforts , the idea of holding an international conference on this issue would be very much welcomed because the consequences of such fires are not just bad for the countries where they occur but for all humanity .
I wish to say that from 1992 to 1997 , a total of ECU 300 million has been committed under the tropical forest financial instrument , which Parliament has granted to the Commission .
Unfortunately , despite this commitment only ECU 130 million has been disbursed during this period .
This is why we have decided to ask for an evaluation of all our projects from an independent external expert because we have to correct this mismatch between commitments and disbursement .
Finally , I wish to say that , even if we do not have budget lines specifically for disasters , the Commission takes the resolutions seriously .
If honourable Members want to follow what has happened , there is one thing that used to come after Question Time called ' les suites données ' which is very boring but you can always identify what has been the follow-up to the proposals that have been made in this House .
Second , it is very difficult to identify beforehand what disasters may occur but my colleague , Emma Bonino , and ECHO deserve our sympathy because they always manage to respond very quickly and effectively in order to mitigate as much as possible all the disasters that have occurred , at least on the humanitarian side .
Thank you very much , Mr Pinheiro .
I hope you will not see my bad pronunciation of Portuguese as an insult to that beautiful language , which I admire so much .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 4.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Arrest of Dino Frisullo in Turkey -B4-0409 / 98 by Mr Vinci and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the arrest of Italian national Dino Frisullo in Dyarbakir ( Turkey ) ; -B4-0411 / 98 by Mr Vecchi , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , on the arrest and detention of Italian national Dino Frisullo in Turkey ; -B4-0412 / 98 by Mr Graziani , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on respect for human rights in Turkey ; -B4-0420 / 98 by Mr Orlando and others , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the arrest of Italian national Dino Frisullo in Dyarbakir ( Turkey ) ;
Cameroon -B4-0392 / 98 by Mrs André-Léonard and Mr Fassa , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal Democrat and Reform Party , on freedom of speech in Cameroon ; -B4-0401 / 98 by Mr Hory and Mr Scarbonchi , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on freedom of speech in Cameroon ; -B4-0403 / 98 by Mr Pasty and Mr Azzolini , on behalf of the Group Union for Europe , on freedom of speech in Cameroon ; -B4-0408 / 98 by Mr Pettinari , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the United Left - Nordic Green Left , on human rights in Cameroon ; -B4-0417 / 98 by Mrs Aelvoet and Mr Telkämper , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on freedom of speech in Cameroon ;
Death penalty in the United States -B4-0407 / 98 by Mr Manisco and others , on behalf of the Confederal Group of the United Left - Nordic Green Left , on the case of Mumia Abu-Jamal in the United States ; -B4-0423 / 98 by Mr Orlando and Mrs Roth , on behalf of the Green Group in the European Parliament , on the case of Mumia Abu-Jamal in the United States .
Arrest of Dino Frisullo in Turkey
Mr President , we have all seen on television recently the attacks made by the Turkish police on the Kurdish population of Dyarbakir , which was calmly celebrating its feast .
We have seen elderly Kurdish women being kicked in the head , and photographers and journalists beaten .
Three Italians were arrested and one of them , Dino Frisullo , is still in jail .
This is a question of human rights , democratic freedoms and the rights of the Kurdish people in Turkey .
This is the level of respect shown towards agreements signed with the European Union by the political and military leading class of Turkey .
We have also learnt today that the Turkish Government will essentially be responsible for Cyprus joining the European Union with the annexation of the north of the island occupied by Turkish troops .
It has been maintained by the EU , recently and over the course of the years , that the so-called " lay Turkey ' should be encouraged to democratize the country and that Turkey should be protected from the so-called " Islamist danger ' .
We signed the customs union for those reasons , despite all reservations .
But the tragedy of Turkey is the leading lay Turkish class .
In the name of the modernization of Turkey , the genetic code of this leading class includes military expansionism and ethnic cleansing within the country .
This Turkish leading political and military class only understands the language of force .
To conclude , the European Union should suspend the customs union .
The EU Member States should stop supplying arms to Turkey . Finally , the Member States should formally warn Turkey against annexing the north of Cyprus or other acts of hostility against that country .
Mr President , I would like to say that it is really discouraging to see how , once again , the Turkish Government does not want to understand why negotiations have not got under way for its accession to the EU .
It does not want to understand , to the point that it is attacking a free demonstration on the part of the Kurdish people , in which European pacifists have participated , including my fellow countryman who is currently in jail in Turkey . The Turkish Government does not want to understand how it is impossible for the country to be able to join the European Union if it fails to respect human rights .
It is not that the Christian club does not want an Islamic country .
In fact I agree here to a large extent with Mr Vinci , when he says that it is the lay component that contains something totalitarian and dictatorial , to such an extent that the lay state of that country is guaranteed by the armed forces , an anomaly that I do not believe exists anywhere else in the world .
That is why , Mr President , it will be necessary for people who , like me , support the need to approve the customs union , to review our positions vis-à-vis Turkey , at least until the rights of the people are respected , particularly the Kurdish people .
I recall , Mr President , that after the First World War , based on the Treaty of Sèvres , the Kurds had the right to independence in a country that was to be called Kurdistan .
Then that Treaty , like so many others relating to minorities like the Kurds , became a scrap of paper , and there is no longer any trace of it in our history .
We need to resume this dialogue . We need to tell the Turkish Government and the neighbouring governments that they have Kurdish populations in their countries , and the time has come to restore independence and trust to a people who currently do not have any trust other than that of those visiting the Turkish jails , like our colleague who was awarded the Sakharov Prize two years ago .
Mr President , as those speaking before me said , on 21 March the Kurds celebrated their new year , the " Newroz ' , during which demonstrations took place defending the rights of the Kurdish people . Representatives of nongovernmental organizations , pacifists and MPs from several European countries took part .
Those demonstrations were followed by unacceptable action on the part of the police , who tackled many of those taking part , arresting some of them , including Dino Frisullo , who is still in prison .
I would like to say that , as I know Dino Frisullo personally , I can assure you that he has always shown peaceful intentions and interest in non-violent choices aimed at favouring dialogue between the parties .
The Turkish Government , however , rather than try to talk with the Kurdish people , has chosen repression , preventing the lawful exercise of the right of expression and demonstration of Kurdish and Turkish citizens and citizens of several European countries .
Within this framework of failure to respect the international agreements and unacceptable repression of human rights - by a country which not only maintains cooperation relations with the EC and has achieved customs union with the EU , but , from a legitimately certain point of view , is also aspiring to join it - it is essential for the EU , and for the European Parliament in particular , to support the action of the Italian Government , which has firmly requested the immediate release of Dino Frisullo .
I think we should make the Turkish Government understand that European public opinion , together with Italian public opinion , cannot tolerate a country with which the above relations are maintained still being able to oppress human rights in this way .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in all sincerity I believe that we are not so much discussing the problem of the Italian citizen , Dino Frisullo , as the Turkish Government and the role Turkey is playing in its relations with the EU .
Two fundamental questions arise : the first relates to respect for human rights in Turkey , and the second to the support the EU has always given to the Kurdish question and , more generally , to the rights of minorities wherever they are .
Today , Turkey is at a crossroads .
It has to choose which way to go .
It is a historic and cultural crossroads that this important country has often reached .
However , its Government has to realize that , if it wants to maintain serious relations with the EU , it has certainly not started out on the right track .
Cameroon
Mr President , the Cameroon is a signatory of the Lomé Convention which states that development aid is subordinate to respect for human rights and fundamental liberties , such as freedom of speech .
The two year imprisonment of the journalist Pius Njawé and the six month imprisonment of Michel Michaut Moussala are unacceptable on the grounds that they infringe the freedom of expression which is normally guaranteed by the constitution and laws of the republic , and the law governing social communications .
Do the Cameroon courts have several interpretations of the law ?
I fear they do , since violations and infringements of civil liberties have shown a dangerous increase and mirror the worsening of the situation in terms of human rights .
There can be no democracy in a country which censors the media .
Gagging the press and preventing news from being broadcast is a serious infringement of basic civil liberties .
I therefore appeal to the Cameroon Government to stop these practices , to free the two journalists , and to return to a situation in which human rights are rightfully in place , as they are in all states who have a fundamental respect for themselves .
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , Pius Njawé is the director of a private press group known as ' The Messenger ' and has been detained since 26 December 1997 . He has just been heavily sentenced to two years ' imprisonment .
His crime is that he allowed an article entitled ' Is Biya ill ? ' to appear in his newspaper , which referred to a mild heart condition suffered by the President of the Republic of Cameroon .
Another journalist , Michel Michaut Moussala was condemned to six months ' imprisonment .
Pius Njawé , who has been imprisoned several times and is considered to be the father of the freedom of the press on the African continent , has once again paid a heavy price in the necessary fight for the freedom of the press in countries where the tradition of a single party still survives and where no opposition is tolerated .
The freedom of speech is sacred .
It is one of the pillars of the democratic process on which the European Union is founded .
We therefore demand the immediate release of these two journalists and that human rights and freedoms , of which the freedom of expression is fundamental , be respected .
Mr President , anyone acquainted with Cameroon - as I am - has a great liking for the country . Its people are particularly friendly and reasonable , and generally it is still a relatively well-managed country , compared to its neighbours .
It is therefore all the more regrettable when events take place there which absolutely contradict our principles .
However , I would like to point out something else . We have the Lomé Convention with these countries , and Article 5 is clear and unambiguous .
But what happens ?
To be honest , I have always had the impression that this Article existed on paper only and is not implemented .
If we do not draw the consequences of what we are demanding , we must not be surprised if the governments and people revert to a tradition which is not so very old .
After all , people alive today remember when things were still quite different .
If we do not insist on the implementation of our provisions then it is not surprising . However , it should make us examine our consciences .
Are the attitudes we support credible ?
Is our support of human rights and international law credible ?
Are we really credible , and do we use the great opportunities we have to enforce them , not only in a moral sphere , but also in an economic and social sphere , as we always trumpet ?
I think we should take up the case of a friendly country such as Cameroon , not in order to criticize it but in order to criticize ourselves , so that we can finally achieve credibility .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the question of Cameroon raises a more general problem : that of freedom of expression , and particularly freedom of the press , in some of the developing countries , particularly some African countries .
In my experience as an MEP , this is not the first time I have had to face such a question .
A journalist has been tried and condemned for publishing false and biased news .
This is not the right way to interpret freedom of the press : you cannot censure the falseness or otherwise of news to impose penalties that go way beyond anything the conscience of any civil people can bear .
That is our problem .
Mr President , I have of course read the joint motion for a resolution on the freedom of expression in Cameroon with a great deal of interest , and I can obviously agree with its recommendations .
Or at least with the obvious position that freedom of expression occupies a prominent position in the list of fundamental freedoms every single human being is entitled to .
I hope you will allow me , however , to point out to this Parliament that freedom of expression is sadly not only being jeopardized in Cameroon . In earlier resolutions , this Parliament itself wanted to restrict freedom of expression , in particular in the resolutions which have become a boring tradition , which under the guise of combating racism and xenophobia , argue for muzzling legislation against people who do not necessarily and indiscriminately consider the so-called multicultural society as an ideal to be pursued .
I note that on our continent as well , for example in France as a result of the communist Gayssot Law , people were recently awarded heavy sentences , and even reduced to poverty , after simply expressing an opinion .
Only a few moments ago our colleague Jean-Marie Le Pen lost his political rights , and therefore his mandate in this Parliament , for two years because of an innocent election clash .
I wonder what is being said in Cameroon about this kind of situation , and whether the Parliament of Cameroon will vote on a resolution on political freedom in France .
I note - one of many observations of this kind - that in my own country the Minister of Justice is starting a criminal law reform whereby press offences , which is what we are talking about today , will no longer be tried by the Crown jury , but by a college of politically appointed judges . The Minister of Justice stresses that it is his deliberate intention to curb the freedom of expression of one opposition party , namely my party .
We cannot merely denounce the events in Cameroon and advocate freedom of expression in that country ; we should also do so in our own countries and on our own continent .
Mr President , of course I emphatically support the release of Mr Njawé and Mr Moussala .
I also think we must attach more importance to the question of press freedom , including in the Lomé states which are closely associated with us .
However , I think we must view the problem in a wider context .
I am very pleased that Article 5 of the Lomé Convention is emphasized so strongly in the resolution .
I think that the freedom of the press is endangered from time to time in the majority of Lomé states , and that it is true that Cameroon is the one-eyed king in the country of the blind .
If we look around the region and consider Nigeria or the Congo , for example , the circumstances are quite different .
I am therefore of the opinion that Cameroon is one of the states characterized by relative stability , which also affects the rule of law .
Nevertheless , this event cannot be excused .
We should draw conclusions for our policy as a whole .
As Mr Pinheiro , one of our best commissioners by far , is here today , I would like to take this opportunity to appeal to the Commission and also the Member States to use our development aid much more than in the past , to promote programmes in the fields of education and training which underpin the rule of law .
Educating junior political leadership , public sector officials , judges and all those connected with the media , including journalists of course , is necessary , because freedom of expression is threatened from various sides .
I therefore think we have a very great duty in the field of education and training , to educate junior leaders who will break out of the vicious circle and ensure that a policy is pursued in most of the Lomé states which complies with Article 5 of the Lomé Convention .
We have a very great task here , which we must finally face up to .
Mr President , I think Mr Posselt is both right and wrong .
We do indeed have a great task here .
However , we have to carry out this task not as if we were masters of the universe , but as people of solidarity who are not trying to teach the Africans how it should be done .
If we consider the history of the 20th century in Europe or the history of European involvement in Africa over the last 300 years , it becomes clear that we are not in a position to rebuke anyone .
We have a common task of basic solidarity .
Cooperation with non-governmental organizations and democratically elected governments are at the forefront here .
We must work with them to find ways and develop initiatives which no longer make an appeal to civil and human rights seem an empty gesture .
Death penalty in the United States
Mr President , after Mr Manisco 's sad but lucid speech , little remains to be said , other than that I agree with him .
I just have a few points to add .
Firstly , I wish to recall the European Parliament 's firm opposition to the use of the death penalty , as already stated several times in previous resolutions , including those on the case of Mumia Abu-Jamal .
We should also remember that , while we are discussing these arguments , other people are in the arms of death and some of them have just been killed under the death penalty , as in the recent case of an American woman .
Then we should mention the terrible deterioration in the living conditions of the prisoners , as we have seen in particular in the Greene Jail in Pennsylvania .
We therefore believe it advisable for the European Union , and the European Parliament in particular , not only to confirm its " no ' to the death penalty , not only to ask for the suspension of the sentence against Mumia Abu-Jamal , but also to ask for a retrial of the case , which we know very well is suspect .
I just wish to add that we have submitted an amendment to ask all European companies thinking of investing in the United States to give preference to those states where there is no death penalty .
Mr President , a great deal has already been said .
Once again , we have a new case of the death penalty .
This time it is the Mumia Abu-Jamal case , and this time it is in the State of Florida .
What has repeatedly motivated us as Europeans and the European Parliament in these matters is firstly the fact that the death penalty still exists at all in the United States , and secondly the circumstances under which it is carried out .
Each case which is judged or sentenced in this way certainly involves its own tragedy and its own drama .
During the meeting in Geneva recently of the UN Commission on Human Rights , we had the opportunity to speak to a Texan attorney who opposed the death penalty .
He drew attention again to one particular factor which I think we do not appreciate .
First of all , most people in the United States know very little about why and how the death sentence is pronounced .
They do not hear about it and are not even particularly interested .
They usually only ever hear of the dramatic cases .
Also , the nature of the sentencing differs widely from one state to another .
Stepping across a state boundary is practically enough to avoid being sentenced to death for the same crime .
This difference in the severity of the penalty is something which concerns us in all cases , most particularly if it involves the ultimate penalty , the death penalty .
There is no uniform case law on this subject .
The same deed is assessed in different ways .
Sometimes it might be a mass murderer , sometimes a first-time murderer .
Murder is murder and is always dreadful .
But I think we should make it clearer to the Americans why we are so concerned about the death penalty in the United States .
Mr President , the Americans have a great country , a great nation , and are a great people .
All European citizens will be eternally grateful for the fact that they sent over their young people to free us from Nazism , a large number of whom fell on the Normandy beaches and in the push into Germany . They live in a country which vigorously defends human rights - freedom of thought , freedom of expression , the right to association , the right to publish - and yet they allow the most basic right of all to be attacked by the state itself .
This surrender to violence exemplified by the execution of an innocent person twelve years after a highly contestable guilty verdict - exemplified also by the fact that firearms are placed in the most untrained of hands and are made available to the most unstable of people , causing the deaths of dozens of innocent people - this collective surrender to violence has to be pointed out . We Europeans call upon the citizens of Pennsylvania .
Wake-up !
Stop this state-sponsored violence ! Demand an end to the execution of human beings , and in particular today of one human being , namely Mumia Abu-Jamal .
Mr President , I hope you do not consider my Spanish to be an insult either .
Mr President , as far as the arrest of Mr Frisullo is concerned , permit me to remind you that on 4 March last , the Commission adopted its annual report on the development of relations with Turkey since implementation of the customs union .
In its report , the Commission notes that the human rights situation and the process of democratization have not made any substantial progress over the past year .
Furthermore , in its communication on a European strategy for Turkey adopted on the same day , the Commission confirmed its intention to continue giving financial aid to the Turkish NGOs working towards an improvement in the human rights situation in Turkey .
The Commission also wants to cooperate with the Turkish authorities , especially on the training of the police force .
Despite Ankara 's recent decision to suspend all political talks with the European Union as a result of the conclusions of the European Council in Luxembourg , the Commission still intends to continue informing the Turkish delegation of EU concerns over questions relating to human rights and respect for the democratic principle .
In this spirit , the Commission will not hesitate to take up Mr Frisullo 's case with the Turkish authorities , and call for more substantial information and explanations on the subject .
As to the question of freedom of expression in the Cameroon and the case of the two journalists , I would say that I share your concerns over their recent sentencing .
It poses a serious threat to the freedom of expression of journalists , a freedom which we all know is one of the vital ingredients of true democracy and one which is also covered by Article 100 of the Lomé Convention .
Indeed , in recent times there has unfortunately been a tendency for those in power in the Cameroon , as in other African countries , to curb freedom of expression with the help of a judiciary system which lacks independence from the government .
Despite everything , I hold out strong hopes that the Court of Appeal , which is this very day examining the appeal launched by Mr Njawé , will not confirm this trend .
I believe it is important for you to know that , via Directorate-General VIII , the Commission has already made its concerns on the subject known to the Cameroon authorities .
I can assure you that it will continue to strive for adherence to Article 100 of the Lomé Convention by closely monitoring the way the human rights situation develops in the Cameroon , and in particular the situation vis-à-vis the two journalists in question .
To conclude , Mr President , the question of the death penalty has once again been raised in this Parliament .
The Commission 's position is in fact well-known because it has so often been repeated .
I simply want to say that as far as the United States is concerned , we consider that it is vital that all guarantees enshrined in the International Pact on Civil and Political Rights and other pertinent instruments are respected .
The Commission believes that the US judicial system will ensure that they are .
It is , however , regrettable that a civilized country such as the United States , one of the major world powers , should continue to pursue such a barbarous practice as the death penalty .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Mr Pinheiro .
Ladies and gentlemen , as Mrs André-Léonard was saying , our debates have been short , though that does not mean that the quality or importance of the issues covered have been in any way compromised . However , we have reached the end of our debates .
Therefore , I would propose that we suspend the sitting until 4.30 p.m.
Mr Posselt has the floor to speak on a point of order for a maximum of one minute .
Mr President , I would like to comment on one of my favourite subjects - the Conference of Presidents .
As you are one of the few Presidents who always provide information about what is said here in a part-session , I would like to point out that it is strange that the Conference of Presidents decided against placing such an important topic as Kosovo on the agenda , on the grounds of lack of time .
Unfortunately , the majority of the House was not in favour of including the topic either .
Consequently , we have discussed three topics today , have interrupted the sitting for twenty minutes , and a current crisis in central Europe has not been discussed .
I feel we should set our agendas much more efficiently and expertly than the Conference of Presidents has done this time . Please let us return to the urgent debate in full , so that time is also available for the necessary topics .
Thank you very much , Mr Posselt .
This will certainly be recorded in the Minutes and the group chairmen who make up the Conference of Presidents will read and take note of your comments .
I am a Vice-President and a member of the Bureau , but I am not a member of the Conference of Presidents .
In any case , in my current role of responsibility , I note your comments and will forward them to the people concerned .
( The sitting was suspended until 4.30 p.m. )
Mr President , you may notice looking around the room that there are a large number of my colleagues who cannot be here tonight because of the flight arrangements that make it difficult to get back to London and the UK generally from Strasbourg .
My colleagues send their apologies but I think it is very difficult for any Member of this House to carry out their duties when they cannot get to and from here , as was raised by Mrs Green on trying to get here earlier this week .
The problems of getting home from Strasbourg are just as bad and colleagues have had to leave here at lunchtime today so that they can be home for tomorrow morning .
That is a ridiculous situation and I hope that this will be looked at by Parliament 's Bureau because you have made decisions regarding Members and their voting records here that are now being disrupted by the travel arrangements that they have to make to travel to and from Strasbourg .
Mr Provan , there are two parts to your point .
On the first part , we will continue to press the airlines and the appropriate governments for an improvement in the service .
On the second part , that will be taken into account when we review the operation of the roll-call vote system , which we shall be doing shortly .
We now come to the vote on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
VOTES ( continuation )
The rapporteur proposes that throughout the French text the term contrôle démocratique should be replaced by responsabilité démocratique .
Are there any objections ?
( Parliament agreed to the oral amendment )
Before the vote on paragraph 5
The rapporteur , who unfortunately cannot be with us this evening , has asked me to propose an oral amendment . Where it currently says ' to hold the ECB to account ' the rapporteur is asking for this to be replaced by ' for the ECB to be answerable to ' .
( The President established that there were more than 12 objections )
Mr President , I wish to apologize , because I wanted to ask the rapporteur , who is unfortunately not present , whether she could repeat the question .
It concerns paragraph 5 .
This is a difficult situation for me .
I am chairman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and I would have liked to have heard what the rapporteur had to say on this .
I know what was agreed - an oral amendment was agreed with Mrs Randzio-Plath which she wanted to table here - but I do not know the exact wording . Under the circumstances , I would therefore recommend a separate vote , whereby we are in agreement with the first section to ' must ... be exercised ... ' .
I would not vote in favour of the second section from ' and that , as the only directly elected institution at this level , the European Parliament is a particularly appropriate institution to hold the ECB to account ' in its current form , but in the form which Mrs Randzio-Plath wished to propose now .
That was the problem .
Mr President , I think it is important to actually say why Mrs Randzio-Plath is not here as there may be some opposition to this because of the fact that she is not here .
You will know that she was extremely distraught at lunchtime that her report was not taken because her husband is ill and she has had to go home .
That I think is something we can all understand and I would ask colleagues here who know she is a very hard working woman to please understand that .
She did try this morning to get the report voted as you know but many other of our colleagues walked out and would not stay on to vote .
That is to be regretted , she was very distraught and I would ask you please to be understanding at least of that point .
Mr President , Mrs Randzio-Plath has informed you of the oral amendment tabled , with which Mr von Wogau is not familiar .
There were colleagues here in the Chamber , unfortunately from your own group , Mr von Wogau , who rose when the President asked whether the oral amendment was approved .
There was a sufficient number of them , which resulted in enough colleagues rejecting the oral amendment .
That is the problem we are faced with .
Otherwise there could have been no doubt .
Mrs Randzio-Plath had expressly submitted the oral amendment to the President in advance because she could not be present today .
I would therefore ask for the vote to be taken again on the existing wording .
It was not we who blocked it , but the colleagues who rose .
Then we shall see who has a majority .
Let us try to keep calm about this .
I have a number of Members who want to make points of order .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I regret that it was not possible to vote on the agreed oral amendment tabled .
But it is those people who actually took a gamble on the whole process , and have now done so again , who must bear responsibility .
Now we should vote on the original text .
Mr President , insofar as it is just Mrs Randzio-Plath 's absence which is causing the problem , there is a compromise which we found following an agreement within the committee , which was voted in .
We had honed this agreement to perfection when at the last moment , we found that the term which accurately translated the term we had agreed on , namely ' to hold to account ' was felt by some people to be too aggressive towards the Bank .
Two or three words were suggested but our British colleagues did not consider them to be appropriate .
We therefore decided to wait until we found the appropriate wording and this morning , Mrs Randzio-Plath and I found it .
( Mixed reactions ) It is deplorable that in order to prevent an agreement being passed , twelve people felt obliged to rise .
That is regrettable .
That said , Mr President , to extricate ourselves from the blind alley in which we now find ourselves , we could start by voting on what Mr von Wogau has proposed , with Parliament then voting on the rest .
I would like to point out straight away that there is practically no difference .
It is merely a question of nuances .
Certain people have become so hysterical over these nuances that they have made a mountain out of a molehill .
Mr President , I would like to say for the Minutes that we should take up the proposal made by Mr von Wogau and Mr Herman , that we all sympathize with Mrs Randzio-Plath , and that no one in our group took part in the boycott of this proposal , which you did not read out , incidentally .
I misunderstood your last point .
I quite clearly read the proposal out .
Mr President , many people in this House know that almost every word counts , particularly in this report .
We had wording which allowed us to assume that a broad majority accepted it .
However , some of our colleagues did not actually know that a situation had arisen in this case , for reasons which Mr Herman has just explained , which cannot really be resolved by the usual application of the Rules of Procedure .
If we now adopt a resolution which does not take account of the oral amendment , we shall be doing something which the majority of the House did not want .
I would propose two solutions , which I think are correct , to get us out of the situation .
If you , Mr President , would ask the question again as to whether the oral amendment is to be allowed , we could ask those Members who rose previously with good reason to remain seated , now they know what it is about .
If we had the opportunity to vote on the oral amendment , we would have the result which the vast majority of this House wants , and the majority would be correct .
Should this not be possible , we must resort to what Mr von Wogau proposed .
However , the first solution would be more correct , in my opinion .
Mr President , first of all I would like to say that we made great efforts in committee - and I expressly acknowledge Mrs Randzio-Plath 's efforts - to help reach an agreement .
We had reached agreement on practically all the points in committee , as Mr Herman said .
It was accepted by almost all the members of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
The fact that the expression ' ... hold the ECB to account ' in paragraph 5 seemed to many members of my group to be too strong remained unresolved .
Then people said : ' We shall reach agreement . '
I must say that I myself took no part in this last discussion , but Mr Herman did .
He says he has now found this word , which is the right one .
However , I have the impression that not everyone in the House understands what this word is .
I must say that I do not have it in writing either .
I would therefore suggest , even if it is not strictly in accordance with the procedure , that we ask Mr Herman again to say quite clearly what the subject of the oral amendment is , as tabled by Mr Friedrich .
I would suggest that we reach some sort of agreement .
I think it is reasonable to expect that we do this .
It is clear that if the oral amendment were put to the vote , it would be carried .
There is no question about that .
But the rules exist to protect minorities in this House and that is the purpose of 12 Members being able to stand up and object to an oral amendment .
No one from the groups who voted against the oral amendment have objected or said they misunderstood .
I now have one person from each of these two groups asking for the floor .
I will hear what they have to say before taking any decisions .
Mr President , I was one of the twelve Members who stood up earlier and I would like to make a small comment .
Mrs Randzio-Plath is absent and the coordinator of our group is also absent .
It is he who was to have given us the information .
I knew this discussion had taken place within the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , and I knew there had been an attempt at conciliation .
I think it is a good thing that an agreement was reached between Mrs Randzio-Plath and Mr Herman .
But neither our group nor the other groups were informed .
And I would like to take this opportunity of reminding everyone that this Parliament has more than two groups .
It has several .
I am quite happy to say that had I been correctly informed , I would have voted in favour of Mrs Randzio-Plath 's oral amendment . However , I believe just as strongly that as a matter of principle , the two large groups should not ignore Parliament 's other groups .
( Applause )
Mr President , I wonder whether we can make a molehill out of this particular mountain .
You have acted correctly according to the Rules of the House .
Twelve Members stood up ; I regret that they stood up but they did .
However , let us return to the original text , which many people tried with great goodwill to modify because there was perceived to be a nuance in terms of the original text being too strong .
My own view is that it is a very fine difference and , indeed , to say that we want to hold the European Central Bank to account is generally acceptable to the majority of people in this House .
I would advise you now to go forward to the vote .
If you wish to take a split vote , all well and good , but my advice to the House is to vote both parts and to vote for them .
Mr Harrison , that is precisely what I intend to do .
After the vote on paragraph 5
Mr President , I formally contest the way you have proceeded .
Rule 116 gives the President the power to fix a deadline other than of one hour .
It does not give him the power to accept at the last minute a split vote which has not been submitted within the allotted time .
This deadline is set at 9.00 p.m. the previous evening for all the groups and all the Members .
You did not amend it before the sitting and you cannot accept a request for a split vote if you have not amended the deadline beforehand .
If you like , I can read you Rule 116 ...
Mr President , throughout the intergovernmental conference which paved the way for the Amsterdam Treaty , a strict rule was adhered to by the negotiators - namely , no mention was made of the single currency - and it is imperative that we do not reopen Pandora 's box !
The result is that today , in a month chosen by those taking part and nine months from the theoretical launch date of the euro , some of their number are realizing the dreadful truth that the Maastricht Treaty has stripped the national democracies of their power without creating any equivalent controls at other levels , and that monetary union will be controlled by no one .
People are asking themselves whether a monster has been created which will devour us all .
The European Parliament , in order to give the illusion that it is trying to react - in spite of the fact that it is jointly responsible for the situation - is therefore taking the initiative of adopting a report on democratic accountability in the third stage of EMU .
However , this is a purely cosmetic exercise , for three reasons .
First of all , the European Parliament obviously cannot correct the Treaty .
It therefore works on peripheral tasks such as improving the presentation of the ECB reports or the procedures governing its directors , as it is doing today .
These proposals - assuming they are accepted by the other institutions - will not change the system fundamentally .
Secondly , in order for the ECB to work in a democratic environment like the national central banks , even so-called independent banks , a European state would have to exist . That is a condition which is not and certainly will not be fulfilled in my lifetime .
Lastly , the present situation is exactly what the authors of the Maastricht Treaty wanted .
As there was not and still is not a European democracy , it was decided to make people think that the single currency could be a purely technical matter , one which could be managed without the involvement of politics .
The German leaders have again today latched on to this illusion to keep their citizens in the dark while definitive decisions are taken .
And that is why the Herman report , which made the mistake of putting the question of democratic accountability too clearly , was suddenly withdrawn from the agenda of the present part-session .
The people will therefore have to wait to be plunged into monetary union before they finally discover the true nature of the system .
Mr President , I voted in favour of the report on the European Central Bank , although not until there had been significant corrections by the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy .
The attempt to push through amendments to the Treaty concerning the appointment of the ECB presidency by the European Parliament failed .
There will rightly be no vote of no confidence against the president of the European Central Bank , and there will be no ' Banking Committee ' as a control body .
We owe our word to the citizens that the independence of the ECB will not be not undermined .
As the future guardian of the currency , it must be able to work without any political interference .
Only then will it earn the same high reputation as the Deutsche Bundesbank has in my country .
It will guarantee that there will be absolutely no waiver in stability and budgetary discipline .
The dialogue between the ECB and the European Parliament must be constructive in respect of objectives , specific decisions and coherence between monetary and economic policy , but also social and employment policy .
We therefore say ' Yes ' to an open exchange of opinions , but ' No ' to mistrust and abstruse control procedures .
Another piece of good news : today the German Federal Constitutional Court has rejected the petition against the euro .
The path for the introduction of the single European currency is now clear .
We would like to thank the rapporteur for a highly relevant report on democratic accountability in the third stage of EMU .
We are aware that the Maastricht Treaty establishes that the ECB is to be independent in terms of personnel , organization , operation and finance , as well as politically .
On the other hand , we do not believe this totally excludes a more pronounced democratic responsibility for the ECB , which is also apparent from Article 109B ( 3 ) of the Treaty on the role of the European Parliament .
In view of the single currency 's importance for the positive development of the European Union as a guarantee of employment , sustainable growth and social welfare , it is essential to realize the need for democratic accountability and openness for the ECB .
So the report on the strengthening of openness and democratic accountability is very welcome .
We believe that the European Parliament , as being the only one of the Union 's institutions directly anchored in the population , should be able to play an active role together with the ECB to guarantee democratic accountability and openness within EMU .
We also believe that strengthening democratic accountability and openness will help legitimize EMU without affecting the independence or credibility of the ECB .
The European Parliament should also play a key role here .
We also believe that it should not affect the ECB 's independence to have all the decisions taken and all the reasons for those decisions published soon after they are made .
Equivalent rules apply to the US central bank without significantly affecting its operations .
Finally , we would like to emphasize the need for the Council , the Commission and the European Monetary Institute to consider this report seriously , together with its proposals on democratic accountability in the third stage of EMU .
When it was being set up , the European Central Bank needed an unprecedented degree of independence , much more so than any national central bank , since economic and monetary union was being introduced .
Today , the approach can no longer be so restrictive .
We have reached maturity and on 2 May , in an extraordinary sitting , we shall give our decision on the countries to adopt the euro when the single currency is introduced .
The European Central Bank no longer suffers from a lack of financial credibility .
Monetary sovereignty is in the process of being progressively transferred to it , and nobody doubts any longer that it will be able to contribute to lasting growth .
The ECB therefore now needs the European Parliament to see its operations strengthened and better promoted thanks to the democratic controls exercised by an elected Assembly with universal suffrage .
I am therefore in favour of Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report .
The overly extremist requirements presented during the Parliamentary committee debates should be put aside .
The ECB must not become a poor imitation of the United States FED .
By contrast , the Maastricht Treaty makes the European Parliament an essential part of the legislation .
It enables us to play a positive role in the European Union 's monetary policy .
Let us therefore build a basis for regular democratic dialogue and a network of mutual information , but let us guard against it becoming a blocking tool .
The euro must be the shared responsibility of all the citizens of the European Union if it is to create prosperity and employment .
At the core of the debate on this report is the notion of " independence ' .
In her report , the rapporteur attempts to explore the limits of this notion .
The central question is to what extent monetary policy can be influenced , controlled and possibly even adjusted by political bodies , without affecting the formal independence of the European Central Bank .
To my mind this is not the right starting point for this report , which is supposed to deal with accountability .
In the former , there is the implicit view that , by using monetary policy , it is possible to implement the aims of an economic policy which are considered important , such as adequate investment , employment and increased welfare .
At the hearing held by the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs in the spring of 1997 , Mr Duisenberg , the current president of the European Monetary Institute , clearly stipulated that monetary policy can only achieve so much .
As it now transpires , the rapporteur has - still - not grasped this point .
This inspires little confidence for the future , when it is argued that the Subcommittee on Monetary Affairs should play an important role in the process known as democratic accountability .
It is for these reasons of principle that I voted against this report .
It was not without a certain amount of pleasure that I learnt of Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report . I was glad to see politicians dare to ask for increased democratic controls over those who hold the economic reins and who do not always have the desired legitimacy .
I wanted to highlight this brave act at a time of exacerbated liberalism whose merits are constantly being heralded without opposition .
Yes , ladies and gentlemen , it needs to be said loud and clear that independence is not necessarily a byword for irresponsibility and that , on the contrary , it is through true democratic accountability , and indirectly through greater transparency , that the European Central Bank will gain legitimacy in the eyes of European citizens .
Naturally , the purpose of our colleague 's work is not to call into question the independence of the ECB .
Rather , it is to mirror certain questions regarding the methods used to implement this necessary democratic exercise .
The committee debates were difficult and interesting .
Furthermore , whilst I regret that the vote of no confidence has been abandoned - while also recognizing that this type of amendment to the Treaty would be difficult - I have to admit that we have achieved a worthy compromise , and one which constitutes an important step forward in ECB controls .
I can also assure you that I will be vigilant over the question of legal consolidation relating to the nomination of candidates which is henceforth subject to the approval of the European Parliament .
Faced with a debate of such importance , and on the subject of regrets , I want briefly to return to the question of employment and that of the Parliamentary banking committee .
As regards the latter , I question the deep-rooted nature of certain groups ' refusal , especially since this committee clearly has the role of informing and creating initiatives and not of controlling .
Eighteen million people out of work , a similar number of people in insecure jobs , a European Council on employment , and governments fighting to reduce unemployment in their respective countries , and there are still political leaders who believe that the fight against unemployment is not a priority .
That is what I wanted to say in relation to Mrs Randzio-Plath 's report , which I support and applaud once again .
The ECB will conduct a single currency policy for all the Member States participating in European monetary union . As a consequence , the democratic controls must be exercised on a European level .
The European Parliament , which is the only directly elected institution at this level and which enjoys certain powers bestowed upon it by the Treaty , will be ideal as the ECB 's privileged political point of contact .
The disruption caused by the introduction of the single currency will occur before political union has truly emerged .
However , in a democracy , legitimacy is born of universal suffrage .
There is therefore a risk that if the ECB acts without political consultation , when all is said and done it will be held responsible for all ills , which in turn will lead to public condemnation of the entire project .
The Central Bank will be independent , but it will not be able to be irresponsible .
Calling it independent involves defining what it is independent from and taking steps to ensure that its political counterpart is as strong as it is , failing which there will be no equilibrium .
Its responsibility implies a dialogue and a transparency between it and public opinion , through the elected bodies of the Council and the European Parliament .
That is why we fully approve of Mrs Randzio-Plath 's proposals for codifying this responsibility .
In this spirit , the ECB 's annual report should clearly take growth and employment into consideration when covering the way monetary policy supports the general economic policies in the Community .
Ultimately , many of us would welcome an amendment to the Treaty to enable the European Parliament on the one hand to have the same powers in this matter as it does in nominating the Commission , and on the other hand to submit a vote of no confidence against the president of the forthcoming ECB to the Council of Economic and Finance Ministers for their decision , should the Treaty be contravened .
Such a development would increase the legitimacy of the ECB 's decisions .
As regards the coordination of economic policies in Europe , the European Council of Luxembourg made progress on more extensive coordination of national economic policies and more especially those concerning employment .
We believe that the European Parliament should involve itself more in this process .
It is in this area that a great deal of work will be done in the coming years , and it is a sine qua non for balanced economic and monetary union .
In the third stage of EMU , the democratic responsibility concerns both the ECB and the coordination of economic policies .
However , the monetary side of the union is today a great deal more structured than the economic side .
To become a reality , the initiative set in motion needs political guidance : operating on a purely economic basis is not enough .
This represents an enormous responsibility for the Socialists in the European Parliament , and an expectation of new proposals .
During the part-session in Strasbourg from 30 March to 3 April , the Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have voted in favour of the report on democratic accountability in the third stage of EMU .
The report emphasizes , among other things :
1 ) the need for the future ECB to provide information on the definitions and operational objectives it uses to achieve the set objective of price stability ;
2 ) the need for publication of the minutes of ECB board meetings ;
3 ) the need to ensure a dialogue between the European Parliament and the ECB on economic and monetary affairs .
The Social Democrats in the European Parliament have voted in favour of the report , based on the fundamental approach of requiring the greatest possible transparency and openness in the institutions of the EU .
In this connection , it should be emphasized that the Social Democrats in the European Parliament are still of the opinion that the four Danish reservations are not under discussion , including the reservation on the third stage of EMU .
Lindqvist ( ELDR ) , Eriksson and Sjöstedt ( GUE / NGL ) , Gahrton , Holm , Lindholm and Schörling ( V ) , Krarup and Lis Jensen ( I-EDN ) , in writing .
( SV ) EMU is a centralized , high-risk project with little popular support .
The priorities of EMU are price stability and low inflation .
There is a serious risk that unemployment , which is already high , will increase still further .
The regional differences between growth areas and areas of depopulation may be exacerbated .
EMU will lead to a major centralization of currency and foreign exchange policy , which may grow to include tax and finance policy .
EMU is a political project which increases the federal aspect of the EU and reinforces the trend towards establishing a state .
EMU and the European Central Bank , or ECB , will have more independence and power than any other bank in the world , the United States FED included .
The members of the ECB , who will be elected for eight years and cannot be removed , will have incredible power over currency , interest and other economic policy which has a direct effect on people , regions and nations .
EMU will centralize and reserve economic policy to a handful of bank directors , which will considerably undermine democracy .
The proposals for better supervision and democratic control presented in this report can scarcely reduce the democratic deficit in the third stage of EMU .
For this reason , we have voted against the report .
This report is full of good ideas on how the new European Central Bank will be held democratically accountable before this Parliament .
It reflects the criteria laid down in the Maastricht Treaty regarding consultation with Parliament on the implementing measures .
However , I fear that there will be no more transparency and democratic accountability in this regard than there has been in the process to date .
So far the Commission has ploughed ahead with its own strategy without any interest in transparency or accountability .
Consequently , we had the bizarre declaration from the Commission last week that eleven countries are economically strong enough to join EMU , among them Belgium and Italy .
The inclusion of these two Member States in the list of first-wave countries demonstrates clearly that the Maastricht criteria were not adhered to and that massaging of figures is acceptable practice .
Italy and Belgium come nowhere near the condition of restricting public debt to no more than 60 % of national wealth .
Indeed , they are more than double that figure .
I hope that when Heads of Government meet under the British presidency next month for the formal vote they will have a better regard for the criteria than the Commission has displayed .
Given the Commission 's commitment to pushing the project forward without regard to the economic circumstances in each Member State , it is difficult not to conclude that it views the scheme in a political light .
The result of this can only be instability within the system and severe economic consequences for those Member States outside it .
The political nature of the project will also surely undermine the position of the Central Bank and make democratic accountability harder to achieve .
Whilst in general I can support the worthy objectives of greater transparency and accountability in the workings of the ECB , I find that this report which continually uses the phrase ' democratic accountability ' has , in fact , confused accountability with the giving of an account .
The dictionary definition of accountability says it is being ' responsible to someone or for some action ' .
It is wrong therefore to suggest that the ECB is in some fashion responsible to Parliament .
It is in my view a mistake to give the impression that Parliament 's right to be informed translates as a form of accountability , in the accepted sense of the word .
I will not therefore be supporting this report as it relies so heavily on the suspension of disbelief .
I have voted for the Randzio-Plath report because the degree of accountability it calls for is better than nothing .
However , it acknowledges - and even welcomes - the fact that the Bank will remain wholly independent .
The Bank will control monetary policy , and will do so with one overriding aim : to achieve price stability .
If this chokes growth or causes unemployment , so be it .
Nothing that Parliament or Ecofin can say will prevent it .
True democratic control of the Central Bank would require the creation of its analogue , a central European government .
Without that , we have the creation of a free market Europe , dedicated above all to the interests of bankers .
This has been described as ' the spectatorship of the proletariat ' , though that is only part of the story .
This is not to suggest that we should be trying to create a central European government .
There is no consent for that , and there can be no confidence , on the EU 's past form - CAP etc. that such a central government would be successful .
The overhasty rush to create a single currency has left us in a fine mess , and we are left resorting to sticking plaster in a vain attempt to patch things up .
To surrender monetary policy to third parties is to surrender to others a significant part of a country 's national independence .
Indeed , the dimensions that such an action assumes when it is carried out by more countries is unprecedented in modern history .
Such an action , even if it should prove to be of benefit to those nations , must be prepared with a great deal of care and attention . All means of ensuring that those who take on this responsibility will be carefully monitored must be scrutinized and safeguarded , so that they can operate and act in a way that will serve national interests and social prosperity alike .
We currently find ourselves faced with a necessary fact of life , which has been commonly accepted .
The European Central Bank is in the process of formation and it will take over the shaping and control of monetary policy . This will directly affect hundreds of millions of citizens , without the people of the countries taking part in the euro - or their governments - having any opportunity to exercise any democratic control .
Nor will the EC and the constituent bodies of the EU be able to exercise control . Why ?
Because the ECB has been created with the sole aim of serving large financial and political interests and of safeguarding the conditions in which they can increase their profits . It has not been created to achieve the aims of social prosperity and a higher standard of living for the working people and citizens of Europe , nor to combat the scourge of unemployment and the continuous degradation of ever broader strata of the population .
The report we are debating today constitutes the most irrefutable proof . It establishes the lack of democratic control by providing evidence , even if indirectly , that the creation of the ECB is an expression of the attempt made by big business to evade national and popular control , and even the completely downgraded control of national central banks .
However , when the supporters of Maastricht voted for the Treaty they were very well aware of what they were creating and what its repercussions would be .
Even if they did not realize it at that time , they should at least have demanded that this Treaty be amended with the revision of the Amsterdam Treaty .
But that did not happen .
On the contrary , any debate on EMU was excluded from the intergovernmental conference on the revision of the Treaties .
The declaration that democratic accountability will be guaranteed or that the aims of the ECB will be broadened to include other aims apart from monetary stability is a conscious attempt at disorientation , when not only is this not provided for in the Treaties but , on the contrary , the Treaties make every provision for the independence of the ECB from any possible national intervention . These provisions restrict the number of people on its board , thereby ensuring that it is not represented by all Member States .
Furthermore , they allow board members to serve a long term in office , thereby ensuring their independence from any political show of force .
We fully endorse whatever measures may bring about transparency , or indeed measures to inform democratically elected bodies of the policy and operation of the ECB .
However , we believe that these measures will not be able to reverse the unacceptable situation brought about by the creation of the ECB .
The only solution is to repeal the Maastricht Treaty and not to ratify the Treaty of Amsterdam .
For this reason , we remain firmly committed to the aim of national referenda on the Treaties , in order to give people the opportunity to express their opposition to this policy and to the surrender of their important sovereign rights to supranational , hermetically sealed , unaccountable bodies .
The question of the democratic accountability and embedding of the European Central Bank is the last major unresolved matter in the run up to the launch of the euro .
It must be made clear that it is not a question of restricting the independence of the ECB and the European System of Central Banks - this is a fundamental condition of monetary operation .
On the contrary , it is a question of interpreting it correctly .
We will counteract the monetary Utopia of ' apolitical currency ' , which becomes a dangerous illusion if dogmatists implement it in economic practice , with the realistic concept that monetary policy remains a specific dimension of the overall economic policy in which it is to be embedded by binding , institutionalized discourse .
This report takes a first hesitant step in the right direction .
It is regrettable that the prevailing idea in the House of the ' grand coalition ' has resulted in the original report being watered down and becoming much less consistent .
We were never under the illusion that our amendments would change anything in this respect .
Nevertheless , the extent to which the Group of the Party of European Socialists has fallen behind the original approach of the rapporteur must be recorded here .
Daskalaki report ( A4-0106 / 98 )
We have voted in favour of the report in question .
We believe a continuing international presence is necessary in Bosnia , under a UN mandate .
We also believe it is important not to add to the tension in the area by exporting arms .
On the other hand , we distance ourselves from the demand to use the articles of the Amsterdam Treaty on military action or the outdated military alliance of the WEU .
The Member States of the Union can contribute to peacekeeping actions with the UN and ECSC as the basis .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have today voted against the report on post-SFOR strategy , because Denmark is exempted in the area of the common foreign and security policy .
Marset Campos report ( A4-0120 / 98 )
The Commission 's communication on a strategy for reducing methane emissions is timely .
It makes some worthwhile proposals and some which need to be reconsidered .
Methane has negative as well as positive claims .
It is negative in the sense that it is a greenhouse gas second only to carbon dioxide or CO2 emissions .
It is positive in the sense that it can be harnessed to provide a cleaner and less polluting energy source .
It can also be used in the manufacture of industrial products such as synthetic rubber and chemical fibres .
The natural sources of methane include animals , wetlands and marine flora while the anthropogenic sources include the burning of fossil fuels , landfill emissions , waste water and sludge treatment .
The latter account for 70 % of existing methane .
While the increase in methane emissions appears to be slowing down , this is not a reason for inaction .
Landfills are a major source of methane emissions which we can turn to our advantage .
Essentially , what is required is an appropriate plan of action aimed at halting or reducing methane emissions .
However , agriculture should not be made the scapegoat .
The Commission considers that to take account of the digestive habits of ruminant livestock , in other words cattle and sheep , there should be livestock reduction .
This is not a feasible solution .
Firstly , this is already taking place because of milk quotas and BSE .
Secondly , it would open the door to competing third countries .
As the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development has pointed out , we should call for more research into improving animal diets and better management of livestock effluents in intensive farming regions .
If we are serious about sustainable development , let us look at exploiting the potential of methane for energy and industrial purposes .
Electricity can be produced from the re-use of methane from landfills .
This could also open new opportunities for small companies .
There should be appropriate financial incentives .
We need more research , more public information .
It is a challenge which , if approached properly , can lead to a range of new opportunities .
Enlargement and cooperation in the field of justice and home affairs ( continuation )
The next item is the report ( A4-0107 / 98 ) by Mr Posselt , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the implications of enlargement of the European Union for cooperation in the field of justice and home affairs .
Mr President , the European Union is undergoing its greatest upheaval since its establishment in the 1950s .
Major enlargement , coupled with fundamental reforms , is imminent .
Apart from the question of the single currency , on which a vote has just been taken , there are three principal processes which concern us .
The first is the question of enlargement .
Concrete negotiations on enlargement began this week .
This is a historic moment , because it involves the greatest enlargement in the history of the EU .
The second point is the ratification of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which is also taking place this year , by which our institutions will be reformed - at least in part , if by no means adequately - and by which a broad spectrum of further development and cooperation will be opened up , particularly in the areas of justice and internal affairs .
The third area is the ratification of the Europol Convention which is currently taking place , under which Europol , the European police force , will at last be able to act .
It is now time to link all these processes together in practical terms , as the communitization of the important areas of asylum , immigration and protection of external borders will be important in the five years following the entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty .
However , the creation of operational authority for Europol is also important , and it would be a mistake if we did not use the simultaneous process of eastwards enlargement of the European Union , and the negotiations on it , to make all these new policies pan-European and involve the candidate countries as fully as possible .
We are therefore of the opinion that we must ensure that the European Union should set the stage for the corresponding integration of these states now .
In the case of Austria - which has thankfully been a full member of the Schengen Agreement , which it implements in full , since yesterday - we had the problem that that country joined first and only then began to create certain conditions .
We should not repeat this mistake during eastward enlargement .
We must use the years between now and 2003 , 2006 , 2008 or whenever the first stage of enlargement takes place - in a region which suffered from dictatorship and repression for decades - to establish the rule of law and develop criteria for a state in which the rule of law prevails , for which spot-on qualification is just as necessary as the oftquoted single currency criteria .
We believe these states have achieved a lot by their own efforts , by liberating themselves , establishing the rule of law and making great sacrifices .
However , we must of course help them . One of the focuses of my report is therefore education and training - the training of junior managers in justice and administration , who will then actually be able to apply European law and the acquis communautaire , which are currently undergoing rapid enlargement .
The Czech Minister of Justice has stated quite clearly that she has not been able to implement much European law so far , and the little she has been able to implement in her country could not be applied by civil servants because they had not been trained to do it .
We urgently need to focus our efforts by expanding our programmes to cover the central and eastern European countries and equipping them with the appropriate material resources .
I therefore suggest as a follow-up the establishment of a European Academy for Internal Security , in the existing border area between the European Union and the candidate countries , possibly in Lower Bavaria or the Oberpfalz .
Deggendorf would be a possibility , where there has been a major border control force establishment .
This European Academy for Internal Security should work towards one of our long-term objectives , namely a European border control force , because we are of the opinion that the individual states cannot assume control of external borders in the long term and that this should be under joint control .
Of course , the current situation is that we still have national border control forces which work well and have proved themselves .
Naturally , we shall require transitional periods on the existing external and eastern borders , even after eastward enlargement .
Austria has shown us , however , that every transitional period comes to an end at some time .
We must develop perspectives now for the time following the transitional period .
The idea of a European border control force has thus been developed and has thankfully met with broad consensus in the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
In this connection , I would like to thank the other groups in this Parliament for their intensive cooperation on my report , particularly Mr Schmid from the Group of the Party of European Socialists .
I must also thank other Members who have ensured that we reached a consensus in setting an important stage for the future .
I believe there is a broad consensus in the European Union , particularly in the areas of combating crime , drug smuggling and trade in people , and the major problem of money laundering , and that there is also interest in the candidate countries , because this is not a matter of patronage , but of partnership .
Give and take already exists on both sides .
I therefore believe that this can become an engine for enlargement of the Community as a whole .
Mr President , I speak on behalf of Mrs Spaak and rise to present the results of her studies .
The Committee on Institutional Affairs shares the rapporteur 's concern that the applicant countries should set in place stable institutions which guarantee democracy , the rights of their citizens , and the ability to take on the obligations of the Treaty and the acquis communautaire .
The first amendment from the Committee on Institutional Affairs highlights three problems : firstly , the five-year deadline for the adoption of measures aimed at the free movement of persons ; secondly , their applicability to the procedure contained in Article 189 B ; and finally , the decision about strengthened cooperation .
The Committee on Institutional Affairs thus insists that clauses relating to the field of justice and home affairs be revised when the institutional reforms take place , which should occur before the first enlargement .
The Committee is concerned about the risk of fragmentation of the European legal landscape .
In fact , the option which allows Member States to declare whether or not they accept the pre-judicial jurisdiction of the Court of Justice in the area of Title VI is dangerous for everybody , but more especially so for applicant countries , given the difficulties they face in adapting their legal systems .
Finally , I would like to draw the rapporteur 's attention , if I may , to Amendment No 4 concerning paragraph 17 , which was accepted by the Committee on Institutional Affairs but rejected by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
This amendment deals with the delicate problems of transition periods , which can only result from a precise and concrete evaluation of the existing situation in the new Member States at the moment of their joining .
This modest amendment has the merit of shortening and simplifying paragraphs 17 and 18 whilst still covering the essentials .

Mr President , it would probably not come as a surprise to you if I wanted to begin , like Mr Schulz , by saying that the Group of the European People 's Party will vote in favour of this report , though probably not because Bernd Posselt is a hardline right-winger , but because he has prepared a report which tells it like it is - exactly as Mr Schulz has described very accurately - and which demonstrates the necessities which exist in this area .
If we are talking about realities here , permit me to begin with a minor factual correction or small remark .
The term ' eastward enlargement ' is used again and again in this House .
As an Austrian , this always surprises me , when I consider that two of the applicant states have their capitals located a good distance west of Vienna .
The enlargement we are considering is an enlargement into central Europe .
If we were going to expand into Belarus and the Ukraine I would be happy to talk about eastward enlargement .
One aspect of this report which seems tremendously important to me is the fact that it reveals that the Community , or European Union , is changing more and more from an economic community into a political and thus a security community .
It reveals the security dimension , namely the security dimension which we must extend to the applicant states .
I think this is tremendously important , because the external - but also internal - image which the Union conveys again and again is , unfortunately , purely economic .
That cannot be correct .
Those states which wish to enter the EU expect certain solutions , particularly in such areas as security .
Each of these states has its own problems with ethnic groups or minorities , just as each Member State of the European Union does , without exception .
I believe this is particularly important if we are referring to the causes of this problem and trying to suggest solutions , as for example in paragraph 4 , as regards ourselves - that is , the fact that the field of justice and home affairs must be integrated in the next institutional reform , which must take place before enlargement .
There is a further point in this report which I would like to emphasize because it seems particularly important to me as an Austrian . Mr Posselt has already mentioned it : the need for a European border control force .
In Austria , we have experienced the consequences of exposure to such rapid change , to a very , very great extent .
We have had to make massive changes to our border control units in Austria over recent years .
Thank heavens our borders with Germany and Italy in the south were opened one or two days ago .
This is hopefully the last major step we have had to take for the next three or four years .
Then there will be further changes , as soon as the enlargement of the European Union has actually taken place .
I do not regard it as particularly practical for us to demand massive measures in the area of border security now from the applicant states , in whose infrastructure we shall have to make massive investments if they have great difficulty in actually implementing them .
I believe that is also one of the key points of the report .
Mr President , by an unfortunate coincidence , the start of negotiations on the enlargement of the European Union with the central and eastern European countries clashes with the Posselt report on the effects of EU enlargement on cooperation in the field of justice and home affairs .
I would nevertheless like to congratulate Mr Posselt on his excellent work .
This report is born of the desire to create a European space of freedom and justice .
Furthermore , the actions undertaken in this field will be subject to an annual review , which the Commission will pass on to the Council and the European Parliament .
This review will be useful as it will enable us to judge the capacity of the central and eastern European countries to fulfil two of the three Copenhagen criteria , namely the political criteria and the ability of the candidate states to take on the acquis communautaire .
The challenge is just as great for the European Union - and the indefatigable Mrs Spaak unstintingly insists on the absolute necessity of deepening the European Union as a prerequisite to any enlargement - as it is for the central and eastern European countries , who face a double challenge .
In fact , it is not only a question of adopting the measures in record time , which will allow the measures being addressed in the present debate to be transposed into national law . It is also a question of linking up with the cooperation effort initiated by the Fifteen in the field of justice and home affairs .
It is actually more a matter of changing their mentality than a problem of budgetary means .
Although the path ahead of us remains long and the tasks before us remain considerable , we must acknowledge the work already accomplished by the central and eastern European countries .
The remarkable area of individual freedom regained in most of the countries which until recently suffered under communist dictatorship is to the credit of the candidate countries and is a very encouraging sign for the future .
Mr President , Lech Walesa , the former president of Poland , is reputed to have said : ' It is easy to turn an aquarium into fish soup ' and went on to compare the task ahead of us by stating that : ' The degree of difficulty associated with the transition of a totalitarian state into a democratic state worthy of the name is comparable to the task of turning a fish soup into an aquarium ' .
I believe he was not entirely wrong , and it is in the light of this wise observation that we should measure the efforts being made by the central and eastern European countries .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , now that the hardline right- and left wingers have paid tribute to each other - you obviously have to be hardline to be a member of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs and I am very glad to be a member of the Committee on Institutional Affairs and able to do without this attribute , which I find very dubious - I would merely like to remind the members of the Committee on Internal Affairs that they are also members of the Committee on Civil Liberties , which is something which is frequently forgotten .
There are many ludicrous clauses in the Treaty of Amsterdam , but one of the most ludicrous is probably Article 29 , which has , of course , also been included in this report .
It says : ' The Union 's objectives shall be to provide citizens with a high level of safety within an area of freedom , security and justice by developing joint action among the Member States in the fields of police and judicial cooperation in criminal matters and by preventing and combatting racism and xenophobia ' .
The word freedom is not repeated .
The word justice is not repeated .
Only the word security - or safety - is repeated .
This imbalance is also reflected in the imbalance of this report .
Anyone who makes an unbalanced policy out of an imbalance of the values of law , freedom and security , and disturbs this balance , is using popular fear to do so .
Fear is not removed , but whipped up .
A major criticism of this report is the imbalance between the area of law and freedom and the security policy .
It may well make demands for guarantees of the rule of law and the stability of democratic institutions , but not , as we might expect , on us , where these things are strained , but on the countries of central and eastern Europe .
As if the rule of law would be guaranteed in the area of security by the establishment of the European Court of Justice , or civil rights protected by a charter of civil rights with the involvement of Parliament .
As if we should not be the first port of call for reproaches about the instability of institutions and the lack of the rule of law .
The report does not include a single word about this .
The report demands a common policy on asylum , but does not say a single word about the Geneva Convention , which is being removed piecemeal precisely by the policy of the European Union .
Reference is made to the rule of law , but only as an obligation for others .
This imbalance represents a serious imbalance in our system of values .
The second imbalance in this report has seldom been expressed so blatantly .
It is the imbalance of the burdens under which we are placing ourselves and the countries of eastern Europe .
With this policy , we are turning the countries of eastern Europe into a buffer zone for security , immigration and refugees for the European Union .
We are turning them into a glacis by telling them to solve our major problems , without helping them to do so .
Schengen prior to entry , a visa policy prior to entry , and adoption of the common asylum policy prior to entry , with nothing in return !
That is no policy to bring about an area of freedom and the rule of law .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , at the Yalta Conference , the states of western Europe in a way bought their freedom at the price of the servitude and ruin of the central and eastern European countries .
And , unfortunately , it is a cause for regret that the Member States of the Union and the European Union itself did not really contribute to the liberation of these countries , despite which , and thanks to truly exceptional men such as Lech Walesa , Václav Havel and of course , Pope John Paul II - not to mention many others - they liberated themselves .
If , in the words of that great Pope , Europe is now breathing with both its lungs , it is primarily thanks to the resistance and freedom of thought of these individuals and peoples .
We therefore owe a debt of gratitude to these countries and we must help them regain the freedom that comes with a democratic state .
As was mentioned earlier , many judges , police officers and civil servants in those countries have only known the totalitarian and repressive ways of the state .
They therefore have to re-learn that they are now living in a society which respects individual , civil and political rights .
That is why Mr Posselt is absolutely right to ask for greater cooperation with the applicant countries in the name of this moral debt which we collectively owe , to help them effectively set up this democratic state .
The rapporteur was also right in underlining that the measures contained in the Treaty of Amsterdam concerning the crossing of external borders , the abolition of border controls , asylum and immigration will be particularly difficult to implement for these countries in the short term , and again I agree with the Prince of Habsbourg-Lorraine on this point .
Whilst it is true that we have a duty to help in the development of the eastern European countries and to contribute in such a way as to help them fundamentally return to a society which respects the rights of the people , it is also clear that we must proceed with tact and not act like school teachers .
To conclude , I would like to pay homage to the fact that Mr Posselt has reminded us of our duties towards the nations of eastern Europe .
The same thing applies to international relations as to human relations : life is composed not just of rights , but of duties too .
Madam President , Commissioner , there are four matters I would like to raise , but the first thing I would like to say is that I am really glad that it is Commissioner Gradin herself who is present here , given her commitment to the fight against the trade in women and children , which also forms part of this report .
So , moving on to the four matters I would like to bring up : firstly , I hope that the so-called acquis document which will be started with the applicant countries will be applied to all countries equally , irrespective of whether we are negotiating or not .
We have heard rumours of dangerous conflicts .
The second thing is the cooperation which is to take place between administrations - in other words , that the 1 500 people who will be sent from the Member States to work in the applicant countries really will be working in the legal and judicial sphere .
This is a case of people helping administrators in the field , which is what we need more than anything else .
Thirdly , it is not enough to ratify conventions , they must also be implemented , such as the UN Convention on Children 's Rights .
This is what the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party took account of in our amendment .
Fourthly and finally , I am unhappy that it is not only trade in human beings we are dealing with here , but also the trade in organs in the applicant countries .
Unfortunately , we have heard in Finland that this has happened in the applicant countries .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.00 a.m.
I now hand the floor over to Mr Schulz who has requested to speak pursuant to Rule 108 .
Mr Voggenhuber , we cannot start a debate .
Nevertheless , I will give you the floor for a point of order , if that is the reason for your request .
The Rules do not provide for replying to a Member who has invoked Rule 108 .
I will , however , allow you to make a point of order .
Madam President , I would also like to make use of this Rule of Procedure - and I think more justifiably , having been mentioned by name , which I did not do in my speech , in which I did not name the Member .
However , I will happily grant him the right to do so .
I believe that , had Mr Schulz been listening to me , he would have noticed that precisely the point which he uses was one of my major criticisms , namely that the legal guarantees , the demand for the rule of law and the stability of institutions is not directed at ourselves , as the state of affairs would make necessary , but at the countries of central and eastern Europe , with incredible moral arrogance .
I think I made it clear that the precise criticism is that in this third pillar , the position of the European Court of Justice has not been clarified in cooperation between justice and home affairs , that we have no list of basic rights , no parliamentary and judicial control over this area , and that the moral finger should be pointing at us , before we point it at others .
That is an evident shortcoming of this report . It is significant that it does not mention it once .
Madam President , I have been mentioned twice , so I should really be able to speak twice under Rule 108 .
I would like to thank my colleagues most sincerely for their support and positive cooperation , particularly Mr Schulz and others .
However , I would also like to say that Mr Voggenhuber should either read reports in future or change his speechwriter if he has not got the time to do so , because my report struck a fine balance between the rule of law and internal security .
By the way , I have no hesitation in mentioning that I adopted suggestions and proposals from Mrs Roth - not as many as she would have liked , but some .
However , there were some major amendments on which we also achieved a broad consensus .
Mrs Roth abstained in the final vote .
All the other members of the committee voted in favour .
She did not table any amendments during the partsession .
Neither did you .
I wonder why not ?
Seen from this point of view , I think this is a last-ditch stand to which we should not attribute too much importance .
( Applause from the Group of the European People 's Party )
Mr Posselt , in any case , regardless of Rule 108 , it is quite obvious that you cannot refuse to let a rapporteur speak when he asks to do so .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Mr Voggenhuber , I think you are out of order .
I would gladly give you the floor , but it does not make much sense . I believe the explanation was very clear .
Madam President , I hesitate to try your patience .
However , if I am to be not only addressed personally but attacked twice in a debate , I also have the right to respond to both speakers .
I shall not exaggerate , and thank you for your generosity .
I would just like to say one thing about not reading reports .
I do not know if it is possible to write reports without reading them , but in case it is possible for some Members , may I just quote one passage which was also quoted by Mr Posselt as if it referred to the EU itself .
However , it must be expressly interpreted as a condition of entry for the countries of central and eastern Europe .
Perhaps it is possible to be a hardline right-winger in this Parliament , but people should , I think , at least know their own reports , in order to be able to defend them rather better .
Mutual legal assistance in criminal matters
The next item is the report ( A4-0122 / 98 ) by Mr Buffetaut , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the draft Council Act establishing a Convention on mutual assistance in criminal matters between the Member States of the European Union ( 5202 / 98 - C4-0062 / 98-98 / 0902 ( CNS ) ) and the draft joint action adopted by the Council on the basis of Article K.3 of the Treaty on European Union on good practice in mutual legal assistance in criminal matters ( 13300 / 97 - C40069 / 98-98 / 0903 ( CNS ) ) .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the increased cooperation between the Member States of the European Union is completely legitimate under the principle of subsidiarity when it is clear that joint action is more effective than individual actions within the various Member States .
Can there be a more legitimate area for such cooperation than in the fight against international crime ?
It would indeed be a paradox if the main beneficiaries of the free movement of goods and persons were lawbreakers , international criminals and gangsters .
The removal of all border controls will necessarily lead to an escalation of such activities .
Now more than ever it is vital that we bring about concrete , practical , realistic and effective mutual assistance in criminal matters between the Member States of the European Union .
In their now famous appeal , seven European magistrates underlined the fact that alongside the visible , official and respectable Europe being built - to quote them - there was a hidden and much darker Europe , that of the Mafia and criminal activities .
To combat this , they notably asked for a review of the European Convention on mutual assistance in criminal matters , and recommended a series of practical measures such as allowing European judges to directly address judges from other European countries .
It is these concerns which are addressed in part by the draft Convention on mutual assistance in criminal matters and the draft joint action on good practice in mutual legal assistance .
As it happens , both these texts are also part of the action plan against criminality adopted by the Amsterdam European Council .
It seems that the Member States encountered difficulties , since the text submitted to us is somewhat truncated and not very definitive .
Indeed , modified versions , with which we have not been supplied , are now in circulation .
It is quite exasperating and unsatisfactory that we should be giving a verdict on texts we know to have since been modified .
It is important to highlight the fact that in addition , last December 's Justice and Home Affairs Council decided to suspend dealing with certain particularly delicate questions and instead to refer to an additional protocol about which we know nothing .
This exemplifies the major difficulties encountered by the negotiators in the difficult field of justice - namely the lack of mutual confidence between Member States as regards their respective legal systems .
This is in spite of the fact that all the nations concerned recognize the state of law , although the legal traditions and philosophies differ from one Member State to the next : Common law , droit romain and the Napoleonic code .
Moreover , law and punishment touch on essential elements of the freedom of individuals and national sovereignty .
We must be pragmatic if we are to achieve positive results in these areas .
Inter-state cooperation remains without doubt the most effective way of progressing because it reassures the Member States and avoids conflicts of principle .
That said , what is the essence of the amendments adopted by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs ?
To make the Council 's text more effective , if not bolder .
We therefore believed it necessary to remind everyone of the strategic importance of legal cooperation in the fight against organized crime ; to highlight the need to place consistent and easily applied instruments at the disposal of the justice professionals ; to affirm that it is important to develop mutual trust between judicial systems ; to take into consideration the requirements for speedy inquiries and court cases , whilst still respecting fairness and justice ; to try to eliminate the obstacles in the way of legal cooperation ; to take into account defence requirements ; and finally , to encourage direct communication between the judiciaries .
I would like to emphasize this last point .
This is actually one of the recurrent requests of the justice professionals and a prerequisite for effective administration of justice .
The draft Convention makes provision for this facility , yet immediately grants Member States the option of not joining this simplified mechanism .
However , this direct communication is an essential constituent of an effective procedure .
That is why we believe that allowing Member States an opt-out actually carries the risk of divesting the Convention of one of its most useful aspects .
To conclude , I would like to thank all my colleagues in the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs who have provided me with their highly competent and courteous support . I would also like to say that it is a matter of regret to me that the Council is asking us for a verdict on texts which have since been modified .
Madam President , we are once more confronted with legislation which makes us painfully aware of the contradiction between true Union law and mere international settlements .
The Convention and the joint action are only a continuation of the 1959 European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters and a similar Benelux Treaty of 1962 , which is to be updated by a link with the Schengen Agreement and adaptation to modern systems .
Has this project succeeded ?
The amendments tabled by the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs shows how much remains to be done here .
The amendments tabled by Mr Buffetaut should therefore be accepted in any case , including the reduction of the limit proposed by this Parliament , as it concerns indispensable refinements .
There is one exception , however - permit me , Mr Buffetaut , to say this . In Amendment No 23 , the Council text , insofar as it concerns part ( b ) , should be given preference .
In my opinion , the amendment entails dilution , which does not correspond to the tone of your remaining amendments .
Have we thus gained legal instruments which are suitable for the contemporary demands of fighting crime and upholding the law ?
I do not think so , any more than the so-called communitization of the Schengen Agreement was achieved by the Amsterdam Treaty .
What we need is not the continuation of antiquated treaties with more and more bureaucracy , but the real communitization of the legal dimension in cross-border traffic , immigration , refugee and asylum law and the protection of the civil liberties of EU citizens , which have gained a requirement for regulation in the interim .
But where is the political will for such communitization ?
That is a question which must be put to us , the European Parliament , first !
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the draft Convention and joint action go back to the Council 's action plan for combating organized crime .
I hope I shall not fall out with listeners or Members yet again if I say that combating organized crime is an imperative .
It is indispensable .
We must therefore also consider that the Convention passed to us on 14 and 20 January initially represents a major contribution by the Council to implementing the objective of the action plans .
Mr Ullmann has just indicated that existing agreements should be developed .
The objective is to develop , expand and facilitate the application of the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters of 20 April 1959 , its Additional protocol of 17 March 1978 , the Convention of 19 June 1990 applying the Schengen Agreement , and the Benelux Treaty on Extradition and Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters of 27 June 1962 .
You can see the difficult problem with which we are confronted and the difficult task Mr Buffetaut has had from the list of treaties and the details I have mentioned .
He has had to try to do justice to the requirements emerging from European integration - particularly economic integration - on the basis of old treaties , which were concluded at times when the institutions which now exist were undreamt of .
In one aspect it cannot be helped : the unlimited economic activity which is possible in the European Union also entails unrestricted activity in the underground economy , which is initially being combated by an attempt at intensified police cooperation .
I repeat : an attempt - because Europol is still not getting into its stride to the necessary extent , to say nothing of the millstone around its neck - at least , it is a millstone in the view of the Group of the Party of European Socialists - of the overdue need to grant it operational powers at Union level , which lies in the distant future .
If we assume that this European police force exists , with rights and , of course , powers of control under the rule of law - so the Member who has just spoken need not get excited - this would not mean that the results which such policing would bring could be used judicially to the correspondingly necessary extent .
That is where the debate on Mr Buffetaut 's report must begin .
The current draft specifies the procedure under which mutual assistance is granted and the observance of the forms and procedures specified by the petitioning Member State in accordance with which mutual assistance is to be granted .
The return of the proceeds of crime , the procedure required , and cooperation in telecommunications traffic between Member States - a very difficult topic - are described .
It specifies how the transmission and transfer of procedural documents is to take place , including the necessary translations of the procedural documents to be transferred .
Facilities for examinations , how they can take place by video-conferencing , and how the corresponding translations can be made during video-conferencing , are specified .
A host of other matters , which I do not wish to mention at this point , are described , which would be necessary to make judicial cooperation possible between two states in proceedings from the confiscation of the proceeds of crime to video-conferencing , whilst observing the existing institutions of the other respective state .
If this is multiplied to involve 15 Member States cooperating with each other , whilst strictly maintaining their existing institutions , hell will have frozen over by the time we have translated the proposals , I am sure .
We shall not get anywhere like this .
What we need is what Mr Buffetaut has indicated , to our surprise : an intensification of the will to harmonize .
We must begin by harmonizing quite distinct areas of judicial cooperation .
I know I cannot always say this without being punished from within my own ranks .
To me , harmonization means that if the European Union wishes to gain executive powers in the long term - including in the area of judicial cooperation - rights must be transferred to it by the Member States .
We have been transferring rights from national sovereignty to the European Union in stages , including in recent months .
We are all pleased that we shall soon have monetary union in the European Union .
We hope that all the Member States of the European Union will soon have the euro as legal tender .
We know that all the groups in this Parliament who have voted for the introduction of the euro have done so because they hope that it will intensify integration .
On the other hand , as the debate on the Buffetaut report has shown , we are faced with the major difficulty that we are not prepared to transfer powers where the nation state is still at its mightiest : police and the judiciary .
If we go on creating an economic area of this type , as we are doing , equipped with a single currency , but holding on to the idea that only our public prosecutors in the Federal Republic of Germany , France or Belgium are in a position to fight crime on the basis of their respective national law , like a child with a favourite toy , then I am going to turn to crime at some stage .
That is simpler than being a law-abiding citizen in Europe .
What we are talking about here is the future capacity of the European Union .
I see all the clever lawyers , including on my own committee , sitting over there saying : " There he goes babbling to himself again , with no idea how the legal system works .
If he knew what all the obstacles were he would not talk like that . '
But , precisely because we need the courage of non-lawyers in order to make progress in judicial cooperation , I will tell you again : in the opinion of our group , the best thing about the Buffetaut report is that he tries to make it clear that we shall only make progress in judicial cooperation and mutual assistance in criminal matters by intensifying harmonization in cooperation within the scope of application of joint actions and in the stronger and stronger application of methods which have proved themselves on the basis of mutual experience .
This is astounding for a Member of his group .
One last remark on the procedure of this House .
If we are to be consulted , the Council must appreciate that the consultation procedure forms part of the legislative process .
This is not a courtesy shown to Parliament .
It is a constituent part of the legislative process .
If , as Mr Buffetaut indicated , Parliament is discussing the submission from the Council as communicated to us - in this case under pressure , because we want to keep to the Council 's deadline - and the Council changes its text in the middle of this consultation procedure , it makes what we do here cosmetic . This is probably not the fault of the Council representative present here , who should tell his masters that this Parliament will not , I hope , permit it to trample all over its rights , particularly in the third pillar .
It is democracy which is being trampled underfoot , which is something which democratically elected governments should avoid if possible !
( Applause )
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , I will begin by saying that my group will support Mr Buffetaut 's report , which represents excellent work by the rapporteur and admirable cooperation on the part of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs .
Having said that , Mr President , allow me symbolically to address the people listening to us in the gallery and interpret what they must feel watching us here today debating this issue , and watching the way in which we are doing it .
I am sure they must feel a mixture of confusion and impotence at what we are in fact acknowledging , because , Mr President , the problem is very clear .
We have seen massive demonstrations in various Member States against organized crime , from the demonstrations against terrorism in Spain , to the " white march ' in Brussels , and every other type of protest .
In all the Member States , there is a common awareness that this is a common problem that we can only tackle together .
And in the face of this , the political initiative , the political impetus of the Member States is lagging way behind .
When making declarations , we talk about the need to create a single judicial , police and legal area .
However , when putting these declarations into practice , we continue to get lost in a sea of regulations - regulations among which , in many cases , even the most experienced , knowledgable lawyers have difficulty finding their way .
And meanwhile , as we have heard from all sides of the House - because I believe our position in this respect is unanimous - the internal market benefits , above all the criminals , even though this is a macabre irony .
Mr President , this report , which undoubtably puts forward some suggestions , must be welcomed , but it represents progress in only very small steps .
It is almost , if you will allow me a certain degree of irony - although the seriousness of the issue does not warrant it - a " lame ' step .
Why do I say " lame ' ?
Because in this case , Mr President - and I am referring to everything that was also said from the seats here in this House - we have lacked from the beginning interinstitutional respect and , to a much greater degree , respect for the citizens .
Mr President , it is no longer a case of us having been sent a draft Convention which does not correspond with what we are currently debating .
The problem is that this draft Convention is actually nothing of the sort .
We cannot consider a convention which from the very start has been incomplete to be a draft convention .
There are certain articles , for example Article 4 , whose only content is " deleted ' .
The same is true of Articles 8 and 9 .
What sort of way is this to draw up regulations ?
What kind of legally binding content does it have ?
And then there is the usage of suspension points : paragraph 2 of Article 12 has three suspension points ; subparagraphs e ) and g ) of paragraph 6 of Article 12 , three suspension points plus three more suspension points , six suspension points in all ; paragraph 6 of Article 15 contains more suspension points ; and there are also some in Article 16 .
There is also the usage - and the Council should tell us what purpose they serve - of " square brackets ' which are unfamiliar to us .
In the Council 's language , these correspond to issues that are being debated by the Member States .
But we do not know what significance there is in asking for Parliament 's opinion on those sentences included in the " square brackets ' .
Mr President , this procedure is not satisfactory .
We have condemned it many times in this House .
We cannot allow this procedural game .
We cannot allow it , because we must defend our institutional competencies - and here I would like to thank the Commission which , on the contrary , shows a deference in these matters concerning the third pillar which is worthy of praise .
We also cannot allow it because we must defend our authority as an institution .
But , more particularly , we must not allow it because we are representing here the European citizens ; citizens who are sitting here today and who , I imagine , will take away a very confused idea of the progress we are currently making as regards the third pillar .
Mr President , I consider the Convention on mutual assistance in criminal matters between the Member States of the European Union , on which the report is based , to be a suitable instrument for reducing , if not removing , the existing shortcomings in the combating of cross-border crime , allowing for the justifiable criticism and amendments mentioned by the rapporteur .
International telephone tapping , observing the respective internal legal arrangements , must be just as possible as controlled service , the transmission of procedural documents , the audio-visual examination of witnesses and expert witnesses across borders , and the spontaneous exchange of information between prosecuting authorities , on as simple a basis as possible .
These are instruments which have long been available to organized crime , and their extension to prosecuting authorities should reduce the technical lead enjoyed by organized crime .
We therefore agree with the report in full .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Buffetaut on a valuable report on the draft of the Convention and joint action on mutual legal assistance in criminal matters .
Both these instruments are necessary in the fight against organized crime .
It also means that we are defending the security in law of the individual in a Europe without borders .
I have long argued in favour of facilitating cooperation between the courts and other judicial organizations in the Member States .
In the work on fighting embezzlement of Union funds , I have seen for myself how delays in exchanging information between different legal systems are a direct encouragement to crime .
The appeals to Geneva from a number of prosecutors are another example of why something has to be done .
We will not be able to meet the challenges which today 's organized crime presents unless we have effective legal cooperation .
The Convention on mutual legal assistance in criminal matters is intended to improve and complement the way we work now .
One basic assumption is that the courts in different Member States will in future be able to exchange information and request assistance from one another directly .
This is an important principle .
I think any exceptions to this principle should be kept to the absolute minimum .
Among other things , the Convention will also make it easier to question witnesses and obtain evidence between Member States .
At the same time , the Convention leaves room for further improvements in terms of cooperation .
Mr Buffetaut complains that there are a number of questions which have not been settled in the Convention .
For example , the report states that raids and seizures have been dropped and will be covered by a later rider to the Convention .
The same applies to the question of data protection and the role of the European Court of Justice .
I can understand the rapporteur 's concern , but increasing cooperation on criminal matters will not grow overnight .
It is a long-term task which is about a process in which , at the same time as improving practical cooperation , we are also working on harmonizing our various laws .
The rapporteur also proposes that Europol should act as a channel for communicating proposals for mutual legal assistance between Member States .
Europol has a good chance of getting a request to the right address fast , so I think the proposal is interesting .
It is also in line with the discussions already under way on giving Europol 's liaison officers a coordinating role for letters rogatory .
Joint action is an important complement to the Convention .
It lays down a number of principles as to how Member States are to handle a request for mutual legal assistance .
I particularly welcome the provisions on set times for action .
Of course it is possible to discuss joint action , as the rapporteur has done , and a convention is not the best way of laying down fixed principles for action .
On the other hand , I believe the important thing for both the rapporteur and myself is that the Member States should apply the principles quickly and effectively .
The annual reports are an important tool here .
They can be used both to assess the situation in each Member State and to make comparisons between them .
Like Mr Buffetaut , I believe the European legal network should be included in the report work .
The network will contribute knowledge and experience on how to develop and intensify mutual legal assistance between Member States .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Driving disqualification
The next item is the report ( A4-0121 / 98 ) by Mrs Reding , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs , on the draft Council Act establishing a Convention on driving disqualifications ( 5217 / 98 - C4-0061 / 98-98 / 0901 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , the figures speak for themselves : 45 000 dead and 1.6 million injured on our roads , and all the pain and suffering that goes with these horrifying statistics . A cost of ECU 1 million to the European Union for each citizen killed .
Ladies and gentlemen , these figures are shocking . In order to counter such a distressing situation , a twopronged assault combining prevention on the one hand and repression on the other is envisaged .
Prevention is achieved through campaigns aimed at alerting people to the dangers of drink driving and educating them about the fight against illegal substances ; compulsory technical vehicle inspections ; improvements in the provision of signals ; and so on and so forth .
These preventive measures are intended to improve road safety in general and remove the cause of certain accidents before they can occur .
Hand in hand with prevention , we must also organize suppression , since even the best prevention campaigns have not stopped some of our fellow citizens from flouting traffic regulations .
Sanctions already exist in our Member States and these range from fines for minor offences to driving disqualifications for more serious offences .
The European institutions have already been very active in the area of prevention .
Under the auspices of this Convention , the suppressive aspects of this European action need to be strengthened .
The Convention proposes to inaugurate the recognition by a driver 's country of residence of a decision to ban them from driving taken in another Member State .
To put this more clearly , measures are needed which will bring about a situation whereby a ban in one Member State would also be enforced in the country of residence and , by extension , everywhere that a driving licence is required in order to drive a vehicle .
In future , these cowboys of the road will no longer be protected from prosecution in their countries of residence for offences committed in another Member State .
That said , certain organizations and several colleagues have told me of their concerns over the protection of citizens against the consequences of applying this new Convention .
I can now reassure them on this point .
The Convention has been painstakingly put together and incorporates barriers against all forms of abuse or unjustified complications relating to the people in question and furthermore , the Committee on Civil Liberties and Internal Affairs has adopted a number of amendments which will further strengthen citizens ' protection .
I do not intend to list all of them but I will mention the most important ones .
First of all , the Convention does not apply to minor offences .
The catalogue of offences concerned only includes very serious offences which endanger people 's lives .
It is not therefore aimed at pursuing minor traffic offences . On the contrary , it is aimed at stopping dangerous drivers .
Next , driving disqualification does not rely on a so-called centralizing bureaucracy in Brussels , but on the relevant authorities in the Member States of residence , who alone have the right to choose whether or not to apply the Convention .
It is not , therefore , a remote and ill-known entity which will decide , but an authority close to its citizens .
Finally , the Convention makes provision for a number of cases in which it does not apply , the most notable of these being the situation where the offences committed do not carry a disqualification in the country of residence .
For example , if a resident of Luxembourg is disqualified from driving in another Member State because of a blood sugar level of 5 parts per 1000 , this decision would not be applicable in Luxembourg where the limit is 8 parts per 1000 .
The Convention is not applicable if it can be established that the person concerned has not had the opportunity of defending themselves correctly , especially due to procedural irregularities or language problems , for the right to a defence is a fundamental right which must be respected .
Furthermore , the Convention also makes provision for several procedures aimed at taking into account the differences in administrative or legal methods in the different Member States .
I am therefore of the opinion that even though the present Convention may not be perfect , Parliament 's amendments have rendered it logical , legally speaking more correct and transparent , and therefore better placed to protect the rights of our citizens .
By respecting the law and being transparent , the amended Convention constitutes an important step forward .
I therefore ask Parliament to support the Council in this initiative .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Reding has just spoken most comprehensively about her report and I must congratulate her most sincerely .
I believe that what she has said here , and the content of the unanimously adopted amendments , show that this report was not only prepared very well , but also that its content addresses the points in question .
Nevertheless , I would like to state that this report affects us all , although only a few Members are present , because any of us could commit a traffic offence in another country resulting in disqualification from driving in that country , but not in another .
Although this Convention provides for the respective country of residence to decide whether the driver should be disqualified , there are some cases in which we must ensure that no-one is disqualified from driving when they would not have been disqualified at home .
It is fundamentally necessary that we should get round to making uniform regulations at a European level which are applied uniformly , particularly where traffic legislation is concerned .
As Mrs Reding has stated , a step has been taken in the right direction and I hope that others will follow .
Although there are countries in which the alcohol limit for driving is zero and others where it is 80 mg per 100 ml of blood , these differences should be removed , if we want to have a unified Europe .
I would welcome the introduction of real , uniform regulations in Europe , whether for speeding , the alcohol limit or other areas of traffic legislation , so that we had European rules for disqualification from driving , instead of more rules made under bilateral agreements .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the legislation we are debating affects all European drivers and thus a large number of people , which ensures it will get attention , but this also justifies the need to give it careful consideration , which is our intention here .
Firstly , some misunderstandings must be cleared up .
This is not a matter of harmonizing road traffic legislation in Europe .
It is not even a matter of communitizing the consequences of driving offences .
The objective of the Convention only concerns disqualification from driving , which is a relatively advanced stage for drivers .
That is the sole objective of this Convention .
It has now been asked whether such a uniform ruling can be made , in view of the diversity of laws on driving in Europe .
If we , as Europeans , use the entire area of the European Union as drivers , we must also accept that uniform rules apply , in principle .
Should a driver therefore commit such a serious offence in one European country that he is disqualified from driving , it must also be accepted that this will have consequences at home .
To put it another way , road hogs must not get away with shaking the dust of one Member State off their shoes and carrying on driving at home , as if nothing had happened .
That is why this rule is correct in principle .
There have been objections from drivers ' organizations .
They are quite entitled to take a critical attitude to such a regulation and we want to consider it .
The question is whether disqualification from driving can be enforced at home , in view of the differences in regulations , but also in view of the different legal systems .
It is the old story : how much Europe do we need ? Or , as a major German newspaper recently asked : " How much Europe can we stand ? '
This regulation does not apply without restrictions .
It is restricted by safeguards within the rule of law .
This Convention will initially only apply to serious offences which are individually listed , not to every offence .
Secondly , it must for example be stated that disqualification can only be enforced at home if , of course , it concerns an offence which is also punishable at home .
The notorious example of someone losing their licence for drink driving in Sweden with 30 mg of alcohol per 100 ml of blood would not be implemented in Germany , because such behaviour in Germany is not normally punishable .
There is thus a host of rules which demonstrate that the principles of the rule of law apply .
However , there is a further objection , namely the differences between legal systems , of which there is a comic example .
In one of the most delightful Member States of the European Union , exceeding the speed limit can be detected by a police officer with the naked trained eye , as it is said .
This would , of course , not be recognized everywhere .
It can therefore be disputed whether it makes sense .
But if we accept that every Member State enjoys the rule of law , we can have confidence that the judicial authorities act within the rule of law in principle . Should we enter the sovereignty of such a state , we must accept that slightly different rules may possibly apply there .
However , Europe as a whole is subject to the rule of law and we can also put our confidence in it in this area .
Mr President , the implementation of the free movement of persons within the Union leads to the urgency of the measure being discussed .
We thank Mrs Reding for her excellent work and , while awaiting an approximation of the national laws , we hope the Council 's proposal will at least serve to establish , at European level , recognition by the country of residence of a decision to penalize a driver by withdrawing their driving licence on the part of another Member State .
The subject draws attention to identification documents in general .
I will take this opportunity to report a paradoxical situation , which is that of the obligation to hold a passport for various Community citizens within the Union . For example - and this causes them problems - young Italians born in Belgium , but not having Belgian citizenship , do not hold an identity card but simply a residence permit that does not allow them to travel in Europe .
We are therefore asking for a real European identity card to be introduced and for the current , anachronistic Community residence permit to be changed to a residence permit and free pass .
Mr President , in principle we have two methods of achieving road safety objectives .
The first is penalties , which we are discussing today .
I would also like to comment that disqualification from driving is a threat to the livelihood of many people .
We have experienced many suicides following disqualification .
It is really an extreme measure which should therefore be used carefully .
We have a second method , namely using incentives .
We should emphasize training very intensively , particularly on the roads , as lifelong learning .
We should emphasize research to improve the safety of vehicles , their drivers and the roads , and we should emphasize infrastructure , meaning electronic systems , simply to make traffic safer .
I believe that a combination of both methods will ultimately lead to success in Europe .
Mr President , nobody wants road hogs to endanger life .
The tone of this report is therefore welcome .
However , it seems to us that the implementation of its intentions has not succeeded .
Apart from the legally unusual construction of Article 3 in conjunction with Article 5 , the main problem is , in my opinion , that errors occur for a wide variety of reasons in proceedings abroad , particularly in the investigation of the circumstances , and remain unchallenged , again for a wide variety of reasons .
The linking of the place of residence to findings in the decision in the state in which the offence was committed does not appear to permit the accused to exhaust the full potential for defence to which he would be entitled under the laws of his country of residence .
The facility for the Member State to reject enforcement in a case in which rights of defence have been breached does not , in our opinion , constitute sufficient compensation , for practical reasons .
We would prefer proceedings to take place in the respective country of residence .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating Mrs Reding on her valuable report on the Convention to ensure mutual recognition of driving disqualifications .
As you are all well aware , the number of accidents on Europe 's roads is far too high .
Many of them are caused by careless or unauthorized driving .
Disqualification has proved an effective tool in the work of improving road safety .
At the moment someone who has had his driving licence withdrawn in a country other than his home country can legally get it back when he returns home .
This is absurd .
The Convention on driving disqualifications will close some of the existing loopholes .
The Commission shares Mrs Reding 's view that a Council decision on the Convention is urgent .
I can tell you that political agreement was reached at the Justice and Home Affairs Council on 19 March and that is a step in the right direction , and the United Kingdom presidency is very optimistic concerning the possibilities of adopting the Convention at the next meeting of the Council at the end of May .
The Convention establishes a notification mechanism between the state where the offence took place and the state of residence of the offender .
The state of residence will ensure that the foreign penalty is enforced or that a suitable domestic sanction is imposed on the offender and , if necessary , other Member States will be informed that the driving licence in question has been withdrawn .
The report suggests that strict deadlines should be introduced for the notification , recognition and implementation procedures .
The proposal is an interesting one .
It would make for greater predictability and security in ensuring that the necessary measures are also adopted in time .
In her report Mrs Reding also stresses the importance of cooperation under the Convention being practicable .
What we must seek to do is establish the fastest and simplest procedure possible .
This is a praiseworthy ambition .
I also welcome Mrs Reding 's proposal that , in future , a Member State should only be able to notify procedural changes which make for simplification .
However , we must , at the same time , remember that the Convention is the outcome of a negotiation process .
There will certainly be room for improvement , so we must make an assessment of how the Convention has worked a couple of years after it enters into force .
With more than 45 000 deaths on Europe 's roads each year , we must take road safety extremely seriously .
Once it has entered into force , the Convention on driving disqualifications will be an effective instrument for combating this kind of offence .
I would like to thank both the Commissioner and the rapporteur , Mrs Reding .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Abolition of duty-free sales
The next item is the joint debate on the following oral questions to the Commission :
B4-0279 / 98 - O-0073 / 98 by Mr Cornelissen and others , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , on the social and regional consequences of the abolition of duty-free sales in the regions affected ; -B4-0283 / 98 - O-0087 / 98 by Mrs Ewing and Mr Castagnède , on behalf of the Group of the European Radical Alliance , on the duty-free sales system .
Mr President , the decision taken by the Ecofin Council in 1991 to abolish duty-free sales for travellers within the European Union from July 1999 has thoroughly stirred up feelings recently .
This is not surprising and in itself not alarming .
What is worrying , though , are the reports that the abolition will lead to the loss of a great number of jobs in some regions and sectors .
I would like to mention for example the ferries , regional airports and certain tourist regions .
The Irish Minister for Transport expects 30 000 to 50 000 jobs to be lost .
The sector itself quotes a figure many times higher .
Amongst the priorities of the European Union are combating unemployment , and the development of deprived regions .
Partly in view of the fact that many workers in the relevant sectors are feeling a sense of unease , we believe there should be clarity .
I am therefore asking the Commission whether it would be prepared to carry out an independent study into its possible effects , looking in particular at the sectors and regions most affected .
Mr President , I trust you will give me a positive reply , in view of the promises made by the Commissioner initially responsible , Mrs Scrivener , during the Parliamentary debates in 1990 and 1991 .
Mr President , this House probably knows that , representing the Highlands and Islands , I have a great connection with the Scotch whisky industry with its hundreds of distilleries and hundreds of types of whisky - a very important employer in areas where there is often no alternative employment .
I would like to follow on from Mr Cornelissen : I do not need to repeat what he said but I endorse his demand for a full study .
What annoys me is that this was promised by the tax Commissioner in November 1990 and May 1991 .
Commissioner Monti came before the EMAC Committee and I was present on that particular occasion when we put these points to him and he seemed to me unrepentant and rather debonair about the fact that such a promise had been made and that the promise was broken .
I am still wondering if we could get an explanation from the Commission as to why the promise was not kept .
We have had other studies of course .
We have had a study from a research department of Parliament which has caused some of the concern among citizens because , as Mr Cornelissen said , we do not know how many jobs are at stake .
But there are estimates that far more than 40 000 jobs may be lost , and this at a time of enormously high unemployment .
The effect on peripheral areas would be very serious because , as I have said already , such areas have very few employment alternatives .
We have received justifications from the Council for a refusal to reconsider this matter .
One is that it is necessary for the single market ; but is it not rather ironic that , so far as alcohol is concerned , we do not have a single market ?
We have not yet managed to tax in accordance with any sensible rule , for instance alcohol strength .
We have not got a level playing field so far as alcohol is concerned .
So the first justification does not seem to me to hold water .
The second justification - there are probably many others that the Commissioner might be able to put forward - is that ECU 2 billion is the cost of the loss in duties .
But some of the studies suggest there is no proof that amount would be made up even if duty-free is abolished .
There is no doubt of course that , in many cases , duty-free affects the cost of airport fares and ferry charges .
We know that to be true , we do not disguise the fact .
But I go back to the effect of these costs , if they have to rise in peripheral areas .
There is enormous concern among the citizenry .
I know it would have to be unanimous , but please , in view of the concern , could we not ask that the Council look at this again ?
Mr President , the Commission is aware of the questions raised in some Member States about the situation which will arise after June 1999 , the date on which intra-Community duty-free sales will end as decided by the Council of Ministers in 1991 .
I am sure that you also appreciate that the Commission is aware that the large majority of finance ministers have made it very clear twice in November 1996 and very recently in March 1998 that the decision taken in 1991 to end intra-Community duty-free sales will not be reconsidered .
The Commission therefore remains convinced that the transitional period of more than seven years granted to the duty-free sector was sufficient to meet the duty-free trade 's legitimate concern about the phasing out of such sales .
The Commission has been asked several times , including during the present session , whether it intends to carry out a study of the implications of the abolition of tax-free sales .
The answer is short .
The answer is " No ' .
There is no reason for doing so .
Let me once again explain why .
When the Commission between 1989 and 1991 discussed the tax arrangements for the establishment of the internal market with this Parliament , the then Commissioner responsible for fiscal matters declared herself ready to carry out a study on the social and economic consequences for all professions whose future was to be concerned by the entry into force of the internal market arrangements on 1 January 1993 and to look for appropriate solutions where necessary .
This declaration was made to meet inter alia the concern expressed by Parliament about the consequences of an immediate abolition of duty-free sales on 1 January 1993 and to see if some arrangements for a phasing-out of this activity were justified and possible .
Against this background , the Commission , which had not proposed any specific measures in favour of this activity in its own proposal , finally welcomed in the following discussions within the Council the introduction of a derogatory regime of more than seven years .
It also kept the competent committee of Parliament closely informed about the solutions then agreed .
I must stress that , having received this information , your institution never again mentioned the study initially envisaged until very recently .
The Council , by adopting such a specific regime which largely overcomes the need for a study - seven and a half years is more than a study - took into consideration the socio-economic dimensions of tax-free activity , as this is clearly reflected in the ' whereas ' clauses of the relevant directives .
Consequently , the Commission remains convinced that this specific regime was an appropriate and practical answer to the concern expressed at the time by the European Parliament .
Comparing this long derogatory regime to the solutions provided for other professions affected by the internal market legislation , for example , customs freight forwarders who receive funds for reconversion and so on of about ECU 30 million , a seven-year period allowing for an annual turnover of about ECU 7.5 billion does not appear to be disadvantageous treatment .
Moreover , launching a study now is not only unjustified but would be slightly irresponsible on our part .
Launching a study now , just over one year before the end of the actual derogatory regime would be most counterproductive as it might be seen by the taxfree industry as a way of re-opening this issue and further delaying the inevitable .
This would run against the necessary and overdue adjustment of the industry which constituted the primary reason for allowing a seven-year period .
The Commission does not intend to give the wrong signals .
I would like to elaborate on the regional effects that are raised in the question .
I welcome this regional dimension which is focused on some real , specific and limited problems which might arise as a consequence of abolition .
The Commission , however , underlines the fact that it will be up to the individual Member States concerned to consider if , and to what extent , specific regional difficulties may occur and to take appropriate measures , including research , assessment and evaluations of local or regional effects on which demands by Member States themselves might be based .
It may well be the case that Community funding could be available to alleviate any specific problems caused by the abolition of duty-free sales .
It will , however , be for Member States to identify any such problems and then to assess what kind of action , if any , would be appropriate .
If Member States then wish to seek support from the Community they will need to do so under existing procedures : for example , those applicable to structural funding .
Cases would then be examined in partnership with the Commission and decisions taken on the merits of each individual case .
In the case of Structural Funds , interventions are aimed at reducing regional and social disparities .
Together with the Member States and the regions concerned , the Commission has established a framework for these interventions covering matters such as priorities , financial resources and forms of assistance , which are usually implemented by means of an operational programme .
The current programme runs until the end of 1999 .
The next programming period for the Structural Funds will run from 2000 to 2006 .
On 18 March this year , in the framework of its Agenda 2000 package , the Commission adopted its new draft regulations on the operation of the Structural Funds .
In its new Article 4 , it allows Member States to propose for eligibility under the national Objective II quota any areas facing or threatened by a high level of unemployment arising from an ongoing or planned restructuring of an activity of key importance for the agricultural , industrial or service sectors .
Sea and air transport form part of the service sector .
Community rules also provide Member States with the means to pursue legitimate public service goals for transport links when commercial operators are unable to meet these goals without public assistance .
Community guidelines already exist in this area - for example , on aid to maritime transport links .
Honourable Members will therefore see that well-known and tested procedures already exist through which Member States and the Commission can work in partnership to help in situations where specific problems might arise in relation to the abolition of intra-Community duty-free sales which will take place on 30 June 1999 .
Mr President , thank you Commissioner Monti for your explanation .
I think you will actually find , if you look back in the records of this House , that the study has been requested for some time now .
It is not just a recent phenomenon ; we have been requesting the study for some years now .
This motion calls for a study of the economic and social implications of the abolition of duty-free .
It does not call for the retention of duty-free .
I think that is a point that has to be made at the very start .
I listened carefully to what you had to say , Commissioner Monti , and I know that on more than one occasion you have said no to carrying out such a study even though it had been previously agreed to .
I understand the reasons that you have given .
When you initially said that duty-free was to be abolished on 1 January 1993 , a study was appropriate in the run-up to that period but when the derogation was agreed until 1999 then the study , as you say , is no longer applicable .
You have also pointed out in the past that in the intervening period of seven and a half years the duty-free lobby were supposed to run down their operations and in fact what has happened is that the duty-free lobby have done the exact opposite and have expanded it .
I take those points on board .
We have noticed that there have been several studies carried out , many of them indicating job losses , some of them indicating the exact opposite .
Can I say that I do not believe any of them ?
I do not believe any of the studies from either side because none of them has been carried out by an independent assessor .
They have all been carried out with vested interests and therefore I think it is appropriate at this time that we have the true picture , the clear picture of what will happen post duty-free .
That is why we need an independent assessment .
But as I have heard you say , Commissioner Monti , you are still saying no .
Can I take you back to a meeting , a joint hearing of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy and the Committee on Transport and Tourism which was held last year on the question of duty-free , when you said that you were prepared to look at ways of ameliorating the effects of any unemployment .
The question I have to ask is how can you look at ways of ameliorating the effects without a study ?
You tried to turn that slightly in your answer earlier by saying it is up to the individual Member States to look at that and to look at ways of utilizing the Structural Funds by diverting them into those areas that may have unemployment caused by the abolition of duty-free .
I would say that is not the duty of the Member States because if we do that then all of a sudden we will have a piecemeal policy on the Structural Funds and that is the last thing that we want within this Chamber , especially when we are coming up to the review of the Structural Funds .
What we have also got to look at is the economic consequences and there are a number of unanswered questions here , too .
An example that has been used on many occasions is if a ferry travels between two EU countries and passes through international waters what are the passengers entitled to ?
Are they entitled to duty-free or are they entitled to pay duty at the port of departure or are they entitled to pay duty at the port of arrival ?
There are economic questions here that have to be answered and therefore a study , I think , would address this balance and I would accordingly urge you to take this up .
Mr President , I am surprised and disappointed at the Commissioner 's negative reply .
It is hard to believe that , in 1999 , authorities are introducing measures without knowing what the effects will be on employment and regional development .
May I point to the statements made in this House by the President of the Commission , Mr Santer , about how much store he sets by good cooperation with the European Parliament ?
The Commission 's reply does not square with this .
Nor does it show much respect for the tens of thousands of anxious workers in the sector .
I would draw your attention to the march in Brussels last year in which 5 000 people took part .
The reply is also at odds with the citizens ' Europe the Commission is so keen on .
Could I therefore ask the Commissioner in the strongest possible terms whether he is prepared to discuss this disappointing outcome with Mr Santer .
Could I also ask him , partly in view of the recent request made by the Transport Council , and in the interest of tens of thousands of worried people , to carry out the requested study urgently , so that we all know what we are talking about .
We are adult enough , Mr President , to judge whether it is correct or not .
Mr President , I rise to support Mr Cornelissen , Mrs Ewing and Mr Miller .
My group supports the resolution .
It has already been said that promises were given in this House by the Commission that it would undertake a social and economic impact study into the abolition of duty-free sales .
Mr Cornelissen has put his finger on the pulse .
The reality is that the Commission representatives continue to refuse to make any analysis even in the face of the decision taken by the Transport Council last March to call for a study of the situation .
Regardless of what position individual Members of this House have on the worth of the continuation of duty-free , my group strongly supports this motion as it addresses the failure of the democratic process whereby the Commission continues to ignore the wishes of those who are elected by the citizens of Europe .
It is they who have the right to expect that their interests are represented wholeheartedly .
So let us have the study and then we can take the necessary decisions on this issue .
Mr President , in passing laws which affect people , trade and places , we all have a duty of care and a duty to care .
Conscious of this , more than seven years ago I proposed the amendment , prior to the decision to abolish duty-free , that we should undertake a study .
In Parliament , as has been said , on behalf of the Commission in the clearest terms Mrs Scrivener pledged to undertake just such a study .
That promise was never fulfilled .
I deplore and regret the Commission 's breach of good faith .
Two years ago I wrote to Commissioner Mario Monti renewing my call for a study .
I reject , therefore , the views of those today who argue that this debate is a late attempt to derail the abolition of duty-free .
Had the Commission been as good as its word , such a study and its consequences would long since have been dealt with .
Without prejudice to the question of substance - the abolition of duty-free - the call for a study remains as valid today as it was before , and I renew it now .
For many , the duty-free question has taken on a certain symbolic significance in respect of tax harmonization and the single market , a symbolism disproportionate to its market share and substance .
This has resulted in proponents and opponents alike paying inadequate attention to the practical consequences of abolition .
The Commission , with some justification , points to industry 's failure to make adjustments .
So , too , the Commission has a case to answer .
Not all the questions of abolition relate to industry ; they touch on significant areas of public policy , such as regional , tourism and employment policy , and they are not questions for industry alone .
On revenue and fiscal erosion , a question : can the Commissioner say with legal certainty what will be the state of play in exciseduty terms for vendors , Member States and consumers after the abolition in 1999 ?
Will excise duties vary for on-board sales as ferries and planes cross between territorial waters ?
Will there be zero excise in international waters ?
Is there a policy to deal with such chaos in the mind of the Commission ?
I regret that tonight we have not had a commitment to do a study .
It is overdue , it is necessary .
Politically I believe in a political Commission .
I am sorry we got a bureaucrats ' answer tonight .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we would not be having this debate if there was not a powerful lobby which has pulled out all the stops to rattle public opinion , and which has even succeeded in mobilizing most of the groups .
We have known for a long time that the Council and the Commission together proposed to abolish duty-free sales at some point . More than seven years were allocated to this process of abolition , nor does it make any sense in a common market to keep such a scheme .
Moreover it is clear that most of the duty-free shops will not suffer at all , as people do not buy there because it is cheaper - in fact often it is more expensive , as I know from experience - but because people have time on their hands , and they want to buy a gift , and so on .
We are behind the Council and the Commission .
We believe there is something to be said for a study , if only to work out a concrete action plan . Proof can then be established that there will only be a shift in jobs , and that the possible social and transport problems in peripheral regions will be countered in all earnestness .
This we support ; no more , but also no less .
Mr President , I certainly find the present debate on the future of duty-free ridiculous to say the least .
If ever we were trying to remove from the public something they want to keep , this is it .
The vast majority who travel abroad do so either on holiday or on business and they like the availability of duty-free .
It is the one little perk they have .
What are we proposing ?
We are proposing to remove the small advantage they have .
And what will be achieved ?
All we will do is anger European citizens who travel , and all in the name of the European Union and the single market .
On top of that , we are going to put a lot of people out of work .
I thought our business was about retaining and creating jobs , not putting people out of work .
I would take this opportunity to urge the Commission and the Council that rather than reply as they have done this afternoon in a very bureaucratic way , as Mr Cox said , they should recognize the deep feeling and concern that is held on this issue by citizens throughout the length and breadth of the European Union .
This will only increase as many people do not yet realize what is going to happen to them very soon .
I urge that , instead of letting that resentment against the European Union deepen , we take positive steps to ensure that this does not happen .
At the close of the debate I have received six motions for a resolution .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
Mr President , I have to live with the name of Piecyk , which is pronounced incorrectly again and again .
This does not represent a problem .
Mr President , in contrast to Mr Cornelissen , I am not surprised by the Commissioner 's statement .
It was almost what I was expecting .
However , Commissioner , I believe that politics must be capable of measuring the decisions it makes against real life , and of having them measured .
It may be said that a decision was made under certain circumstances and things did not happen as we perhaps expected or intended .
I have the impression that you are ultimately shying away from acquiring data , under the motto of what the eye does not see , the heart does not grieve over .
As has frequently been mentioned here , I find it remarkable to have to press for something to which the then Commissioner committed herself in 1991 .
We received this commitment from the Commission several years ago .
It is also a question of good faith between Parliament and the Commission .
There is another question . All those people , including myself , who are committing themselves to the retention of duty- free sales , because of their concern about the imminent job losses with which they are confronted , are working with shock figures provided by the duty-free industry and pressure groups .
That is the real reason for saying that we need a correct , verifiable and wide-ranging survey , so that we can reach a reasonable , rational conclusion .
I do not know whether 140 000 jobs are really at stake in the Union .
I do know that several thousand jobs will be lost in the daytrip and ferry crossing business in my own area of Schleswig-Holstein on the Baltic Coast .
I do not know which airports and airlines will be affected , but I do know that smaller , regional airports , connections to remote areas , and Baltic ferry traffic , especially with Finland , will be particularly affected .
I do not know what the precise fiscal effects of the abolition of tax- and duty-free sales will be , but I do know very well that assistance for the transport sector in the affected regions and for social security contributions from the unemployed will be back on the agenda , as you have indicated .
For all these reasons I say that we need a proper , correct survey before we go on arguing about the whys and wherefores .
I can imagine that you want this .
However , the Transport Council has demanded it , Parliament will demand it and , if my understanding is correct , we have a joint motion for a resolution tabled for tomorrow morning by many groups .
For this reason , the Commission should not continue to refuse at this point , but should provide this study , so that we can then hold a reasonable discussion about it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my committee held a hearing and a report by Mr Garosci is available .
We must make a distinction between the demand for a survey and the abolition of duty-free .
I share Mr Piecyk 's opinion that a survey would illuminate the false stories spread by the lobby , as parliamentary democracy is being put under massive pressure by completely unfair means .
There can be no doubt that the coastal regions which are particularly affected will receive specific aid if necessary .
On the other hand , the discussion is really about cancelling the abolition of duty-free decided on in 1991 .
The debate is being dominated by Members from countries in which there are high taxes on consumer goods , or which have borders with such states .
It thus involves Member States in which extensive use is made of tax advantages , which is not justified within the sense of the entire population of the European Union .
Weekend speeches emphasize the importance of tax harmonization again and again , but on Monday morning everyone wants their own tax breaks .
That is why , Commissioner , I share your opinion that duty-free sales must be abolished , because it conceals the concept of cheap shopping - frequently quite blatant consumer deception .
Those who say that airports are in danger must be asked whether the ordinary citizen should subsidize business travellers , by continuing to give them the opportunity to shop tax-free ?
I do not think so , and there is absolutely no reason to grant special advantages if we want to harmonize certain fiscal regulations within the scope of the euro .
We can , Commissioner , discuss this much better , and you will be in a better position , if you commission a survey of the regional effects and take the wind out of the sails of the entire lobby !
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is a rather odd debate we are having .
In response to a question by one of my fellow party members in the Lower Chamber in the Netherlands , the Minister of Finance states that the European Commission does not want to conduct such a study .
Here , the Commissioner is telling us that it is the Council of Ministers which does not want a study .
And so we are pussyfooting around .
I am not saying that we should maintain the duty-free facilities ad infinitum , but I do think it is very bad that on the one hand we are saying to society that we are abolishing it , yet on the other hand , the planned tax harmonization - which was supposed to be further advanced than it is at the moment - and the internal market are not yet a reality .
I think it is extremely bad , Mr Commissioner , that we are facing society , not the Member States and the Commission , with a fait accompli .
For that reason alone we should be conducting a study !
Mr President , having listened to the Commissioner 's speech I am of the opinion that the issue was displaced , since we were faced with a double challenge .
Mr Commissioner , the first challenge is this : you said that after a transition period lasting seven years we did not need a report , and that we would not draw up a report .
However , you also admitted that there would be repercussions on employment , on the ports , on travel and on the market .
The second challenge is this : there will be repercussions .
Each Member State will face up to these repercussions and rectify the situation .
However , was it the policy of each Member State individually that caused these repercussions or was it Community policy ?
This Community policy must be responsible for coming to the aid of each Member State to put these repercussions right .
In the meantime , Mr Commissioner , the people working in the sector say that 145 000 jobs will be lost , mainly affecting young people who work in the duty-free shops .
I want to ask you what these young people will do .
Do you know why you are delaying the study ?
Do you know why you will never submit it ?
Because you cannot be bothered to look and see what will happen to these people .
That is why you are avoiding it .
If not , it would have been very easy for you to produce evidence to show that such and such would be the repercussions , such and such would be the tax gains .
You do not want to get involved in the issue of what will happen to the 150 000 people who will be thrown out into the streets . These young people will swell the ranks of the 20 million unemployed , made jobless by your notorious , infamous unified market and the policies you implement to promote it .
Mr President , first of all I think it is outrageous and very irresponsible of the Commission that it should actually pursue something without first having an independent assessment of its consequences .
Especially for island states in the EU including Ireland , it really warrants particular attention and I wonder what the Commissioner is actually afraid of by refusing to carry out the study that so many people have called for .
With its harmonization of the tax system , the EU is gradually assuming all the characteristics of a single state .
Irish politicians from the main political parties are now queuing up to score points on this issue , but they should be criticized for their unflinching enthusiasm for the single market in the past .
For example , the leader of our own government in Ireland , Mr Ahern , is only a recent convert to the duty-free cause .
When he was Ireland 's Minister for Finance in 1991 he joined other EU finance ministers in agreeing that duty-free sales should cease by the end of the decade .
I really think it is irresponsible of the EU to push something through without a proper study being carried out and , as Mr Miller said , any studies done to date have been by vested interests on both sides .
We need proper studies that are independent and will give us the whole story and it is the responsibility of the Commission to carry that out .
Mr President , can I start by saying that if somebody was thinking of inventing duty-free tomorrow and they actually came forward with these ideas I am sure they would never be taken up .
However , we are not in that position .
The original rationale behind duty-free is clearly flawed and clearly the people who had the idea never envisaged the single market which we are trying to work towards at the moment .
The same could be true of something like smoking .
If we could have banned smoking before it started I am sure we would have done so , but clearly all we can do for the moment is try and discourage it .
So it is there , we have got to deal with it .
The question is , how do we deal with it ?
We all know , because many of us in this Parliament travel as often as we do , that certainly ports and airports use the advantages of duty-free to actually reduce the costs of fares and of travelling to passengers .
In my own region in particular I have two airports , Manchester Airport and Blackpool Airport , that benefit considerably from duty-free and indeed there are jobs tied up in that .
There is a point which has already been made by many other speakers : there has not been an independent study , and we need one .
Jobs are tied up in this .
Whether 140 000 jobs would go , as Mr Ephremidis estimates , we do not know .
Clearly , some of the people working in those shops will continue to work there ; some will not work there because the profitability is not the same .
What we need to know is what the impact will be , how many jobs will be lost , and then a decision can be made about what to do .
That decision may incorporate some adjustments of regional funding in order to take account of that fact .
Like Mr Miller , I do not believe there should be a piecemeal approach to this but nevertheless if extra money was forthcoming from the Commission or elsewhere to take account of this fact , I am sure it would not be refused by the regions concerned .
We need a way forward , we need to be objective about this , we must not just bow to vested interests .
What we need is an objective analysis , and I ask the Commission and the Council to come forward with proposals on that basis .
Mr President , must we remain loyal to our single market principles come what may , or are we interested in people as well ?
Come to the North Sea spa of Cuxhaven , where I come from , which attracts a lot of visitors , not least because of duty-free .
Speak to those who will lose their jobs , according to the shipping lines .
We do not have any other jobs .
We are fighting for our fishing industry and have just one small shipyard left .
The hinterland is rural , arable farmland and pasture , without many SMEs .
All in all it is a rural area experiencing difficulties , soon to be without 5b status or the new Objective II status , Mr Monti .
Agenda 2000 does not provide any security .
The unemployment rate where I live on the North Sea coast is 11 % and rising .
The position is the same in other areas along Europe 's 80 000 km coastline .
You can see that the problem is not local .
We are in it up to our necks , though we are working on solutions for the future .
Our long-term goals are lively networks of small and medium-sized harbours , coastal management , protection of salt marshes , the sustained establishment of maritime information and technology systems and attractive tourist resorts .
These could be implemented successfully by the coastal states , if Europe helps them .
We are counting on this .
Our future depends on it .
We are currently expanding our harbour in Cuxhaven , with EU assistance , but you , the opponents of duty-free sales , are blocking the entrance .
A harbour without ships is like a sea without fish .
The symbiotic relationship between the coast and inland areas , between economically weak and economically strong areas , has been successful with duty-free , though seldom sufficiently so .
The volume of business has increased rapidly since 1991 and with it the number of jobs .
Not even a modern economic programme such as the trans-European network has yet provided such economic and social cooperation .
I know it will take a miracle to overturn the Council decision , but I do not belong to the Council .
I represent the people .
What am I supposed to tell the families who are hit by job losses ?
I do not think that anyone in Europe can be insensitive enough to wilfully destroy these achievements .
The cost of unemployment benefit and restructuring projects will far exceed the tax revenues lost on duty-free sales , and no fiscal harmonization is in sight anyway .
I therefore demand further examinations of the regional effects .
Perhaps there is also a legal interpretation which permits an exemption , as there was for sea travel to Heligoland , the jewel of the North Sea .
The Transport Council has decided this in the meantime .
I would like to ask you , Mr Monti , and those Members who oppose duty-free sales , to follow this route .
Mr President , if the Commissioner says it is possible to get support instead of the traffic which might stop , I would say this to him .
Firstly , ferry traffic is not eligible for trans-European network support , unless both ports are part of it .
Secondly , structural support is not operational support .
I say this in reply to your statements that we should look at the support side .
Thirdly , you have said a lot about duty-free sales being an indirect form of support .
But the indirect support which is available today in the form of flagging out rules is much greater and could have much more serious consequences , namely the flagging out which would take place in ferry traffic if duty-free were abolished .
I still wonder why the Commissioner is so against making this investigation while at the same time insisting that the Commission has information about the ferry routes which are most threatened .
I am thinking about what lies closest to my heart , namely the most northerly all year round ferry route in the Northern Straits .
Thousands of signatures were sent in support of this route , well before any lobbying started , Mrs Aelvoet .
Unfortunately , those signatures were not received by Commissioner Monti .
The aim is to safeguard jobs in the area , but there are also environmental reasons for protecting the ferry links .
One study , for example , says that using this ferry link saves millions of marks on the environment .
Mr President , let me say first of all that I recognize the logic of the eventual abolition of duty-free .
We must in Europe work to phase out the anomalies in the fabric of the single market and one of these anomalies is intra-Community duty-free sales .
But in Europe we need to harmonize other things as well , or at least approximate them - levels of excise duty , VAT and other taxes .
Yet the problem of intra-Community smuggling of duty-paid alcohol and tobacco is probably on a greater scale than the loss of revenue by the continual existence of intra-Community duty-free .
The question is why is the abolition now , why is it so urgent and why are we doing it in the dark ?
There have been a number of studies done by a variety of people .
Many of those on both sides of the argument are possibly flawed but they have indicated at various times a potential loss of something between 112 000 and 147 000 jobs in the EU , with 90 % of those job losses in a period of two years of the abolition of intra-Community duty-free with major impacts on employment in Spain , France and the United Kingdom .
The European Commission has claimed that duty-free is costing Member States ' exchequers ECU 2 billion in lost revenue yet there are some studies that claim that the result of the abolition of duty-free will be that Member States will be worse off because of increased transport costs and other tax losses .
There have been claims that it will cost the average person taking a charter flight in implicit costs , adding up all the costs together , an extra 14 for each time they travel from their Member State and back again .
It has been claimed that EU destinations will become less competitive than nearby non-EU destinations , that Turkey will benefit at the expense of Greece , that there will be a loss from the United Kingdom of 635 000 visits a year within the EU , partly offset by a rise of 124 000 extra visits to non-EU destinations .
So that is the problem we face .
Now despite what the finance ministers claim to have said , the reality is that on 17 March this year - less than three weeks ago - at the initiative of the Irish delegation on the Transport Council and with the support of eight other Member States , namely Sweden , Belgium , France , Germany , Finland , Portugal , Spain and the United Kingdom , there was a demand for a study of the possible employment and financial effects of the abolition of duty-free in June 1999 .
Commissioner Monti says that two wrongs do not make a right ; because the promised study was not done at the proper time it is now too late to do it at all .
It is Catch 22 .
He said Community funding might be available to help alleviate the impact , but the impact is going to be short and sharp immediately after the abolition .
Yet he refuses to allow for regional employment impacts to be assessed in advance .
Tomorrow Parliament will vote for the resolution demanding such a study .
The Council of Ministers is already in favour of such a study by nine votes to six at worst .
Why is it now that the Commission alone sets its face against such a study that it initially promised ?
If the case is so powerful for that abolition , Commissioner Monti , why do you not demonstrate it by actually having the study ?
Mr President , Mr Commissioner , I have to say that you have sorely disappointed me .
For years now , like many of my colleagues , I have been battling to explain to the various different lobbies that duty-free shopping must be abolished in an internal market .
Well I must say , the arrogant way in which the Commission has responded to our legitimate questioning makes us literally feel as though we have been stabbed in the back .
I feel it is important for you to know that .
The line of argument you used in answer to Mr Cornelissen 's question was , if I may say so , quite unworthy .
You told us two things : firstly , that we would not be doing this study because it had been set for an immediate decision .
The decision had been put back , therefore the study was not to be done , as if it had become superfluous , as if the analysis of the consequences of a decision become superfluous as soon as the date of application of the decision changes .
That is the sort of reasoning that says a blind person can drive a car as long as they do so slowly .
That is simply not the case .
The second argument you deployed was the lateness argument .
Many years have elapsed between Mrs Scrivener 's promise and your being here today without having honoured that promise .
Whose fault is that ?
Under such circumstances , you are not in a position to accuse us of being late in taking part in the debate , when for years you yourself failed to respond . It was also mentioned earlier that you were asked questions during Parliament 's Question Time .
There is a Latin proverb , a Roman law adage I am sure you know , which goes : ' Nemo auditur propriam turpitidinem allegans ' - none shall invoke their own turpitude .
In any case , Mr Commissioner , you do not have the right to refuse Parliament or the citizens of Europe an analysis of the consequences of the decisions you take , simply because a decision has already been taken .
Mr President , I too am amazed that Commissioner Monti , having had time to reflect on the discussions we had earlier this week at Question Time and having heard the strong feelings that the majority of the House - we , the messengers of the people - have on this issue , is not prepared to relent , even at this very late stage , and give us a more positive response .
By just saying ' no ' he is just burying his head in the sand .
The success of the Irish minister at the Transport Council has been documented here .
There are now nine Council members around the transport table who are prepared to ask for a study .
There is no reason to assume that the same majority , or more , would not obtain , if the Commissioner had a study and allowed the Ecofin ministers to look at the issue again in a clear and factual way . Politicians do not see any shame in this .
The many thousands of workers who marched in the streets of Brussels recently - airport workers , industrial workers , generally from the duty-free industry - should not have to beg for their jobs .
They are entitled to look to our institutions to protect their jobs .
For every measure we take here , we are supposed to have an employment audit .
So how does the Commissioner reconcile that with just getting rid of all these jobs in one fell swoop ?
The accusation the Commissioner made here that it is for people in favour of abolition and that we who are against it want to support the hidden subsidies to the alcohol , tobacco and travel industries is not true .
It is very simplistic .
What is happening here is that we have looked at all sides of it and we have come down , on balance , in favour of employment .
I appeal to the Commissioner to give us a more favourable response this evening , because the vote tomorrow will go in favour of the study , and it is time for the Commission to face up to that .
I would like , first of all , to thank each of you for your remarks .
The Commission is not making any particular proposal .
Some of the remarks assume the Commission was making proposals .
This was a decision taken unanimously by the Ecofin Council in 1991 .
The Commission is not pushing for anything .
As was made clear , the reference made by my predecessor , Mrs Scrivener , to the study was to the effect of identifying whether or not the decision to abolish duty-free should take effect on 1 January 1993 like all the other measures concerning the single market .
You know what the outcome has been : no study , but a seven-and-a-half year postponement .
As to the pretended request of the Transport Council for a study , the outcome of the Transport Council of 17 March was that the presidency of the Council noted the strong support by a majority of delegations for the Irish intervention and decided to report to the Ecofin Council concerning further measures to be decided by the ministers of finance , if appropriate .
The Ecofin Council has repeatedly stressed its unwillingness to ask the Commission to do this study .
There were questions concerning the important issue of whether there are clear rules that are going to be applied after June 1999 or not .
Yes , I can be very positive and reassuring in that respect .
Rules exist in terms of VAT and excise legislation that apply now and will also apply after June 1999 .
I refer to Article 23 ( 1 ) of Directive 92 / 12 and Article 8 and following of the Sixth VAT Directive .
As to the specific question Mr Miller raised , the mere passage through international waters does not modify the internal market rules .
They will be modified only if the vessel were to touch land on third-country territory .
As you can imagine , I am as sensitive as you are to the issue of employment .
There are serious ways of approaching employment issues .
Some of them have to do with taxation .
As Parliament will be aware , the Commission is - and I am personally - working very hard with the support of Parliament and , in particular , the competent Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and Industrial Policy , to arrive at some form of tax coordination that is the serious response of tax instruments to the employment challenge .
The Commission is prepared , as you know and as Parliament supports , to consider reduced VAT rates on labourintensive services .
Even much more important , we are engaged in strenuous efforts to fight harmful tax competition .
You know , as I do , that the taxation of capital on this continent has gone down by 10 % in the last 15 years .
Taxation on labour has gone up 7 % .
What is the reason for that ?
A lack of tax coordination .
In December 1997 , for the first time , we persuaded the 15 finance ministers to agree on a package of measures against harmful tax competition .
That is the first step towards eliminating tax havens in Europe so that taxation on labour can be slightly reduced .
How can I go to the finance ministers and press them for the continuation of this serious fiscal policy for employment that Parliament supports if , at the same time , I were to go and ask them to please consider leaving in existence localized tax havens such as duty-free ?
( The speaker was interrupted by Mr Cox ) No-one can escape logic .
Believe me , I am deeply committed to making taxation policy in Europe favourable to employment .
( The President interrupted the speaker )
Ladies and gentlemen , I would ask you please not to interrupt the Commissioner .
I am grateful to those of you - and there have been some - who have noted the constructive approach that I brought here this evening .
A study may have two components .
One is to identify what specific difficulties a particular regional airport or ferry line might have .
No one is better placed than the Member State concerned to identify that .
There is one way in which the Commission can be helpful and that is to identify the appropriate instruments of regional policy , of transport policy that might , in the event that there are serious problems , be helpful .
I have committed the Commission to do that , not the phantom study which by now in the public perception could be associated with a reconsideration of the deadline for duty-free .
Finally , it is not for me to judge whether the Commission is an appropriate political body or whether it gave you bureaucratic answers this evening .
However , I can assure you that the Commission , in its political responsibility , is not prepared to deceive European citizens by doing something that would , in effect , conflict with a serious employment policy based on tax coordination .
The Commission is not prepared to do anything that would help retain a hidden subsidy , in the sense that it is not transparent , that it is regressive because it is paid by the general taxpayer who is normally less well off than travellers with access to duty-free , that goes to a large extent to subsidize the consumption of alcohol and tobacco .
Mr President , in his reply to the debate the Commissioner referred to the pretended wish of the Transport Council for a study .
I should like to read to you a letter from Gavin Strang , chairman of the EU Transport Council , to Gordon Brown , chairman of Ecofin .
It says : ' Dear Gordon , you will be aware that at the 17 March 1998 Transport Council the Irish Minister raised the issue of abolition of intra-EC duty-free under ' any other business ' and called for a study to be undertaken into the possible employment and financial effects of the abolition of duty-free in 1999 .
Eight Member States supported the Irish Minister 's request , including Sweden , Belgium , France , Germany , Finland , Portugal , Spain and the United Kingdom .
In my summary of the discussion I agreed that I would forward these views to you as chairman of Ecofin .
Ecofin will no doubt wish to take into account the support given by Transport Ministers to the Irish request that the Commission should undertake a study into the possible employment and financial effects of abolition of intra-EC duty-free sales . '
It seems to me that is not a ' pretend ' decision of the Transport Council , it is a decision .
Commissioner Monti may not like it , but it exists .
Thank you , Mr Ford . We shall not be re-opening the debate .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 9.00 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 8.05 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes
The Minutes of Thursday 2 April have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , this concerns item 4 of yesterday 's Minutes and Article 24 of the Rules of Procedure , on the duties of the Conference of Presidents .
Paragraph 5 says : " The Conference of Presidents shall draw up the draft agenda of Parliament 's part-sessions ' . In other words , the Conference of Presidents decides which reports will be on the agenda , and when .
It does not say that the group chairmen decide whether a report is acceptable to them or not .
This means that the Conference of Presidents should not judge the reports appearing on the agenda on their contents .
This was the case with my report on the partsession which was discussed this week , and it was especially the case with your own report on the voting system .
I really wonder , therefore , whether the Conference of Presidents is in fact blatantly and grossly violating the Rules of Procedure .
Mr Wijsenbeek , you have been chairman of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities for some time now , and you are one of the many people in this Chamber who have a great deal of parliamentary experience .
You know , as indeed we all do - I do not claim any privilege to this knowledge - that , in the final analysis , the Conference of Presidents is elected by Parliament . When changes are to be made to the agenda , the final word is always left to Parliament , which also votes .
Therefore , you need never worry that there is an elected organ of the House which was not elected by the House .
Mr President , this is the text relating to the Randzio-Plath report .
Yesterday , it was agreed during the vote that the words ' responsabilité démocratique ' would be used instead of ' contrôle démocratique ' .
That change has been made in one of the titles , but not throughout the whole text .
For example , paragraph 8 still says " contrôle démocratique ' .
The words " contrôle démocratique ' must now be replaced throughout the text with " responsabilité démocratique ' .
That is what was agreed yesterday .
I have made a note of it , Mr Herman , and we shall look at all the texts to make sure that it is done .
Going over the attendance register , I noticed that my name is not on it .
Perhaps I forgot to sign it , but I did take part in all the votes yesterday .
Mr Martens , you may have forgotten to sign , but there are a lot of us here and we can vouch for your continued presence in this Chamber which , I think , holds you in great respect .
Mr President , you just responded to Mr Wijsenbeek and stated that he was chairman of the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities .
May I inform you that my colleague Mr Fayot is chairman of the Rules Committee .
Mr Corbett , you must remember that Mr Wijsenbeek presided over the Committee on the Rules of Procedure , the Verification of Credentials and Immunities for a long time , and he knows the Rules of Procedure perfectly .
Mr President , I would just like to point something out .
My name does not appear on Monday 's record of attendance , although I was present and voted by the electronic voting system , which must be easy to check .
I should be grateful if you would arrange to have it checked .
Thank you very much .
I have made a note of it .
Mr President , there is an omission in the Minutes .
On page 19 you will see that Mr Lataillade spoke .
It does not record his deep concern and compassion for the plight of Mrs Randzio-Plath !
We shall be sure to extend similar compassion to him in the future ...
Mr Falconer , you were here yesterday .
Several of us were here yesterday .
Mr President , I raised the following matter on the Friday of the last part-session .
I refer to the discrimination in terms of television coverage of the Friday morning session .
We are here to do a job and it should be recorded both for the archives and for television just like any other session .
What progress has the President made with this request ?
Mr Hallam , I totally agree .
I would say there is another reason for Friday morning , and we will look into it .
But I would add that , on the whole , television coverage is not an issue which is regulated by the Presidency . I wish it were regulated by the Presidency and by the House .
Television has its own rules and regulations , and we are not in a position to have any influence over it . I am afraid we are often under its influence , and not always to the good .
We will look into it , however .
Mr President , I was astonished to see that my name is not on the record of attendance .
I really thought that I had both attended regularly and signed the register .
But I may be wrong .
In any case , I think a number of speeches and rollcall votes prove that I was here .
Yes , I believe you made a speech during the sitting .
So it really is a bit much .
Votes
Mr President , at the end of this vote in the presence of representatives of the Council I would like to mention something which is very important before the final vote .
We have had a text conveyed to us by the Council .
Mr Buffetaut has worked on this text , we have given our views on it , and we have voted on the committee version today in the final vote .
During this process , and even before we were able to vote today , the Council has again changed the text which was conveyed to us , which we have worked on .
In other words , it did this before listening to the outcome from Parliament .
I consider that a flagrant contempt of Parliament , and ask that this should be communicated to the Council .
Mr Schulz , I have made a note of your comments , and the Presidency will not fail to take the necessary steps .
( During successive votes , Parliament adopted both legislative resolutions )
Mr President , I would like to make two comments .
Firstly , the committee deleted Amendment No 4 concerning Article 4 , paragraph 1 ( b ) of the Council proposal .
In the meantime , however , we have satisfied ourselves that this Article merely serves to establish that no-one may be punished twice for the same matter .
In other words , it is a question of the legal principle ne bis in idem , and we therefore ask you to vote against this deletion so that the original text is restored .
That is the first point .
The second point I would like to bring to your attention is the fact that the rapporteur 's language , the original language , is French , and Amendment No 7 , as it is written , is the official version .
It says that when the person concerned has not had an adequate opportunity to defend himself , " inter alia ' because of language problems , the term " inter alia ' which is in the French text , means that it is not exclusive , and other possibilities can be envisaged .
I know that it is not stated in some other versions , but it is more in the citizen 's interest .
But it is the French version , which is the official version , and I would be grateful if you would arrange for it to be corrected .
I would ask the House to consider the rapporteur 's comments , Mrs Reding .
Mr President , I strongly urge that Mrs Reding 's oral amendment should be accepted .
We must point out that we made a mistake in committee , which for once might mean us spoiling a good idea from the Council .
That is why it is imperative that Mrs Reding 's oral amendment should be supported .
Mr Schulz , Mrs Reding did not make an oral amendment ; she made oral observations which , I trust , the House will take into account .
Please do not cause confusion , as we will have problems if you do .
I am particularly glad that Mrs Reding has noticed this matter , which is important to countries where there is already extensive cooperation between the authorities , for example .
That is why our group decided to vote as you proposed .
Mrs Thors , we will not debate this here .
The rapporteur always has the right to make a comment , indeed many comments . However , we shall not repeat the debate which took place in committee .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr President , I would like to point out that Mrs Thors has introduced a good amendment , by which progress in implementing the rights of the child should be included .
However , we do not want to place more emphasis on this than on other legal concerns , such as human rights and minority rights . We therefore ask that the text up to ' of the Convention on the Rights of the Child ' should be dropped .
We want to insert that between human rights and minority rights without any additional formulations .
( Parliament approved the proposal )
Mr President , I had not intended to slow down our Friday voting , but a short while ago a Dutch colleague drew my attention to the fact that a mistake has crept into the Dutch version of my report , at paragraph 16 .
The words ' vis-à-vis third countries ' are missing at that point .
I would ask you to check this in all language versions on the basis of the original German text .
Mr Posselt , I have made a note of your comments , of course , and the Presidency will make sure that the language of this report is looked at .
The Danish Social Democrats in the European Parliament have voted today for improved legal cooperation in criminal cases .
This is a necessary element in the fight against organized crime .
We support better , more effective , practical cooperation between Member States .
Serious effort should ensure speedier processing , and enable practical difficulties to be resolved more effectively .
This could be brought about through direct contact between the authorities concerned in mutual legal assistance , for example .
However , we remain adamant that as far as possible , national traditions and styles of practice should be respected , and law and order should at be paramount at all times .
Reding report ( A4-0121 / 98 )
It is good that the question of revoking driving licences is being dealt with in a convention and not through harmonizing legislation .
However , it is very doubtful whether the home Member State will be responsible for implementing a decision to revoke a driving licence issued in another country under that country 's legislation without examining the matter itself under its own laws .
Posselt report ( A4-0107 / 98 )
Over the next ten years , the European Union is going to be faced with one of the greatest challenges in its history , when it welcomes the almost simultaneous accession of ten new countries , at a time when the candidate countries are experiencing a difficult transition period .
In fact , they have to deal with the disorder which has followed in the wake of the collapse of the communist systems - social unrest , disorganization of controls , corruption , organized crime , migration of populations - and they must build democratic states governed by the rule of law .
It will be particularly difficult for both sides to maintain a balance between this transition period and accession to the European Union .
To simplify the task , the Europe of the Nations Group some time ago proposed the creation of a Europe of " variable geometry ' , on the basis of several cooperation associations , which would enable candidate countries to join the European Union by moving progressively from one association to another , as appropriate .
We pointed out at the time that the first cooperation association to be set up , the most urgent cooperation association , should relate to internal security .
We are therefore delighted that , at their meeting of 30 January , the EU justice and home affairs ministers invited their counterparts from the candidate countries to sign " pre-membership ' pacts on combating organized crime .
We saw in this a reflection of our position , or at least a certain fellow feeling .
However , if the Amsterdam Treaty comes into force , it will not simplify matters because it does not encourage flexibility .
For example , in order to prevent international crime , it would be preferable for the candidate countries of eastern Europe to be able to join Europol now .
But will the incorporation of Europol into EU procedures not complicate the problem ?
Similarly , it is difficult to understand the aim of the European Parliament 's proposal to create a specialized European service drawing on the experience of competent national services with regard to external border control .
If this proposal means that a system of financial aid needs to be set up , at the European level , to support Member States which are experiencing serious difficulties with regard to the control of their external borders , we are in agreement .
We had , in fact , already suggested it .
But we believe it is essential for each country to remain directly responsible for its borders . Otherwise , an integrated system would not motivate anyone , and in fact , it could have the opposite effect .
I have voted against this report , as I cannot support the arrogant attitude which the EU is taking towards the applicant countries of central and eastern Europe .
The EU cannot demand , amongst other things , that the applicant countries modify their visa policies with third party countries to bring them into line with the EU 's before they even join the EU , and before the EU 's provisions in this area under the Amsterdam Treaty are accepted .
Not all the EU Member States have ratified the Amsterdam Treaty as yet , so I fail to see how reference can be made to this .
When it comes to police work , I do not think Europol should develop and charge the applicant countries at all .
Interpol already exists and is working in the areas which the EU wants to hand over to Europol .
Instead of Europol , I think we should continue to rely on Interpol in the fight against international crime .
As for the situation in the applicant countries , in important areas , I believe the EU will have to accept a number of transitional rules if the countries join .
What I would really like to see is the EU handing over many of its powers in favour of the national parliaments , which would make enlargement easier .
The way things look now , the EU seems to want to annex the countries of central and eastern Europe , as they would have to accept all the EU 's laws without having any influence over their substance .
I cannot accept this .
The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of Mr Posselt 's report .
We have done so in the belief that we must ensure that prospective Member States in central and eastern Europe develop sound , democratic communities based on the rule of law .
The report sets the scene for closer cooperation between existing Member States in the field of justice and home affairs .
Denmark has one reservation in this field , but we do not wish to preclude other nations from entering into closer cooperation .
We do , however , retain the right to remain outside .
Our most important consideration is to ensure that the candidate countries of central and eastern Europe should be given financial and political backup in their efforts to develop democratic authorities .
This also applies to supporting projects for the training of administrative officials and police .
To ensure that democratic measures are upheld , the people who will be administering the new laws must be trained for this purpose .
The Danish Social Democrats oppose the view that the institutional changes should be in place prior to enlargement .
Our stance is that Parliament must not put obstacles in the way of enlargement .
Applicant countries should be assured of their inclusion in the European Union once they have fulfilled the objectives set out in the individual partnership agreements .
The enlargement process must not be delayed by a stipulation on the part of the European Parliament that the distribution of mandates and weighting of votes should be in place before the first countries can be accepted .
As the communist regime destroyed every rule of civil life during its rule , the accession to the European Union of ex-communist countries presupposes a type of revival by the applicants , to make their internal structures compatible with the rules and spirit of the European Union .
This also applies to relations with the police , legal matters , the mobility of goods , services and citizens , civil rights and the protection of minors .
When this tedious adaptation process has reached maturity , it will certainly be time for these states to join the European Union .
Joint resolution ( B4-0424 / 98 , B4-0426 / 98 , B4-0427 / 98 , B4-0428 / 98 and B4-0429 / 98 )
Mr President , I can happily live with this resolution which calls for a study , if only because a study might actually show that some of the wilder allegations of job losses are perhaps greatly exaggerated .
In any case , there is no harm in finding this out .
I admire Commissioner Monti and the way he has resisted the pressure from the alcohol and tobacco industries to try and have this decision reversed .
I hope that the economic and finance ministers will be similarly resolute .
From the point of view of a finance minister , there is surely no sense in reintroducing a tax break for the alcohol and tobacco industries : a tax break which curiously is available only to people travelling internationally , usually a group of people who are , on average , better off than the ordinary citizen .
I hope therefore that this resolution , even if it calls for a study which may provide more objective facts than some of the studies that have come from partisan organizations with an interest in this matter , will nonetheless help confirm the decision taken long ago by the European Union .
I am satisfied that the positions you have adopted are not just yours but that they are supported by other Members .
Of course , there are quite a few Members who hold the opposite view .
Global Satellite Navigation System
The next item is the report ( A4-0109 / 98 ) by Mrs Langenhagen , on behalf of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Council Decision on the agreement between the European Community , the European Space Agency and the European Organization for the Safety of Air Navigation on a European contribution to the development of a global navigation satellite system ( COM ( 97 ) 0442 - C4-0043 / 98-97 / 0231 ( CNS ) )
Mr President , in the last few years , satellite-assisted positioning and navigation systems have become increasingly widespread .
The purpose of this technology is the permanent , environmentally compatible , secure and guaranteed mobility of individuals and goods through better traffic and transport management .
This is not just true of air transport .
This new technology is being applied in other areas as well , such as local public transport , the railways , and the transport of goods - but also in cars , farming and the fishing industry .
You do not have to be a prophet to foresee that this technology will progress further .
It will undoubtedly be used more widely in the area of leisure , for example .
Sailing and walking enthusiasts may perhaps only pursue their hobbies in the future with this high technology .
There are already two systems which operate on a world-wide basis : the American " global positioning system ' , known as GPS ; and the Russian global satellite navigation system called GLONAS .
However , neither of them meets all the requirements of civilian users .
Both systems are nationally controlled , were conceived for military purposes , and have been artificially weakened in some respects for civilian applications .
The accuracy is inadequate , there is an unacceptably high probability of technical errors , and warning times for system failures are too long . Furthermore , there is no guarantee that the system will be permanently available , and no-one is responsible for the functioning of the system .
All these reasons compel us as Europeans to launch an initiative of our own . This is the background against which the Commission 's proposal should be seen .
As long ago as 1994 , the Commission and the Council took the initiative in this area with the support of the European Parliament .
The agreement on which we have to decide today is a consistent continuation of previous developments .
Its purpose is to govern cooperation between the European Union , ESA - the European Space Agency - and EUROCONTROL - the European Organization for the Safety of Air Navigation .
These three European institutions are to work towards a European contribution to the development of a global satellite navigation system .
In particular , the plans and projects of the participants are to be coordinated and combined .
As a first step , the existing Russian and American systems are to be supplemented , to correct the technical defects and inaccuracies I have just described .
Technical problems can be solved in this way , but the fundamental institutional problem - namely the lack of civilian control and a guarantee for the system - will remain .
That is why a second step is required , with the objective of developing our own independent civilian system with a guaranteed optimal performance at all times and in all places .
We are working away steadily at this .
In a global situation in which the market for satellite navigation could be dominated by the United States , this agreement will undoubtedly help to ensure that European interests are protected , and that it is easier in practice to realize the full potential of satellite navigation technology .
The importance of state-of-the-art technology for Europe as a location for industry is underlined time and again .
With this agreement we can recover lost ground and lay down our own European standards for satellite technology in the future .
Of course , the budgetary aspect still has to be considered .
That is why I referred in my report to an action plan for the financing of such a project .
In all honesty , I must admit that future civilian users still regard the project with scepticism .
It is quite clear , however , that without the participation of European industry and other partners it will be impossible to finance such a project .
So in order to ensure the involvement of a large number of collaborators in the development of a global satellite navigation system , a coherent strategy with a financial perspective should be formulated as soon as possible .
The European Union is today called upon to enter into international cooperation , the major advantage of which is a reduction in costs and investment .
In this connection , potential partners are - and will continue to be - the USA and Russia , whom I have already mentioned , together with Japan .
Therefore the agreement with which we are dealing today has a symbolic character as well , since it underlines the resolution and the will of Europeans to make their own contribution in this area , and that is why I ask you to approve it .
Mr President , let me first thank Mrs Langenhagen for the excellent report she has presented .
New technology is developing rapidly in aviation .
Used correctly , it will make flying safer and also create an opportunity to deal with some of the constantly recurring delays we have to live with at present .
What we have to decide now is whether we want Europe to be part of this developing technology , or if we want to remain on the sidelines .
We are facing a highly strategic choice which could have major consequences for the future development of navigation systems .
The question is , should we develop our own navigation system or should we simply modify those already in existence ?
There are a lot of indications that it would be cheaper to be involved in developing the existing system .
At the same time , it means putting a lot into research and development to try to develop our own system and the comfort of not always being dependent on someone else .
I think there are reasons for being positive about further development , and hence for entering into this agreement between the European Community , the European Space Agency and the European Organization for the Safety of Air Navigation .
This represents an opportunity to be in there and influence future developments , which I think is a good thing .
But there is also good reason to warn that we risk digging ourselves into an incredibly costly project which may not give the results we are justifiably hoping for .
There are also reasons to be alert .
So I believe the plan of action which Mrs Langenhagen has included in her report is extraordinarily important .
Against this background , I would like to mention a letter from the Association of European Airlines .
This letter , dated 6 March , states amongst other things that ' improvements , if any , could be achieved in a much cheaper way ' .
I would welcome the Commissioner 's comments on whether it is possible to achieve comparable improvements more cheaply than by the route we have to decide on today .
If that question cannot be answered today , I would be grateful if the Commissioner responsible were able to comment in writing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the GNSS Global Navigation Satellite System is an example of the dual value of technologies for military and civil use .
Satellite positioning , which arose in a military environment during the Cold War for the surveillance of ballistic missiles , today offers the possibility , in civilian times , of establishing the position of ships , not by means of the stars , lighthouses or radar , but by satellite .
In fact , the satellite sector is far from being a minor aspect , in terms of value , of the potential services that can be provided on the ground . The satellite signal can be used to help with navigation , assistance , safety , choosing a route by land or sea , and fleet management ; even taxis are beginning to use satellite signals on board .
Today 's document is not a strategic document , but it creates a useful premise for a European strategy on satellite navigation which we will be discussing in the near future .
The document sets out the rules relating to the cooperation agreement between the European Commission , ESA and EUROCONTROL , and so it seems a fairly positive first step to take .
We are voting on the recognition that the Commission , as a European institution , should provide the political impetus , ESA should play the role of technological architect , and EUROCONTROL should be the first of a number of service providers for those using the air service .
I think two things still have to be recommended in this organizational architecture , and they are taken up by the rapporteur , Mrs Langenhagen .
Firstly , the three-party agreement should remain open to other partners to ensure that satellite positioning services can be extended quickly to all sea and land services . Secondly , a European authority or agency should be set up - you choose the name - to be responsible for certifying the service and approving the equipment .
With these two comments , which the rapporteur has taken into account , I approve the report and await further debate , which should take place shortly , on the Commission 's document on satellite navigation .
Mr Malerba , I think you are more qualified than most people to speak to us about these issues , from the heights from which you have seen these events .
Mr President , satellite navigation is a strategic sector which represents , together with the information superhighway , one of the technological battles of the future .
Europe has a duty , and the potential , to take part in it .
But Europe must express a political determination to do so , and must make a clear choice of strategy .
That is the point of Brigitte Langenhagen 's report , which proposes an agreement between the European Commission , the European Space Agency and EUROCONTROL for the development of a global navigation satellite system .
We have a clear choice today between an autonomous , independent European system , at an estimated cost ranging from ECU 400 million to ECU 4 billion , or cooperation based on the existing American GPS and Russian GLONAS systems .
The Group of the European Radical Alliance is in favour of the rapporteur 's proposal for several reasons .
The main reasons are as follows .
Why should we entrust our interests to others , in a critical sector , if we have the ability to safeguard them ourselves ? Why should we be dependent upon the Americans , yet again , in this technological and scientific area , when we have the means within Europe of ensuring our own independence ?
There is no doubt that the high cost of a European system means that partnership between public and private industry in Europe will be necessary .
But if we wish to remain independent , in such an important , essential and potentially profitable sector for Europe , with the prospects it offers , we must not waste any time . We must adopt a real strategic decision quickly , as the rapporteur recommends .
In this respect , I agree with Commissioner Kinnock , who is afraid that if we do not reach a decision soon , we will remain in the slow lane as far as progress is concerned .
In other words , we will be excluded from this technological and scientific undertaking .
That is why we have no time to lose .
Mr President , the agreement between the European Community , the European Space Agency and EUROCONTROL aims to make a European contribution towards the development of a global navigation satellite system , or GNSS . These parties set certain objectives .
The first is the introduction of a so-called European Geostationary Navigation Overlay Service , abbreviated to EGNOS .
The current GNSS system will be given additional capabilities for geographical positioning with satellites , integrity and wide-area information for its users .
The second objective is to set up a complete operational version of GNSS-1 , and the third is the preparation of a new European navigation satellite system , GNSS-2 .
As far as EGNOS is concerned , the European airlines have announced that they have no need whatsoever for such a product .
They believe that if improvements are needed , these might be achieved at much less cost .
I therefore wish to put the following question to the European Commission : which users will benefit from EGNOS , and will these users be prepared to contribute to its operational costs ?
If there is indeed little interest in EGNOS , would it not be better to concentrate our efforts on developing GNSS-2 further ?
There appears to be no controversy surrounding the benefits of these new generation navigation satellite systems .
Lastly , the opinion of the Committee on Budgets merits attention .
It notes that the financial contribution from the Community has not yet been set , yet large amounts of money have already been spent .
That is why the Committee on Budgets requested that the Langenhagen report should not be adopted until the financial situation had been thoroughly investigated .
Nonetheless , the report was discussed and approved in the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
I would be grateful if the rapporteur could tell us why she dismissed the clearly stated opinion of the Committee on Budgets .
Mr President , I am a pilot myself and have experienced the change-over .
The advantages which the satellite navigation systems provide are sensational .
They represent a significant increase in safety , and the computer capacity and the software which lie behind these systems are also a great advantage for a pilot , because they allow your work in the cockpit to be of a significantly higher quality .
I am also pleased that the Commission has informed us that the funding will come from existing resources - from budget line B5-700 , among other things .
I believe this decision will have very important implications for competition in Europe , and that competition in this market is urgently needed on a worldwide basis as well .
We know that economic development in particular is very heavily dependent on three factors , namely education and training , research and infrastructure .
All three areas are addressed in the best possible way with this system , and I would like to congratulate Mrs Langenhagen on this report .
Mr Rübig , I see that the House has the good fortune to have at its disposal a lot of experience , which indeed makes its own contribution to the examination of these issues . We note this with great interest .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on the Commission 's behalf , I gather that Parliament supports this agreement which permits a European contribution to be made towards developing a global navigation satellite system .
This agreement will be the first formal basis for an agreement to be concluded between the Commission , the European Space Agency and the European Organization for the Safety of Air Navigation , EUROCONTROL , for the joint development of a global infrastructure for satellite navigation .
A European contribution here is essential for a number of reasons .
Firstly , global navigation satellite systems will contribute to a viable development of constantly increasing air and sea transport .
Secondly , such a system will allow major improvements to be made , in terms of safety .
Finally , the proposal will mean opening up new potential markets for the European industry , which is excluded from these markets at present because of the USA 's dominant position .
Satellite navigation is a promising , dynamic area , but progress in this sector calls for a wide , deep partnership .
Hopefully , this agreement will create an effective partnership structure designed to make the best use of the resources of each of the parties involved .
The Commission is preparing another step through the communication which we adopted in January .
This deals with the general strategy for Europe 's contribution to the global navigation system .
To Mr Stenmarck , I would simply say that I will pass his question on to the Commissioner responsible , and he will then receive either an oral or a written answer . I am not the person to examine the cost aspects on this point .
The Commission is looking forward to a wide-ranging debate with Parliament on strategy in connection with future discussion of this communication . It is essential that we decide how Europe is to be involved in all this work .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
The global navigation system seeks to organize cooperation between the EU and the European Space Agency and the European Organization for the Safety of Air Navigation .
It is our determination to ensure that we achieve above all else total safety .
The existing system permits geographical positioning and navigation control in all modes of transport .
We are now faced with either developing this new mode of transport control or continuing to stand by all the systems of the past .
There are no easy solutions to resolve the problem we face , but we must accept the most efficient and secure proposal , to ensure traffic congestion is eased for all .
Construction of the Chernobyl shelter
The next item is the report ( A4-0076 / 98 ) by Mr Adam , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a Council Decision ( Euratom / EC ) concerning a Community Contribution to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development ( EBRD ) for the Chernobyl Shelter Fund ( COM ( 97 ) 0448 - C4-0499 / 97-97 / 0235 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , the shelter or sarcophagus which was constructed over the No 4 reactor at Chernobyl following the disastrous accident in April 1986 was assembled in a remarkably short period of time .
It achieved its primary purpose of providing protection for the immediate population and enabled the remaining reactors to continue in operation .
However , it was recognized that the construction was not adequate in the long term .
In particular , none of the beams which were put in place to take the roof of the shelter has a reliable support inside the sarcophagus .
There are problems with radioactive dust in the former reactor hall , and there is an accumulation of radioactive water in the basement rooms of the reactor area .
Until now there has been no design acceptable to all the parties to stabilize this structure .
The risk of extremely high radiation doses to workers has been the main problem to be overcome .
The Memorandum of Understanding , which was signed between the G7 countries , the Commission and the Government of Ukraine in December 1995 , provided for the closure of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant by the year 2000 and recognized that the structure over reactor No 4 had to be dealt with .
However , there was no agreed plan , nor an estimate of the cost involved .
We now have the Shelter Improvement Plan , which has been agreed as a result of detailed technical discussions , and we should note that the TACIS programme has been particularly active in the development of the plan .
The purpose of the report is to set out the provision of the financial contribution from the European Union , which will not exceed the sum of US $ 100 million , for a total estimated cost of US $ 750 million .
The Shelter Improvement Plan is unusual in that it arises from a political decision of the G7 .
It will be implemented by the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development .
It is important to note that the final shape will not be known for four or five years , because some aspects of the final design are part of the plan .
The final shape and nature of the shelter ; the question of the removal of the fuel-containing material ; how to deal with the dust inside the sarcophagus ; and the treatment of the accumulation of water will only emerge during the implementation stages .
The final shape will also depend on the ability of the G7 countries to raise the estimated funding that is required , and , at the moment , we are only at the halfway stage .
This report deals with the financial and management issues linked to the construction of the shelter .
There are associated engineering works , such as plant to handle radioactive material , which are essential before work on the shelter can begin .
Therefore , it was necessary for Parliament , as part of the budgetary authority , to be satisfied that the associated works are in phase with the shelter project .
It should be noted , in connection with the implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding , that the reform of the electricity market in Ukraine is the most important single issue : whether the electricity is produced from nuclear power stations or thermal power stations .
Unless the electricity market is operating in a manner which will allow funds to be available to the operators , there cannot be the required level of maintenance and improvement which the situation requires .
The text of the Memorandum , the framework and all the legal texts relating to this are produced as an annex to my report .
They are in English only but I hope colleagues will find them a useful reference .
The plan does not exist in a vacuum : as it has been prepared considerable progress has been made by the Ukrainian Regulatory Authority , under Mr Smyshlyayev , the head of that authority , who will have the responsibility for the safety standards under which the work in the shelter will be carried out .
The nuclear industry has been reorganized under Mr Nigmatullin , and Energoatom , the company which operates the nuclear sector in Ukraine , in free market conditions , produced 47 % of the electricity last year .
A high-level working group , headed by the Deputy Prime Minister for Economic Reform , Mr Tigipko , has been created to draw up a plan for the modernization of the power sector .
These are not inconsiderable achievements in a country whose economy is still reeling from the collapse of the Soviet Union .
Paragraph 54 of my report sets out the conditions for Parliament to agree the transfer of funds from the 1998 budget reserve .
Most of these , and certainly the most important ones , have now been fulfilled .
Paragraph 55 sets out the information which should be made available to Parliament by the Commission and the EBRD during the implementation of the plan .
Paragraph 56 lists a number of activities where , in my opinion , the Commission could , and should , give further assistance to the plan .
I am satisfied that the guidelines in these paragraphs provide a basis for consideration of the budgetary decisions by Parliament in the future years of the project .
The EBRD have taken positive steps to involve Russian expertise .
After all , the reactor is of Russian design .
The Kurchatov Institute , which is known to some of us on the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy , will have a role to play .
This is a very technical and complex report but I wish to conclude with one or two more general political observations , and to point out that the nuclear industry in Ukraine is a relatively young industry , in that many of the reactors have a long-life potential .
It is absolutely clear that the national policy is to continue to have a nuclear industry , partly to reduce dependence on Russia for gas , oil and coal supplies .
But we have also got to note that the Russian connection is not something that can be ignored , because through the SYNERGY and TACIS programmes the links between the Union and the Ukraine in terms of oil , gas and electricity are gathering pace and are linked closely with the adjacent countries .
So , for these reasons , it makes sense that we should encourage nuclear standards which are acceptable throughout Europe as a whole and we should recognize that the Russians are intent on developing their own reactors .
The recently appointed Minister for Atomic Energy in Russia , Evgeni Adamov , is known to some of us and we know that he places considerable importance on improving the safe operation of nuclear power stations and attaches importance to collaboration between Russian scientists and those in the European Union .
All these facets of the energy scene in the Ukraine need to be kept in mind .
While the government is firmly committed to closure of the plant , we should remember that this is not supported by all political forces in Ukraine .
It is especially true of the people who represent the Chernobyl area where unemployment is already high .
That is why it is important that in implementing the Plan the EBRD should take every opportunity to ensure that the implementation of the project brings as much work as possible to the local people in Slavutich , the nearby town where most of the workers involved at the plant live .
It is also important to recognize that there will be no complete closure of the plant until the second reactor at Khmelnitsky and the fourth reactor at Rovno are completed .
Recently Ukraine has made arrangements for Russian funding to be available and it is imperative that the EBRD makes up its mind as to the G7 contribution to this project .
To put it bluntly , Ukraine believes that the commitment to complete those two reactors was inherent in the Memorandum of Understanding .
They see the failure to help with the loan finance for this work by the European Union as a failure to honour that agreement .
Without that loan finance , K2 and R4 will not be completed to western safety standards , but they will be completed .
The assembly of donor countries has appointed Dr Hans Blix to be its chairman .
Dr Blix is the former General-Secretary of the International Atomic Energy Agency and is well respected in that field .
He has already told me he would be willing to meet the Parliament 's committee at a suitable juncture and the EBRD officials responsible for handling the account are also willing to do the same so that we can be kept closely in touch with developments .
The production of a newsletter by the EBRD which will keep Members informed is a welcome development .
Parliament has an important role to make sure that this project goes ahead to time and to budget and I have suggested in the report that it might be expedient that two experts might be appointed to help in our assessment of the work .
That proposal is contained in paragraph 64 and I hope that the Budgets Committee will take this idea up at a later date .
Throughout all the discussions and meetings related to the preparation of this report , I have stressed that the Memorandum of Understanding should be implemented as quickly as possible .
There has been no evidence made available to me to suggest that the agreements relating to the Shelter Improvement Plan could be materially changed with advantage at this stage .
I therefore urge the House to adopt the report in the form in which it was adopted unanimously in the Budgets Committee .
Mr President , this is not actually my statement . My colleague Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz drafted the opinion of the Committee on Research , Technological Development and Energy but unfortunately she cannot be here today .

Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz ' statement was adopted unanimously by the committee .
The main thrust of the statement involves not just the financial aspect , but also a whole host of the technical aspects which are so important with regard to this subject .
The Commission 's proposal is of course primarily about funding , in accordance with the donor conference which was held in New York last year .
It concerns the Shelter Improvement Plan , which aims to build a new concrete shell to seal the nuclear reactor at Chernobyl where the disaster occurred in the spring of 1986 .
That the EU should be included in this project , and help pay for it , is obvious .
It is also pleasing that the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development , which manages the fund in question , should be supported by the EU .
However , we still have to decide how much money will be provided from the TACIS funds , as the Commission 's proposal merely refers to a maximum of ECU 100 million .
I hope the Commission can clarify what the amount involved might be .
Another thing to remember here is that it would be more appropriate and simpler in organizational terms if the Commission could harmonize its internal criteria for awarding the financial resources with the conditions which the EBRD laid down for handling the funding project .
As far as the reactor itself is concerned , the Commission aims to convert the existing shelter over the destroyed reactor to an environmentally safe system .
This aim is unrealistic .
No-one can guarantee complete safety , even if the plan might lead to an improvement in the present disastrous , highly threatening situation at Chernobyl .
The committee also believes that we must ensure that all the water on the inside of the wrecked reactor is removed as part of the work of building a new shelter , and that steps must be taken to ensure that the new shelter merely seals the wrecked No 4 reactor without affecting the future dismantling work in reactor block 3 .
Mr President , I want to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Adam , on his excellent report .
I would like to point out that he took on a very important responsibility in drafting this report .
Not least , he went to Chernobyl in person , in order to see for himself both the progress made and the condition of the sarcophagus in situ .
That represented a certain personal risk for him , of course .
We should record that fact here .
There was excellent cooperation between him as the rapporteur for this report and myself as the rapporteur for the 1998 budget .
Because once again , a decision has been taken elsewhere about where the European Union should make its financial contribution .
During the 1998 budget procedure , we were confronted with the fact that the sum of ECU 100 million was to be made available for the safety of the sarcophagus as " front loading ' , in other words immediately .
In 1997 we held a hearing on this matter in London , together with the Commission and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development , where we were informed about the details of the procedure and the project .
Both from our responsibility for the budget and as representatives of the Group of the European People 's Party , we are in favour of the sarcophagus being made safe .
But we must formulate some conditions , of course .
We also made resources available as front loading for the reconstruction of the war-damaged former Yugoslavia .
We know about these problems .
We discussed them just this week .
That is why the most important precondition is adherence to the agreement between the Ukraine , the European Union and the USA under the auspices of the G7 .
That means that the agreed obligation to provide financial resources must be simultaneously fulfilled by all the parties , and that , in the case of the ECU 100 million which we now want to make available , we initially assume that this sum will be available for the overall project until 2005 .
Because we know there is a funding shortfall of more than ECU 300 million or US $ 300 million in the case of this overall project .
We shall undoubtedly be confronted with this shortfall again at some point .
That is why we have explicitly recorded that the European Union for its part is ready to make ECU 100 million available , as contractually agreed , and to do so in the next two years , 1998 and 1999 .
We have created a special budget line in the budget procedure .
In so doing , our intention was - as we also informed the Commission - to prevent the Commission from on the one hand redesigning the TACIS programme as basically a nuclear safety programme , and on the other hand reducing the large arrears in the TACIS programme with a cheque for ECU 100 million .
We want more transparency here .
At the end of the day , this also offers the opportunity to show the public the value of nuclear safety in Europe , and what we are doing for the sake of achieving it .
That is why there is a separate budget line .
Mr Adam has mentioned the fact that it is very , very important for us to receive competent and adequate information about the proper use of the funds in situ .
In the knowledge that only coordinated action by everyone in the world will bring genuine progress in improving the nuclear safety of the sarcophagus at Chernobyl , and that the Ukraine itself and those of its people with political responsibility are the key to success in this process , the PPE will vote in favour of this report by Mr Adam , and his amendments .
The only proposal from the Green Group in the European Parliament which we shall vote for is Amendment No 17 , by Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the problem of the use of nuclear energy and the dangers of a nuclear accident resulting from this use has three dimensions as far as the European Union is concerned .
The first relates to nuclear plants within the European Union .
Naturally we speak of these only rarely , and even more rarely do we talk about nuclear waste . The second aspect relates to nuclear plants in countries which border on the Member States of the European Union , such as the Koslondooi site .
The third concerns those nuclear sites located in distant countries , such as Ukraine , and I refer more specifically to the issue addressed by Mr Adam 's excellent report - Chernobyl .
However , radioactivity knows no borders .
In the event of a nuclear accident we are all in danger .
In this sense , therefore , the European Commission and the European Parliament quite rightly decided , together with other donors , to contribute towards the construction of a shelter over the Chernobyl reactor .
However , in my opinion two problems remain unsolved .
The first concerns the financial contribution from the other donors who , at least in the past , have not shown the necessary sensitivity and consistency that have been shown by the European Commission .
In other words , Madam Commissioner , there has been a repetition of what happened in Bosnia , where it appears that the European Commission is the only donor to have so far contributed anything .
The second problem relates to the proper use of the money that has so far been given to Ukraine because of Chernobyl .
Total transparency and continuous monitoring are required with regard to the handling of that money .
Madam Commissioner , there is a suspicion that the assistance provided in the past was not put to correct use by the Government of Ukraine .
When I put two questions on this matter to the Commission , the reply from Commissioner van den Broek only served to strengthen those suspicions .
I was far from reassured that the money had been used for the purpose for which it had been given .
Of course , our ultimate aim must be to close down the Chernobyl reactor , and I would like to remind you all that there was already a shelter , even before 1986 when the accident occurred .
We are not now going to construct something which did not already exist .
Nor do I know what political forces in Ukraine Mr Adam was alluding to , which oppose the closing of the reactor .
What I do know , however , is that whatever these political forces are , they have not contributed a single ecu to the issue of the reactor in their country .
So we are to remain ignorant of these political forces and , since we are paying - and , I repeat , quite rightly so - our ultimate aim must be to close down the reactor .
In finishing , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Adam , since it was a technically difficult and politically very sensitive report .
My political group will support it , together with almost all the amendments .
Mr President , Mr Adam has produced an excellent report on the EU 's involvement in constructing a shelter which will cover , once and for all , the nuclear power plant at Chernobyl .
I thank him for the report .
It goes into the matter thoroughly and the result is a clever and justified proposal .
The report shows just how problematic the issue is .
Besides the destroyed reactor at Chernobyl there are three other old reactors all in uncertain condition .
Repairs to them are continually having to be carried out .
Progress is slow ; the work consumes 6 % of Ukraine 's gross national income .
Ukraine cannot meet the cost of achieving even a passable standard of safety , and therefore needs outside help .
Because Chernobyl presents a risk to the whole of Europe , it is right that the EU should share these costs .
That is why the report 's proposal that the EU should contribute ECU 100 million is justified .
The overall cost of the operation is going to be pretty enormous .
For that reason , the report 's suggestion that costs should be shared among different agencies is right .
It is a matter of concern that only half the funding is clearly available . The proposal in the report that the EU should fund the project as it proceeds is thus a safe and reasonable solution .
In questions of nuclear safety , the best is preferable to the merely OK .
That is true of the Ukrainian nuclear industry .
Two new and reasonably up-to-date atomic power stations are nearly ready for use in the Ukraine .
They are Khmelnitsky 2 and Rovno 4 . When they start production the power stations in worst condition could be shut down .
At the same time , the Ukrainian economy would get into better shape as it could focus on more valuable projects than fixing up old nuclear power stations .
That is why we should speed up the financing of these projects out of the European Development Fund and get things moving .
Mr Adam proposes in his report that finance should come partly from the TACIS fund and partly from a specially constructed budget .
This is an excellent idea .
It is absolutely right for the report to urge the Commission to examine TACIS funds in this respect .
On the other hand , it is true that nuclear safety has so far accounted for a full 13 % of TACIS appropriations . This is quite justifiable .
Possible nuclear accidents could be catastrophic and cause untold destruction .
TACIS has achieved good results in this area .
It has supported improved technology and safety .
Communications have got essentially better , as each power station has someone employed by the EU with direct access to information and expertise in the outside world .
Communication delays can thus be avoided , and steps can swiftly be taken to put things right in the event of something unexpected happening .
That is why I should like to express my sincerest thanks to the TACIS body for its good work .
I support Mr Adam 's report .
Mr President , this matter clearly illustrates the sort of problems any future common foreign and security policy might cause for the smaller nations .
At the meeting of the G7 countries , the leaders of the largest EU countries drew up a proposal that EU funds could be used to build a shelter over the Chernobyl plant .
The decision was the right one .
The problem is that those leaders did not have the authority to take such a decision .
In the end , the promise lacks a proper legal basis .
This has led to money for the purpose having to be taken out of the TACIS aid programme , which was not originally meant for the construction of a shelter at Chernobyl .
The EU 's Court of Auditors , according to a special report , says we cannot be certain that TACIS funding to develop the Ukrainian nuclear industry has always had the desired result .
There has been negligent monitoring of the spending .
That is why the demands of Mr Adam and the Committee on Budgets are justified .
A watchful eye has to be kept on spending .
Because the unofficial G7 resolution is not legally binding we must ensure that other parties honour their promises too .
We still lack half the money we need .
If the G7 and the EU stop paying out , where is the other half supposed to come from ?
The demand that the EU share be a mere ECU 100 million sounds unrealistic , but we have to stick to it .
From the Ukrainian point of view , they need energy there just like everyone else .
That is why the realization of the agreement made in December 1995 to close Chernobyl requires other decisions to be taken on energy production .
Consequently , we have to take a stance with regard to seeing through the construction of the reactors Khmelnitsky 2 and Rovno 4 .
If Chernobyl closes down these new plants will go into production , or else the Ukraine will have to be given a massive amount of energy aid .
I personally oppose the building of new atomic power plants .
If , however , we insist that Ukraine shuts down the Chernobyl plant and concentrates on the construction of the two new reactors , the demand seems unreasonable if we do not provide economic aid , which we nevertheless find distasteful .
As Mr Adam says , Ukraine in any case sees the agreement and the new power stations as being part and parcel of the same thing .
If new reactors are going to be built anyway , the question is how they can be made safe .
That means new funding problems , which will have to be solved by the bank .
If the Chernobyl plant is to be shut down and we give aid accordingly , we are reluctantly moving in the direction of support for nuclear power in Ukraine .
Mr President , Mr Adam has really put a great deal of work into this report , as is apparent from the explanatory notes .
However , the Green Group in the European Parliament has formulated a number of amendments , through Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz , to make a good report even better .
The Commission 's aim is to convert the existing shelter over the wrecked reactor at Chernobyl to an environmentally safe system .
As I said before , this aim is totally unrealistic .
The plans drawn up by the international group of experts may undoubtedly lead to improvements in the current disastrous and highly threatening situation at Chernobyl , but no-one can guarantee complete safety .
There is no way of establishing an environmentally safe system , as there is radiation involved .
To achieve this would require a total cleanup , both of the damaged reactor and its very high radiation levels , and of the environment itself .
This project , which we are forced to employ to improve the safety of the destroyed reactor , is desirable but would be incredibly expensive .
In order to achieve a truly environmentally safe system we would also need a complete , safe , final disposal method for all radioactively contaminated sections of the wrecked reactor , as well as the shelter .
This would also involve totally dismantling the other three reactors at Chernobyl , and safe final disposal of everything in the Chernobyl area which has been exposed to radiation as a result of the accident and the operation of the nuclear plant .
Until now , however , the technology required for this has not been available , either for dismantling the wrecked reactor or for the safe final disposal of the radioactive material .
The radioactivity is still there .
I remember when Chernobyl was destroyed in the spring of 1986 , and the Swedish Government 's nuclear inspectorate said no radiation problems would remain after six months .
Nothing could have been further from the truth .
A few weeks ago , a report appeared which showed that radiation levels have in fact increased in some areas of Sweden .
The problem is enormous and cannot just be swept away somehow .
When it comes to the funding conditions and handling the financial resources , the EU authorities have once again shown themselves to be masters of bureaucracy and unnecessary expense .
Quite why a separate item has to be set up for informing the public is also unclear .
But the exception to precise control of how the funds are used should be that funds are handled in as unbureaucratic a manner as possible , so that large parts of the funds do not get swallowed up in administration but instead go to where they are intended .
A rapid improvement of the unacceptable security risks at Chernobyl must be the absolute top priority , and the bureaucratic expenses required to achieve this aim must be kept to the absolute minimum .
The Commission points out that the Community 's contribution to the funds for sealing the reactor will ensure that the shelter plan , under the agreement between the G7 nations and the Ukraine on shutting Chernobyl down , will be carried out by the year 2000 .
Apart from the safety of the wrecked reactor being improved immediately , it is essential that the entire nuclear power plant at Chernobyl is shut down .
The EU 's contribution to the funding of a new sarcophagus should also be independent of the building of the two Ukrainian power stations which are under construction .
We should make it quite clear to the Ukraine that they must expect significant reductions in the contribution unless the promise to close Chernobyl is kept .
So , even before it is finally closed , we should insist on seeing evidence that the technical and organizational measures required for a shutdown have been taken .
Nuclear power is not safe , either within the EU Member States or outside , such as at Chernobyl .
Nuclear power does not belong to the future .
We need new technology . We must not be negative about the technological developments we can all benefit from , which the EU has so finely stated in the new Treaty of Amsterdam , on the aims of an ecologically viable society .
Nuclear power is not one of them !
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I agree that the technical quality of Mr Adam 's report is very high , and I shall vote in favour of the provisions proposed in it .
I can see that we really have no choice , and with regard to Chernobyl , we are obliged , for essential safety reasons , to provide European Union aid , more or less as a priority .
However , it is permissible to question the economic and political rationality of the situation forced upon us , and to look at what alternatives we have .
Certainly , the Government of Ukraine claims that in order to close down Chernobyl , it is necessary to build new power stations as soon as possible .
We are in a situation where the Ukraine Government could request a quite considerable amount of economic and financial aid .
It is a pity that the possibility of considering a non-nuclear solution has never really been envisaged at any time .
However , such a solution exists .
It is much less expensive and more rational in all respects . But it is dependent on increased cooperation between Ukraine and the Russian Federation , as it is mainly the Russian Federation which could , in the short term , supply the gas and oil which Ukraine needs to operate the thermal power plants it could use to replace Chernobyl .
It is a pity the European Union , which usually promotes cooperation between the various European countries , does not do so between the Ukraine and Russia , although continuing to respect Ukrainian sovereignty .
Furthermore , I note that at a diplomatic level some world powers are playing a questionable role by exacerbating the dissension between Ukraine and Russia .
I do not think this is in anyone 's interests , either geostrategically or economically . This irrational policy should be abandoned in order to promote cooperation between Ukraine and Russia , which would help to solve their energy problem , among other things .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Adam for this exceptional report .
In 1986 we saw the beginning of a terrible tragedy with the explosion of reactor 4 .
The people working on the site and living in the surrounding areas have paid a very heavy price for faulty design , very poor maintenance and a very risky working environment .
They are still paying that price today .
Many have lost their children , their health , their homes and livelihoods .
This experience has shown that the environmental damage from such a disaster knows no boundaries and respects no frontiers .
Therefore Chernobyl 's problems are our problems , too .
I wish to support the report by Mr Adam on the Chernobyl Shelter Fund and I agree with him that the Memorandum of Understanding between the G7 , the Commission and the Ukraine Government should be implemented as quickly as possible .
The principal purpose of the Shelter Improvement Plan must be to close and decommission the plant completely , as quickly as possible .
Unfortunately it is clear that nuclear energy will continue to be Ukraine 's electricity plan for the future , so high engineering and security standards must be paramount in all other nuclear sites if a repetition of the 1986 disaster is to be avoided .
Unfortunately , even if all these extensive repairs and the construction of an effective and secure shelter for reactor 4 can be completed quickly , there will be no guarantees and , in my view , no question but the whole project will still be environmentally unsafe because the technology to render the dismantled reactor safe , on the one hand , and to eliminate the radioactive waste , on the other , does not yet exist .
We need continuous research into safer plant design and a fuller answer to these very difficult problems .
Otherwise mankind will continue to live with an unacceptable risk .
Mr President , Commissioner , I believe we have an exceptionally good report before us from Mr Adam , who shows that politicians will have to keep their finger on the pulse , and will manage to do so through this procedure .
Mr Adam touches on a number of very sore spots .
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development may not have enough experience , for instance .
It remains unclear how the project will be monitored .
It states correctly that a lot of money is going to Western companies .
Extremely complex interests are at stake , and for that reason it is crucial that we keep our finger on the pulse . The procedure , as selected by the Committee on Budgets , is a very astute move .
Nonetheless I continue to have concerns , about liability , for instance .
Is Amendment No 3 enough of a guarantee that the Community assumes no liability ?
Nuclear power is difficult to insure , so I assume that if things get out of hand again , it will not be insured , and Western countries will be liable once again since such enormous interests are at stake .
That is why safety controls and monitoring are so absolutely vital .
Mr President , I would like to devote my remaining time to the political subject of Ukraine 's independence .
I have been to that country , and it says on the one hand that it does not wish to be independent from Russia .
That is a reasonable argument .
But on the other hand , I believe Ukraine is not addressing certain issues sufficiently - energy conservation , for instance .
Huge amounts of energy could be saved in that country .
No other country in the world could achieve so much with a method such as the total energy principle .
During all these negotiations , we did not quite manage to achieve this .
It is therefore my view that the European Union in particular should argue for a new energy policy for the Ukraine .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Adam for his excellent report .
The threat of a nuclear accident is a good example of a danger that lurks outside the borders of the EU but nevertheless threatens EU Member States , which would remain defenceless against it .
I think the European Parliament must make sure the agreement is put into practice as quickly as possible .
It will also diminish the chances of our nations being contaminated by radiation due to a nuclear disaster .
The closing down of the plant at Chernobyl is part of the renewal process for the whole of Ukraine 's energy sector .
As the powers that be in Ukraine are obviously not unanimous in their desire to shut down Chernobyl , we should agree with the rapporteur 's view on the Commission 's responsibility .
The Commission should make sure that , in return for the EU 's money , they get proof on a regular basis from the Ukraine Government that the Chernobyl plant is being shut down in accordance with the agreed timetable .
I also agree with Mr Adam that the Commission should provide resources only after the other parties to the agreement have used up their share .
It is reasonable for the European Union 's share of the finance to cover the period when the design for the reactor 's shelter is being put into practice .
In this way we will be better able to ensure that EU funds are not continually milked for this important project , but that it is carried out within the confines of the funding agreement .
Mr Seppänen 's remarks on what money has been spent and whether there will be enough for the future are futile .
The funding situation will most certainly be due for review after 2005 , and I think we must share in the responsibility considering the safety risk involved for our countries .
The report is excellent , and I support it .
Mr President , there are undoubtedly a lot of people who , like me , remember 26 April 1986 .
I myself was out on an island in the Swedish archipelago , at Sandhamn .
We heard on the radio that radioactivity had leaked from a Swedish nuclear power station close by in Forsmark .
I remember it well .
It was three days before the report was changed , and it turned out to be a Russian reactor thousands of kilometres from the island in the archipelago where I and my friends were staying .
Those of us in central and northern Sweden were hit particularly badly : mushrooms , wildlife , berries and animals were contaminated with radiation .
This made many people who depended on natural products in the affected areas realize that nuclear power is an unsafe and highly dangerous source of energy .
Sweden has decided to stop using nuclear power .
The decision was actually taken before 1986 .
Every effort has to be made to ensure that the proposals in this report are implemented .
The shelter , funding , information , training , environmental safety , and so on are all essential .
Of course , we have to provide resources along with Ukraine and the G7 group of countries .
Advice , expertise and money must go to the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development .
It is particularly important that openness , information and close contact with employees and the general public are a constant feature of this work , and that no money is used for operating and extending new nuclear power stations .
Environmental safety , control and monitoring must have top priority for as long as the project lasts , between 1998 and 2005 .
I would like to ask the Commissioner how the Commission proposes handling this excellent report .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate Mr Adam on a well produced report .
It supports the Commission 's proposals on Community support for the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development for the fund for improving the shelter over the Chernobyl reactor .
In setting up this fund , international society has taken up its responsibility to help Ukraine put the 1986 Chernobyl disaster behind it and make that nuclear plant environmentally safe .
Through the Commission 's TACIS programme , the European Union has put itself at the forefront of these efforts .
The TACIS programme will be subject to constant follow-up and reporting back .
The European Bank for Reconstruction and Development has also played an important role by taking on the heavy responsibility of managing the project on the donors ' behalf , and it has managed to get the project under way quickly .
It is my hope that , after the Parliamentary elections in the summer , Ukraine will see the European Union 's contribution as a sign of our friendly relations and solidarity .
The Commission can accept most of the amendments , but one important question remains - namely , when the EU will pay its contribution to the Chernobyl fund .
The Commission is proposing here that the EU 's contribution will be paid in the initial years of the project .
This is mainly because most of the project 's costs will arise at the start .
The Chernobyl fund operation has got off to a rapid start , which also shows that the project itself will be implemented quickly .
A number of tender procedures for the so-called " early biddable projects ' and project management have already been announced , and so the contract will be signed in the near future .
What is even more important is that the Ukraine authorities are planning finally to shut down the Chernobyl nuclear power station in the year 2000 .
One express political requirement is that considerable progress be made before then .
Parliament 's report proposes that payments should be extended to cover the period 1998-2005 .
According to Parliament , this is because the Community will be paying its contribution at an early stage , and then the other contributors will go back on their promises .
I believe I can set Parliament 's mind at rest on this point .
Of the US $ 400 million promised to the Chernobyl fund , US $ 178 million of fixed commitments have already been made for 1997-1998 .
After the European Union , the next largest donor is the United States : their fixed commitments for the period 1997-1998 amount to US $ 54 million .
The cash already in the fund 's account amounts to nearly ECU 50 million : this does not include the contribution from the European Union .
In view of this , the Commission is certain that it is both necessary and appropriate that the EU 's contribution should be paid at an early stage .
Thank you very much , Mrs Gradin .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
I would like to delete the word " primarily ' from the first sentence , so that the text instead reads : ' With the aid of Community funds , the following technical aims will also be achieved as a new shelter is constructed ' .
This means deleting the word " primarily ' , which I think Mr Adam can accept .
Ladies and gentlemen , are there any objections to this oral amendment ?
Mr President , I would be quite happy to accept the amendment with the deletion of that word .
The important point is that we are approving the plan as a whole and we cannot therefore select particular parts of it as being priorities .
If the word ' primarily ' as it appears in English is taken out that would be very appropriate .
I would then support it .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have heard the rapporteur 's opinion .
Since there are no objections to the introduction of this oral amendment , I shall put it to the vote .
( Parliament approved the oral amendment )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
As Austrian members of the Group of the European People 's Party , we set great store , in connection with the Shelter Improvement Plan and the agreement between the G7 countries and the Ukraine , on the closure of Chernobyl by the year 2000 . Therefore we have chosen to approach the voting in a way which accords with our consistent anti-nuclear policy within the European Parliament .
On the basis of the community assets , we resolutely defend all measures to guarantee greater safety in the nuclear sector .
In this process , however , any link between the closure of old and highly dangerous nuclear reactors and the possible completion of new atomic energy plants must be resolutely rejected .
In line with these views , we also recognize the need for the European Parliament to proceed coherently in the implementation of the agreement and the solution of the Chernobyl problem , but without thereby supporting the completion of other nuclear construction projects , especially in this region .
EC - USA competition laws Agreement
The next item is the report ( A4-0104 / 98 ) by Mr Malerba , on behalf of the Committee on External Economic Relations , on the proposal for a Council and Commission Decision concerning the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Communities and the Government of the United States of America regarding the application of positive comity principles in the enforcement of their competition laws ( COM ( 97 ) 0233 - C4-0559 / 97-97 / 0178 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in the global economy society we live in , there is an ever increasing number of multinational companies and mergers .
Dominant positions and restrictive market practices are also more frequent and have transnational effects .
The authorities which protect competition have several instruments at their disposal to combat restrictive international practices , the authority par excellence being the World Trade Organization . However , one of the most widely adopted methods is that of the extraterritorial application of national competition law .
This means that penalties are also applied when behaviour within the territory of a third country has negative effects on their markets .
In 1991 , the European Commission and the US Government concluded a bilateral Agreement on the application of competition rules between the two parties .
That Agreement was approved by this Parliament and I reported on it a couple of years ago .
Section 5 of the 1991 Agreement introduced the concept of comitas gentium - positive comity - for the first time in relations between the EU and the USA .
This is a rather special concept which should possibly be explained .
When a party is the victim of anticompetitive behaviour within the territory of a second party , the first party can ask the second to take measures applying the second party 's anticompetition laws .
The Agreement on which the House is now being called upon to vote represents further progress in relation to the 1991 Agreement . Not only does it provide directives on how to deal with requests for positive comity , but it also implies that when a party considers itself the victim of anticompetitive practice in the other party 's territory , the first party should generally suspend the measures laid down by its regulations , in other words stop implementing extraterritorial measures .
The central point , therefore , is the extraterritorial application of competition rules .
From time to time , the USA and the EU try to apply their rules of competition to behaviour in other countries as well ; in particular , the USA claim competence to apply their competition rules even when they are prejudicial to their exports , and not only when they are prejudicial to the consumer .
This Agreement therefore seeks to replace international cooperation in the methods of extraterritorial application of the rules of competition to regulate anticompetitive practice .
So the Agreement , even if it is only bilateral , seems to be going in the right direction and I recommend its approval .
A word of caution and concern has been expressed , however , by the economic circles of the EU on the provisions for confidentiality of information exchanged between the competition authorities .
That is particularly the case because there is more information available at the European Commission than at the American competition authorities .
At this point , I recommend that the Commission take this concern into account when drawing up a second-generation agreement , that is in the process of being prepared , as well as the possibility of agreeing to the exchange of confidential information even without the parties ' consent .
Mr President , Madam Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this is not the first time that issues relating to the new EU-USA relations have been debated in Parliament . On each occasion , serious reservations have been expressed on all sides of the House , since there is still a general climate of mistrust on both sides of the Atlantic .
Nonetheless , the laborious efforts of the Vice-President of the Commission , Sir Leon Brittan , to push forward the plan for a new Euro-Atlantic market cannot be overestimated , in spite of the difficulties it faces on both technical and above all political issues , as was discovered last Monday at the General Affairs Council .
It is well known that very serious objections have been raised by France , which of course cannot be ignored .
Reservations have also been expressed by other Member States which , it is true , do not in principle disagree .
However , they put terms and conditions on the promotion of a common Euro-Atlantic market , such as the safeguarding of WTO regulations , and the solution of problems arising from the implementation of the infamous extraterritorial Helms-Burton and D 'Amato-Kennedy acts . Naturally , there is also the condition that sectors of the agricultural economy and of audio-visual communication will remain outside the plan .
As regards cooperation in the implementation of competition laws , which is dealt with in Mr Malerba 's report , the proposal of the Council and the Commission is of course constructive , and no-one can have any objections to a framework of regulatory provisions .
Nevertheless , the Agreement has serious weaknesses to the extent that its implementation is neither obligatory nor does it have a strong legal basis . Rather , it is a political undertaking to cooperate , which in particular excludes company mergers .
So it is natural that reservations and concerns should be expressed by European businesses , especially concerning confidential provisions and the exchange of financial information .
European businesses are worried about a possible undermining of legitimate interests if the United States gains free access to all secret information . It is only natural for there to be fear and mistrust , since our partner on the other side of the Atlantic is burdened by a host of international violations , which show that it is no respecter of laws and international agreements .
At the same time , the United States ' insistence on maintaining extraterrestrial laws , despite the recent relaxing of measures against Cuba , is typical behaviour . It is a fact that the United States demands respect from others for the laws of competition and the free market , whilst reserving for itself the right to violate them .
There is also another serious issue . While we have decided that , in each agreement concluded between the European Union and third countries , there will be clauses to ensure respect of human rights in accordance with European humanitarian values , I have the feeling that this is systematically passed over when it comes to our powerful partner on the other side of the Atlantic .
I am referring in particular to the issue of the death penalty , which is retained by many states .
Every now and again public opinion is shocked by an execution , and I am also personally shocked by the public executions in the United Arab Emirates and in the United States .
An equally serious concern is the reduction in US contributions to aid for third world countries .
As a result , child deaths have risen to 12 million a year . In other words , whereas the European Union currently gives 0.4 % of its GDP as developmental aid , the USA gives only 0.1 % , even less than Japan at 0.28 % .
It is also a well-known fact that it is a very bad payer with respect to the United Nations Organization .
These issues do not prevent the creation of a common conception and a common agenda on issues of democracy , international cooperation and a just and viable world order such as we envisage in the European Parliament and the European Union .
Therefore , in spite of all this , we will vote for the Agreement .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to offer sincere thanks to the rapporteur for his excellent report .
The Agreement presented here constitutes a renewed attempt by the two largest markets in the world - the two most important trade partners - to reach an accord where previously there have always been recurrent difficulties .
On behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , I should like to say that we approve of this Agreement .
Admittedly , highhanded US behaviour ensures time and again that US legal regulations are applied in a way which is dubious under international law ; Helms-Burton and D 'Amato are just two examples of this .
In international competition law as well , people in Texas or elsewhere believe they can apply their own rules and do not have to take account of international law .
But none of that should prevent us from attempting , step by step , to persuade the people of the USA as a whole to enter into agreements which they can then comply with too .
Incidentally , I do not fully understand what the death penalty or insufficient development aid has to do with it .
If you look at the European budget lines in national Parliaments , you will see that development aid is being reduced bit by bit even where Socialists are in charge .
The pot should not call the kettle black .
High-handed US behaviour is one thing we must recognize .
However , we must also recognize that we and the Americans have jointly achieved a great deal in many areas .
If the USA and Europe had not stuck together , there would never have been any expansion of GATT-WTO .
We need to recognize the positive side as well from time to time , not always take a sledge-hammer to the Americans .
So our idea of competition law must gain international acceptance .
If the Americans and Europeans reach an accord , we shall have made a significant step forward .
That is why extension by means of a clear framework agreement is necessary , and that is being attempted here .
The Agreement itself is no more than a statement of political commitment .
As a consequence , however , the agreed trade rules will in any case lead to efforts being made to arrive at a rational outcome in cases of dispute , and this should be warmly welcomed .
That is why there is no need for a special , outstanding effort to give approval to this Agreement here .
With the Agreement , I am glad to say we are advancing into an area which is of decisive importance for the maintenance of a free world economy at a time of increasing globalization .
International cooperation in the area of competition will be one of the main tasks of foreign trade and investment at the start of the 21st century .
Globalization , as we all know , leads to world-wide competition .
Europe is part of this world-wide competition .
After the introduction of the euro , we shall play an even more significant role in international competition .
Our efforts to reach an accord must be all the greater .
The conclusion of the present Agreement is a step - albeit a small one - on the way to the comprehensive liberalization of all areas of transatlantic trade .
From my remarks you will see why the Group of the European People 's Party gives its support , and I would ask Parliament to give its approval to this Agreement in its totality .
Mr President , competition and freedom of competition are often said to be non-political matters that global capitalism needs to survive .
The USA tries to impose its own laws on other countries .
An instance of this is provided by the Helms-Burton and D 'Amato-Kennedy acts , by means of which the USA has enacted political laws .
They are at odds with freedom of competition .
So markets and competition are not at all non-political matters and do not represent complete freedom of competition .
We politicians in Europe must make political decisions and laws : that is our job .
Consumer freedom means not having to buy US hormone-treated meat or genetically manipulated soya .
There is a clear conflict of interests between freedom of competition among US producers and the health of consumers in Europe .
US companies and multinationals want freedom of competition based only on making a profit , with little in the way of social and ecological responsibility .
Competition can harm or kill , so politicians must take responsibility generally and protect people and the environment .
In this whole area , I would like to say that non-political competition does not exist .
The rules can be clarified in the form of the Agreement now being prepared , and it would be wise to approve it .
However , we are already taking the next step : namely , the MAI Treaty .
Politicians are gradually submitting to market dictatorship , which is what constitutes complete freedom of competition .
Thank you very much , Mr Seppänen .
Ladies and gentlemen , so as not to distract attention from the important things being said here this Friday morning , the Presidency would ask the Members of the House to please switch off their telephones during the debate .
This is not obligatory , but it is distracting and it would be better if we could manage without them .
Mr President , Mr Malerba 's report recommends the revision of an Agreement negotiated by the Commission in a particularly sensitive sector of our relations with the United States : the extraterritorial consequences of different competition laws .
But the Agreement does not solve the fundamental problem of the extraterritorial nature of recent US federal and local legislative provisions .
The main question today is therefore whether the Commission is going to retract the suspension of the WTO panel relating to the Helms-Burton law , which it requested nearly a year ago , in the unfounded expectation of an amendment of Title 4 by Congress .
The suspension therefore has no purpose today , and if it is not withdrawn before the mid-April deadline the whole procedure carried out by the Commission will be a failure , to the detriment of European interests .
Violations of international law should not , in any case , be negotiable , as the chairman of our Committee on External Economic Relations , Mrs Castellina , has just pointed out .
The Commission 's attitude is so laxist that you have to wonder how it would handle the negotiations to create a transatlantic free trade area .
The process would not be unbiased anyway , because a large number of areas referred to in the project fall within EU competence on this side of the Atlantic , whereas in the United States , they are the responsibility of the federal states .
And how can we expect Washington to relax trade barriers when the legislative and supervisory bodies are independent from the political authority ?
The United States has always , by various means , tried to obtain a sort of right to take part in the internal operation of the European Union .
If they support Sir Leon Brittan 's personal initiative today , it is because they see an opportunity to enter the European decision-making process , in the era of the euro and enlargement .
It is not a question of blaming the Americans for defending their own interests carefully and intelligently .
No , what is surprising is the little resistance to their efforts offered by a divided Commission - which makes you question the principle of collective responsibility - and a timorous Council , which is allowing itself to be led by Sir Leon 's personal project .
Mr President , does that sort of European Union really defend the interests of the European people ?
Mr President , there is no doubt that the Malerba report is a good one , and well written .
Nevertheless , I must express some reservations about its whole orientation and also about some speakers ' contributions to this discussion .
I very much value what Sir Leon Brittain has done , because I know he has endeavoured somehow or other to achieve a situation in which we can create a reasonably tolerable community with the USA in this particular area .
It is therefore a very valuable attempt .
Nonetheless I have to say that there are many signs that this attempt cannot be very successful , for a simple reason : the Americans are certainly our friends .
We owe them a great deal of gratitude .
But on the other hand , it cannot continue to be the case forever that one power asserts itself in the economic area , imagining itself to be outside international practices and laws , and intervening where it has no business to do so .
I would particularly like to refer to what is implemented time and again by means of extraterritorial legislation .
The way in which US industrial interests repeatedly manage to find loopholes - the very thing with which the Japanese are reproached - verges on the brilliant . They do this so that in practice they do not have to keep to what they have committed themselves to in writing .
This situation arises particularly in the matter of international legislation .
I would like for example to mention here a fact which undoubtedly affects our trade : I refer to the new US measures under which sporting events that take place in Europe can no longer be shown on television because they display advertising for drinks such as wine and other alcoholic beverages .
That has a very great effect on our interests .
That eliminates us from competition in advance .
I believe we should be clear about one thing here - and I would like to endorse Mr Souchet 's remarks , although I do not share his views on all matters .
Unfortunately the Americans have a strong Government that knows what it wants and has laid down a political line , and we still do not have a real decisionmaking body to guide foreign policy for us .
If we did , we would be much better off !
Mr President , many companies today are in business all over the world .
Many of them also form strategic alliances to strengthen their position in foreign markets via an international partner .
However , the economic effects of mergers , anticompetitive behaviour and the abuse of dominant positions often affect countries other than those where the companies concerned are based .
One way for the monopolies and mergers authorities to deal with anticompetitive behaviour at an international level is to apply extraterritorial jurisdiction .
This means that a country which is adversely affected by anticompetitive behaviour in another country can try to apply its own competition rules to deal with the problem .
There are many legal systems which allow this , including that of the European Community .
The USA makes considerable use of extraterritorial jurisdiction , which , as we know , has generated political tensions between the EU and the United States .
Using extraterritorial jurisdiction also creates many problems in practice .
There is no way of exercising jurisdiction over people outside their own country , and it is also difficult to get evidence from abroad .
In 1991 , the EC and the USA signed an Agreement on applying their competition laws .
Instead , the principle of positive comity was introduced , in other words active civility .
Using this principle means that one country can combat anticompetitive behaviour in another country without having to resort to extraterritorial jurisdiction .
Instead , as we know , the country which is being adversely affected can request the country in which the anticompetitive behaviour is taking place to take action .
Although this principle was introduced in the 1991 Agreement , the USA continues to use extraterritorial jurisdiction to a considerable extent .
Enhancing cooperation calls for better and more effective application of the principle of positive comity .
The Commission started negotiations with the United States in 1996 .
The new Agreement mainly contains guidelines for dealing with applications to use the principle of positive comity .
It also lays down certain terms on which the parties will defer or break off their own investigations and action .
The country where the behaviour is occurring can be requested to take action instead .
The Agreement does not cover mergers and concentration .
Neither US nor EU legislation allows for such procedures to be deferred or broken off .
Confidential information furnished to the Commission is heavily protected in Community law .
I can therefore calm Parliament 's fears on this point : the Commission can only lift the confidentiality requirement if it first obtains the consent of the company in question .
The monopolies and mergers authorities must work together to ensure that anticompetitive behaviour amongst companies in the world market can be regulated properly and effectively .
The Agreement constitutes a commitment by both the USA and the EU to work together instead of using their own anti-trust legislation in the other 's territory .
In this way , the Agreement represents a significant development in relations between the EU and the USA .
Mr Malerba also notes this in his well-considered report .
Thank you very much , Mrs Gradin .
The debate is closed .
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Mr Rübig has asked for the floor pursuant to Rule 19 of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , pursuant to Rule 19 of our Rules of Procedure , I would like to inform you that the deadline for signing the written declaration ' Sign Against Crime ' expires today .
So far 154 Members have signed this written declaration in accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure , and I would like to offer them my sincere thanks .
In this respect , I would also like to thank you most sincerely , Mr President , for your readiness to give active support to our concern .
Brussels must become the safest capital in Europe .
As you have rightly commented , we particularly need police reinforcements in the Europe quarter , a police station of our own , and an international , multi-lingual emergency number as a contact point in case of criminal incidents .
According to Rule 19 paragraph 4 of the Rules of Procedure , you represent Parliament in external matters as well .
I would therefore request your continued commitment to representing our concern .
I hope you will soon be able to report something positive to the House .
Thank you very much , Mr Rübig .
Mr Manisco has asked for the floor .
Mr President , I simply wish to say that I voted against the Malerba report .
You only mentioned two abstentions .
Thank you very much , Mr Manisco .
I am sorry ; I did not look towards the left and in my case , ladies and gentlemen , that is even more difficult to understand .
So I apologize both to you personally and to the area where you are sitting .
I looked towards the right , towards the centre and towards the left , but not towards the extreme left .
I am sorry Mr Manisco , and I note that you have voted against .
Mr Schulz wishes to speak on a point of order .
Mr President , I have one comment to make in relation to Mr Rübig 's remarks , if you would allow me .
Mr Schulz , that is not a point of order .
In any case , this could open a debate .
I would ask you not to open a debate , but that we merely note Mr Rübig 's opinions , which were made pursuant to Rule 19 of the Rules of Procedure , and record them in the Minutes , as is fitting .
But if you insist , Friday mornings are very special mornings so I will give you the floor for one minute .
Mr President , I knew you were an understanding man .
I am sure you will also find a Rule which makes it possible for me to speak for a minute and a half .
As someone who deals with cooperation between the police and justice systems in the European Union , I support the concern of my colleague Mr Rübig in principle .
Please do not clap too soon .
Mr President , please subtract the applause and the heckling from my speaking time .
I support it in principle , Mr Rübig , because you are defending the safety of our colleagues in this Parliament .
I merely want you to bear in mind something I consider to be very important in negotiations with the Belgian authorities .
Apart from anything else , we play a role in the lack of safety in the Leopold quarter .
In the eyes of a great many people , including criminals of course , we are people worth attacking . This leads to the situation - you were right to use your hammer in support , Mr President - whereby the people who live in the Leopold quarter on a day-to-day basis are of course victims of crime as well - in other words the Belgians , who suffer at our hands in any case because prices have been driven up because of the European Parliament , as far as rents and land prices are concerned .
So in future please let us not just mention ourselves , but also the people who live there .
The police station which is to be established there is to serve Belgian citizens as well .
I consider it right and proper , Mr Rübig , that we should mention all the affected parties .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would ask you not to open a debate .
Two opinions have been given .
I believe we should now get ready to end this part-session calmly instead .
Parliament has come to the end of the agenda .
The Minutes of this sitting will be presented for Parliament 's approval at the beginning of the next part-session .
Ladies and gentlemen , allow me once again the satisfaction I have every Friday of thanking all Parliament 's services for their cooperation , especially wi