Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 10 April 2008 .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Follow-up to a request for the defence of immunity : see Minutes
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Corrigendum ( Rule 204a ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Lapsed written declarations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Action taken on Parliament 's positions and resolutions : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 17 April 2008 , pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure , has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Monday , Tuesday , Wednesday :
No changes
Thursday :
The UEN Group has requested that in the debate on cases of breaches of human rights the item on Iran be replaced with a new item on Georgia .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I propose that we should discuss the situation in Georgia instead of Iran or Chad .
The situation in Georgia is urgent , since the Russian Duma has adopted a resolution calling upon the President to consider the question of recognition for Transdniestria , Abkhazia and South Ossetia , and an increase in the numbers of Russian forces in the region .
The territorial integrity of Georgia is guaranteed by 36 UN resolutions adopted in 1993 .
In addition there is President Saakashvili 's peace plan for Abkhazia .
I believe that this is a priority matter , which is why I am proposing this change .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I do think we should wait for this Parliament 's delegation to visit Georgia in a week 's time , when it will look in particular at the Abkhazia question .
After all , a number of delegation members are present here .
We can put this item on the agenda after the delegation 's visit in a week 's time , not perhaps as an item for urgent debate but certainly as a matter for serious discussion .
First , however , we should wait for the report from the parliamentary delegation .
( Parliament rejected the amendment )
( The order of business was adopted )
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .

( ES ) Mr President , as some of you will know from the media , a Spanish freezer vessel , the Playa de Bakio , based in Bermeo , carrying 26 crew aboard , 13 Spanish nationals and 13 crew of African origin , was seized yesterday when fishing for tuna in international waters 250 miles off the coast of Somalia .
For some time now , the fisheries sector has been very concerned at the absence of security in that part of the Indian Ocean where piracy has become rife and where a French yacht was seized recently on 11 April .
In view of this situation , Mr President , I would like to ask Parliament and the Community institutions as a whole to take whatever steps are necessary to expedite the immediate release of the crew and the vessel , and to protect the Community fleet fishing those waters , now considered to be the most dangerous in the world .
Mr President , a few weeks ago , together with Mr von Wogau , the Chairman of the Subcommittee on Security and Defence , I visited the EUBAM Mission in Odessa , Ukraine .
Its mandate is to help Ukraine and Moldova manage their common border better , by providing both expertise and support .
Once there , we could see that the Mission , through the quality and professionalism of its people , has managed to build a solid reputation of professional authority useful not only in passing on expertise to its counterparts , but also in mediating between them on important questions of mutual interest .
Moreover , by flying the EU flag as the only embodiment of our Union in that large and important area , the EUBAM Mission is a very efficient ambassador for our institutions , thus contributing to the concrete implementation of both our security strategy and our neighbourhood policy there .
It has most certainly set an example worthy of being applied in other areas of interest to us .
Mr President , your speech at our recent part-session in Brussels on the events in Tibet was extremely well received by the House , and I think it enjoyed the support of all the Members present .
It quite clearly reflected the public opinion in the European Union about the recent repression in Tibet .
Considerable concern was also expressed by the Commission and by a number of Member States in Council .
It is surprising , therefore - and to my group disappointing - that the Presidency-in-Office of the Council has decided not to invite the Dalai Lama to come to Brussels to meet ministers .
It therefore seems to me all the more important that this House pursue your suggestion that the Dalai Lama should come , and I wonder whether I might ask you to get in touch with the Dalai Lama 's office to see whether he could advance the visit from the current schedule foreseen for December to an earlier date , since clearly the interest in this House and in Europe in discussing the events in Tibet before December is very great .
( Applause )
( PL ) Mr President , I wish to speak on the same issue .
The Olympic flame has been extinguished with the blood of the Tibetans , blood spilled in Tibet every day .
The closer we get to the opening of the Olympics , the greater the Chinese reprisals against their own citizens and against the inhabitants of Tibet .
At the last part-session in Brussels , we adopted a resolution criticising human rights violations by the Chinese authorities . We also called for the Chinese to resume negotiations with the Dalai Lama .
Unfortunately these calls were ignored by the Slovenian Presidency .
I think that Parliament should react decisively to the fact that the Dalai Lama has not been invited to any official meeting with the European Union by the Slovenian Foreign Minister , Dimitrij Rupel .
Parliament is the conscience of Europe and this conscience must not be silenced by any pronouncements by any minister holding office in the European Union .
( ES ) Mr President , piracy has now become one of the worldwide threats to maritime safety .
According to statistics compiled by the International Maritime Bureau , pirate attacks have tripled over the last decade : whereas there were 90 incidents of piracy in 1995 , in 2007 the figure had risen to 263 .
As we speak , 26 crew members of the fishing vessel Playa de Bakio have been seized off Somalia and perhaps , as my fellow Member said earlier in this House , we should not only show solidarity with their families , but also request the European Union to take action in this matter and to make every effort to free these fishermen .
It is not enough for us to sign agreements with various African States .
We also have to ensure the safety of these vessels .
The problem is European in scope and must be tackled as such .
Mr President , as you are aware , there will be a referendum in Ireland on 12 June on the Lisbon Treaty .
I want to raise with you a matter of very deep concern in Ireland .
It has emerged through the media that the Commission , and committees of this Parliament , are actively colluding to suppress information .
Let me quote Commission Vice-President Margot Wallström , that the Commission is willing to tone down or delay messages that might be unhelpful in advance of the referendum on the Lisbon Treaty ; reports have been carried in the press of a letter that was sent to parliamentary committees urging them not to deal with sensitive political issues that might arise from Lisbon until the Treaty has been ratified .
I want to say to you that these types of tactics are unacceptable .
The Irish people should have their debate with full information .
They deserve the full and unvarnished facts , whether in relation to corporation tax or the outworkings of the defence and security provisions of the Treaty .
As a minimum - I am sure you will agree - the people deserve the full facts .
So I call on you today to clarify publicly that committees will not delay or suppress debate on these sensitive matters , and I would equally urge the Commission to do likewise .
( EL ) Mr President , I apologise for the delay , but I have just arrived in Parliament .
I believe that it would be unrealistic for anyone to talk about cross-border cooperation in the case of Greece , which is the country that receives the fourth highest number of illegal immigrants , after Spain , France and Sweden .
Now what talk can there be of cross-border cooperation when , on the other hand - is this not the case , Mr President ? - we have to deal with a country engaged in just that : Turkey , which is doing that job ; in other words , Turkey has men who are professionally engaged in transporting illegal immigrants from Asia to Europe .
In addition , the financial assistance received by Greece is minimal - I am sorry that I do not have enough time to go into the relevant details - and I must tell you that if Europe does not help , I believe that it is Europe that will have to foot the bill for the people who today are pouring into Europe , via Greece and the Aegean sea , with its 2 000 islands .
( BG ) I take the floor in order to draw your attention to a canker affecting the rights of over a million citizens in Bulgaria 's capital city .
This is a problem which illustrates clearly the corruption schemes which , regrettably , have crept into all areas of life in Bulgaria over the past several years .
For eight years in a row now , with the obvious blessing of both the town hall and the government , the Sofiyska Voda company has been amassing huge profits at the expense of ordinary citizens without delivering even at a minimum level on its obligations undertaken under the concession agreement . Instead of having the agreement terminated , however , the concession holder receives additional loans amounting to millions of euro .
The government authorities in Bulgaria , both central and municipal , keep turning a blind eye to the numerous protests by citizens ' groups which have finally had to approach Mr. Barroso , the European Commission representative , both through official and unofficial channels during his recent visit to our country .
Since Bulgaria and its institutions do not have the will to protect the rights of the civil society , I trust that the authorities of the European Union will do so .
( RO ) In April , for the first time Bucharest was present on all media channels only in a favourable light , on the occasion of the NATO Summit that took place in Romania .
Many did not think that our country could organize a summit of this size : 3,000 officials from 49 countries and 3,500 journalists , since the Bucharest Summit had the greatest participation and the most complex agenda in NATO 's history .
I would like to point out three major Summit conclusions : Croatia and Albania were invited to join NATO ; NATO will install an anti-missile shield complementary to the American one - this shield will protect NATO countries that are not covered by the American shield ; the NATO leaders undertook to increase their troops in Afghanistan in order to fight the Taliban , to share the difficulties of military operations and limit restrictions in using their troops .
( EL ) Mr President , let us pay tribute to the memory of Nikos Aslamazidis , of the Saint-Nazaire dockyard , who went on hunger strike .
We must once again raise the issue of protecting workers from modern-day slave trading .
Let us talk about unemployment , under-employment , and job insecurity , and also about agencies which hire out workers , or , perhaps I should say , exploit them .
These employment agencies treat workers like modern-day slaves : they use them until they are worn out , pay them peanuts , move them around at will and arbitrarily get rid of them .
How are we protecting the workers ?
The Bolkestein Directive makes ambiguity an art form and allows them to be thrown onto the social slag heap .
The increasingly popular flexicurity policy is a new way of deregulating employment relations resulting in less stable employment and greater insecurity job .
As a result , we now have disposable workers , who struggle daily to survive with dignity .
The creation of different kind of Europe whose priorities are full employment , improved working conditions and a fairer redistribution of wealth , is not only feasible but imperative .
The sacrifices of the workers are essentially a struggle against the new imposition of medieval terms of employment against which all progressive forces must really fight as one .
( RO ) Deforestation has reached an alarming rate at a global level , namely 13 million hectares a year .
The phenomenon is closely related to the illegal cutting of trees and illicit trade in wood products .
We could continue to shut our eyes to the massacre of the forests , believing that we , Europeans , have advanced systems of biodiversity and consumer protection .
In EU , approximately 50 per cent of wood imports from tropical countries and 20 % of wood imports from Europe and the Russian Federation come from illegal sources .
Therefore , we contribute fully to illegal deforestations in the Amazon and what 's more , the phenomenon is also widespread in EU Member States such as Estonia , Romania and Bulgaria .
We need to have a consistent and honest approach toward the issue of illegal deforestation and illicit trade in third countries , but particularly on European Union territory .
Therefore , I request the European Commission to submit as soon as possible a legislative proposal by which only wood and wood products coming from legal sources could be traded on the European market .
For this purpose , I have launched a written statement in the EP and I encourage my colleagues to join us in the fight against illegal deforestation .
( EL ) Mr President , the increase in prices and the impending food shortages are assuming worrying dimensions .
I draw your attention to justifiable concerns over recent developments during the agricultural negotiations at the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) .
The European Commission is conducting the negotiations . It must act strictly within the negotiating mandate of the Council and within the framework of the revised common agricultural policy ( CAP ) .
The Commission must ensure the viability , competitiveness and multifunctional nature of European agriculture .
The need for a quality food supply to Europe now appears pressing ; it must guide the negotiating position of the EU .
( ES ) Mr President , on Wednesday 23 April UNESCO is celebrating World Book Day .
That is also the day on which Miguel de Cervantes died and William Shakespeare was born .
Miguel de Cervantes , the greatest figure in Spanish literature , is universally known for his Don Quixote ; it is generally agreed that this book is the first modern novel and one of the finest works of literature in the world .
The English playwright , poet and actor William Shakespeare was born on a different 23 April , according to the Julian calendar , and is regarded as the most important writer in the English language and also one of the giants of world literature .
This is the day chosen by many countries of the European Union as the feast day of their patron saint .
This is the case in Catalonia , where it is traditionally the feast day of San Jordi , St George , a day for celebrating the Catalan language and culture .
I think it would be recognition of European cultures and literature for this Parliament to agree to join in these celebrations on a cultural and literary day which is so widely celebrated in the European Union .
( CS ) Mr President , allow me to point out that our decisions sometimes lead to quite unexpected results .
Today the enthusiasm for biofuels and their use in the fuel mix is subsiding somewhat .
Not only are biofuels driving up the price of agricultural commodities ; they are also contributing to faster devastation of the rainforests .
We should learn a lesson from this for future legislation .
Some of our other laws may have similar adverse effects , such as the recent trend towards voluntary regulation of the automobile industry .
We must not therefore be too hasty to legislate and we must take time to consider the laws and adopt a more responsible approach .
We would do well to remember the old adage ' look before you leap ' .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to say a few more words about freedom of expression in Russia .
The Moskovsky Korrespondent daily newspaper has disappeared from news stands because it showed an interest in Vladimir Putin 's supposed divorce .
What takes place in the full glare of publicity in France is covered with secrecy in Russia .
Clearly any information concerning the marital status of a Head of State should be in the public domain . Moreover , people are not even allowed to ask questions about such matters , as was shown by the recent attack by Vladimir Putin on a female journalist from Niezavisima Gazieta , which reduced the woman to tears .
The rules governing standards of behaviour in the relationship between the authorities and the media recognised in the civilised world still do not apply in Russia .
There , the media are a tool controlled by the authorities and if they do not conduct themselves in accordance with the authorities ' wishes they are closed down .
Journalists are intimidated , and in extreme cases physically liquidated , as was the case with Anna Politkovskaja .
Freedom of expression is the foundation of democracy .
Once again we can see that the foundations of Russian democracy are very weak .
( HU ) Mr President , in recent years Hungarians have been beaten up in the streets of Slovakia , Serbia and Romania , simply because they have been speaking in their native language - Hungarian .
This very weekend aggression has been renewed and blood spilt in Kolozsvár , in Transylvania .
The victims were journalists , Tibor Zágy , István Ambrus and János Fancsali , who were attacked from behind on the street at night by three young Romanians and brutally beaten .
They were jeered at and insulted , called filthy foreigners and told to go back home where they belonged .
In a similar incident on Saturday , another Hungarian , Mr Attila , was knifed in the main square in Szabadka / Subotica , in the Vojvodina in Serbia .
This is the place where , on 15 March 2008 - Hungarian Revolution Day - there was an anti-Hungarian demonstration , organised by a neo-fascist Romanian group , the New Right , in Kolozsvár , where , the same day , a young Hungarian was assaulted .
It is a matter of urgency that we join forces with our Romanian cousins to suppress aggressive nationalism .
We look forward to legislation being adopted by the Romanian authorities and the culprits being punished in an exemplary fashion .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to take this opportunity to mention a serious issue : the constant attempts to revise the history of World War II .
These are repeated attempts , which take different forms and which sometimes take place in the European Parliament .
Most often , in fact in the overwhelming majority of cases , they manifest themselves as attacks on the Czech , or rather Czechoslovakian , so-called Presidential Decrees .
In the former Czechoslovakia , these Decrees , based on international law , were used to regulate legal issues relating to the defeat of Nazi Germany .
I know for a fact that some German and Hungarian Members of the European Parliament are planning further action this year in opposition to these Presidential Decrees .
Consequently , I would ask the Members of the European Parliament not to support such activities and to strongly condemn them .
I am sure that we agree that any revision of the history of World War II is entirely unacceptable .
- ( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me call your attention to the fact that from today Written Declaration No 33 is open for signature .
It concerns where young people stand in the EU 's policies .
Everyone knows that young people are affected by unemployment .
This is what we must focus on for both the present and the future of the EU .
We therefore call on the Member States to take young people into account in all relevant policy sectors .
They must enter with them into a structured dialogue . They must plan policies in education and life-long learning ; and also employment , social inclusion , health , the independence of young people , mobility , fundamental rights and non-discrimination .
This will give us hope for better prospects in the matter of young people , who are difficult to find , owing to the problem of demographics .
( FI ) Mr President , one in three fatal road accidents in Europe is caused by drunk driving .
On the sunny shores of Spain last Saturday evening at least nine Finnish tourists lost their lives and 19 were seriously injured when a drunken driver with one per mil alcohol in his system crashed his sport utility vehicle into the bus which was carrying them .
The accident was made even more serious by the fact that several passengers were not wearing the safety belts fitted in the bus .
There should be some serious thought given at European Union level to how these sorts of appalling incidents and such completely unnecessary loss of life can be avoided in the future .
At present the per mil limits vary in the EU between zero and 0.8 .
They should be made uniform and as close as possible to zero throughout all the EU countries .
Furthermore , there needs to be compliance with the rules on safety belts and drivers should be made sufficiently aware of these .
We also need to take sufficient account of the consequences of people ignoring them .
Thank you , Mrs Myller .
We all offer our deep sympathy to the victims ' families .
( BG ) European citizens are concerned about the rise in food prices .
The overall jump in prices which is felt in Western Europe is more painful in Eastern Europe because of low income levels .
A new leap in prices in expected , as a result of financial markets instability and the anticipation of a global economic crisis .
The International Monetary Fund called for decisive action to control food prices .
The general rise in prices is linked to energy costs , and the European Union is energy-dependent .
Hence , discussions on food prices ought to address not only rational farmland use and exploring alternative energy sources .
In addition , soaring food prices can be placed under control by regulating prices of traditional energy sources .
This demands , once again , a reconsideration of the use of nuclear power as part of the EU energy mix .
If nuclear power facilities which are available in Member States are switched on at full capacity , the shortage of energy could be overcome and this would influence prices of goods in the consumer basket .
( PL ) Mr President , the Polish Parliament was one of the first legislatures to consider the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty and passed a bill giving its consent for the President of Polish Republic to sign the instrument of ratification .
Many EU Member States have not yet taken any decision on this question .
The Constitutional Treaty was blocked following the vote taken by the citizens of France and the Netherlands .
I do not propose to refer to the substance of the two treaties .
We are all entitled to our own opinion on this .
I want to draw attention to the fact that here in the Chamber , and elsewhere , critical remarks have been made about Poland and the ratification process by representatives of countries which have made no progress at all on this up to now .
I regard those remarks as unjustified and ill-intentioned .
( DE ) Mr President , according to Amnesty International 's annual report , more than one third of all death sentences worldwide are carried out in China .
The exact number is probably much higher and therefore a state secret .
Sixty-two states apply the death penalty , sometimes for non-violent crimes such as adultery , tax evasion , prostitution or homosexuality .
Iran , Saudi Arabia and Yemen also execute young people under the age of 18 .
The European Union must therefore do all in its power to uphold the elementary human right to life and seek a worldwide moratorium on the death penalty .
It should address China in particular , heading up these sad statistics , in an endeavour to bring it closer to applying these universal human rights , in accordance with the Olympic motto ' One World , One Dream ' .
( PT ) Mr President , the Portuguese company Cerâmica Torriense has taken disciplinary action against Pedro Jorge , a worker and trade union leader at the company , with a view to his dismissal , after he participated in a Portuguese radio-television programme where all he did was tell the truth .
In this television programme , he used himself as an example of the situation in which workers in many companies find themselves , that is , they have had no pay rise since 2003 .
We would like to demonstrate our solidarity with workers and trade unionists who are the targets of repression .
We think that the company 's behaviour is unacceptable .
Its persecution and intimidation of this worker and active trade unionist is contrary to democracy and freedom and deserves our strongest condemnation .
Mr President , last Monday the Commission launched its task force report on Northern Ireland by Commissioner Hübner , and I am very pleased to see her in the Chamber here this evening , so she can at last hear what I have to say on this subject .
Unfortunately , though this report contains some good points , it did not go far enough to cover this destructural deficit we experienced by lagging so far behind the rest of Europe after over 30 years of terrorist violence .
It is also most unfortunate that the Members of this Parliament were not properly consulted or kept informed ; this has never happened before - a major opportunity has been missed by the Commission and the First and the Deputy First Minister in Northern Ireland , and not one extra euro has been given .
Unfortunately , this has now been seen as a long exercise that did not in the end give any real positive result .
Mr President , the peace in Northern Ireland is still fragile .
It has come a long way , and it has taken a long time .
But it is still fragile , and the difficulties that still lie ahead should not be underestimated .
I believe more can be done , more could have been done and more should be done to ensure we provide a very strong base to this peace process that many of us have worked so hard to achieve over such a long period of time .
( HU ) Mr President , on 11 May Serbia will go to the polls .
We all know that the Western Balkans will not be stable unless there is stability in Serbia .
However , all the indications are exceptionally negative .
There is Kosovo , with the loss of 16 % of the country 's territory .
Nationalism casts a shadow over everything and it is conceivable that the nationalists , the Radical Party , Koštunica and the Socialist Party , and Milošević 's party will form a coalition .
Serbia is not moving towards Europe .
At the same time , the European Union is making every mistake it could make .
I pray that Javier Solana will not make a statement , as with every one of his statements Javier Solana damages the prospects for Tadić 's pro-European party .
It was a huge mistake to allow Haradinaj , the Albanian guerrilla , to leave The Hague .
It was a huge mistake to announce a trade agreement with Kosovo at this point in time .
It was a huge mistake to keep talking about the Stabilisation and Association Agreements ( SAA ) ( which The Netherlands thwarted in January ) and saying that the European Union is doing good , that it is helping , that it is making visas easier , and trying to retrieve the irretrievable , the Union is attempting at last to help the democrats , the pro-Europe parties . Thank you .
Mr President , the protests that disrupted the Olympic torch relay in Europe have backfired on us , as there are now several anti-Western demonstrations going on in China .
In principle , everyone has a right to feel betrayed that the Chinese authorities have not fulfilled their commitment to improving the human rights situation in that country , and the ongoing violence in Tibet continues to cast a shadow over the Olympics in Beijing .
However , I cannot go along with the idea that aggressive protests such as those that took place in London and Paris addressed this issue in a proper manner .
Our inclination to take advantage of the Olympics to introduce some democratic values for the people of China is going to be met with extreme reluctance , as they feel insulted by those protests .
An internal change inspired by the will of the Chinese people is needed to bring about the fall of the Communist regime in China .
Anti-Western demonstrations are quite vivid proof that our recent acts have led to the opposite of what we had hoped for .
( EL ) Mr President , according to the European Commission 's data , in order to protect fisheries stocks , we are reducing the Community fleet annually by 2 % .
Thus from 2003 to 2006 the reduction is of the order of 10 % .
Despite this , the reduction in the fleet does not correspond to smaller catches , because of the improvement in fishing technology .
On the other hand , while the EU is reducing its fishing fleet , countries in Africa and the Pacific , such as Australia , New Zealand and China , are building more and more boats and increasing their fishing fleets .
The Community fleet is thus shrinking , while at the same time the fleets of third countries are growing .
This means that we are not achieving anything !
Although it imports 40 % of the fish it consumes , the EU is sufficiently aware to make an effort .
It is therefore vital for us to include this subject in international talks .
We must ensure that others also reduce their fishing fleets .
( RO ) In order to best use the opportunities provided by globalization , the European Union should modernize its social policies and invest mainly in human resources .
Starting in the ' 90s , expenses of social protection have remained around 28 % of the gross domestic product .
During 2000-2007 , the number of jobs increased by 13 million , while the unemployment rate decreased from 9 % to 7 % .
At the same time , approximately 80 million European citizens are below the poverty threshold .
The poverty risk among children is 19 % in the European Union .
The Lisbon Treaty emphasizes the importance for the European Union to have a social market economy .
Social changes that take place in the context of globalization refer to unemployment , the reform of the pension system , the reform of taxation systems , fighting poverty and invetsments in education and the child care system .
Education could play a vital role in compensating for the socio-economic disadvantage and for opening the way for children 's succesful development .
Member States should also improve their health systems and fight poverty among the elderly as well .
( FR ) Mr President , I just wanted to remind Members that on Wednesday we will be celebrating the first World Malaria Day .
Until now it was called Africa Malaria Day . This year , for the first time , it will be commemorated as World Malaria Day .
I wanted to remind Members that this global problem , which , by its nature , is associated with poverty , affects 107 countries in the world , and that in 90 of those countries it constitutes a major public health problem , since 40 % of the world 's population lives in malaria-stricken regions .
The number of reported malaria cases worldwide is somewhere in the region of 350 to 500 million per year , with more than 60 % of cases being reported in Africa , leading to 90 % of malaria deaths .
Every 30 seconds a child dies in Africa from malaria .
This means that , by the end of my speech , Mr President , two children will have died from malaria .
The disease is also believed to inhibit growth , as malaria reduces GDP by USD 12 billion per year .
On Wednesday , a working lunch will be held on the subject at 1 p.m. in Room C 2.1 .
( RO ) In relation to the report on volunteering , I would like to emphasize the importance of these actions in the countries newly integrated into the European Union , namely the role of volunteering for improving the economic situation and social cohesion .
Romania , as well as other countries in the European areas , has taken shy actions in the field of promoting volunteering , although the European policies on recycling waste , reducing carbon emissions and environmental protection could be implemented and motivated by the involvement of politicians , together with young people , in volunteer actions .
The impact is so strong that it could trigger a favourable reaction of the state institutions and contribute to changing the mentality of a generation .
I propose the inclusion of volunteering into the education system and interregional programmes based on projects for establishing connections between Member State citizens .
I propose criteria of symbolic stimulation for people participating in volunteer actions and I request the help of the European Commission and the European Parliament .
( SK ) The European Foundation for Democracy was launched in Brussels last week .
I welcome the creation of this pan-European initiative , whose fundamental task is to promote freedom and democracy beyond the European Union 's borders and to support the opposition in countries that are not free .
Many of us spent part of our lives under totalitarian regimes .
I believe that today , now that are free , we have to help those courageous women and men who strive for freedom and democracy in their countries .
I have personal experience of giving financial support to the families of Cuban dissidents .
I also believe that we need to find ways of supporting the activities of the European Foundation for Democracy from the European Union budget .
In this way we can join the struggle to promote freedom and stand alongside figures such as Václav Havel , Richard von Weizsäcker , Jacques Delors and other politicians who have agreed to become patrons of this Foundation .
( EL ) Mr President , the Council has decided to wage a war of nerves with the UN by dealing with the situation in Kosovo through unilateral initiatives irrespective of the rule of law or international law .
Thus the decision to send the EULEX peace-keeping force to Kosovo to take over the role that until recently had been played by UNMIK is a tactical error .
In Article 5 the Council decision notes that there will be a transfer of mission from the UN to the EU force once the formers mission has ended .
Fortunately , there are countries , such as Spain , which oppose such initiatives .
According to Mr Moratinos , the Spanish Minister of Foreign Affairs , the initiatives contravene international law .
Finally , Slovenia and France warned Serbia that it had to accept EULEX , or else risk not joining the EU .
I consider this to be unacceptable , to say the least .
( SK ) The blank front pages of Slovakia 's daily papers - a protest against the approval of the media law that will introduce non-democratic press standards in Slovakia from June 2008 - remind me of Belarus , where the government does not respect the opposition and where there is no freedom of speech or freedom of the press .
I believe that a Member State that is celebrating on 1 May 2008 the fourth anniversary of its accession to the European Union should not adopt laws that are contradict the basic democratic principles of the European Union .
Mr Pöttering , I greatly appreciate your words and your clear stance in favour of press freedom in Slovakia .
I would also like to thank my colleagues Mr Joseph Daul and Mr Michael Gahler for their support .
I trust that the representatives of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament will not adopt a passive approach to this matter either .
I also appeal to all European politicians of a democratic persuasion to make every effort to ensure that the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought is not awarded to Slovakia .
Mr President , I should like to say a few words about the position of agriculture in the current WTO negotiations .
I am deeply concerned about the direction being taken by Commissioner Mandelson in the negotiations with regard to concessions on agriculture .
On a number of occasions , I have put the question to Commissioner Fischer Boel in this House , and each time she has reassured me that Commissioner Mandelson is staying within his remit .
However , with the ministerial meeting scheduled for 20 May in Geneva , and Commissioner Mandelson 's willingness to sacrifice agriculture to get a deal - with , I might add , nothing in return on non-agricultural market access and services - I am very concerned .
At our last part-session in Strasbourg we discussed the CAP , and many Members spoke of the need for food security and on the issue of air miles on food products and the growing of food for fuel .
All of this will have serious implications for European food supply .
If Commissioner Mandelson gets his way and reduces import tariffs beyond what he was mandated to do , he will flood the European markets with imported food .
The outcome of his actions will be to severely damage and , in some cases , destroy European food production .
We can only do this once and then it is done permanently .
As parliamentarians , we have a responsibility to ensure not just sustainable quality and traceable food , but also food security .
( SK ) I would like to point out that Cardinal Alfonso López Trujillo , President of the Pontifical Council for the Family , died in Rome yesterday at the age of 72 .

Throughout his life he promoted traditional family values and opposed abortion .
As the head of the influential Latin American Bishops Conference , he was considered a possible papal candidate after the death of John Paul II in 2005 .
In 2006 he criticised scientists involved in embryonic stem cell research . In his view , the destruction of embryos was comparable to abortion .
Cardinal Trujillo always responded to today 's world events in a clear and timely manner .
I had several meetings with him , which demonstrated how we , as Christian politicians , could benefit from his opinions .
We will miss his voice . May he rest in peace .
Mr President , freedom of the press is a fundamental principle of democracy and we rightly expect the Turkish penal code to be amended so as to respect this principle .
However , in order to be persuasive , we have to make sure that this principle is properly applied in the EU Member States too .
I would ask colleagues to consider , objectively , whether the press in Europe is really democratic and free .
The answer is ' not really ' .
The press in the EU is to a large extent manipulated and directed by non-journalistic economic and political interests .
The media , in many cases , present the truth not as it really is , but as certain media barons wish the public to perceive it as being .
The time has come for us to look critically at how the press functions in the EU and take urgent corrective action .
We should be firm with Turkey on freedom of the press , but at the same time we should take action in our own countries against press corruption .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , trade and cooperation help to bring countries and individuals closer together , as does sport .
In 2008 we have an anniversary that is particularly important for European countries : it is the 100th anniversary of the International Ice Hockey Federation .
To commemorate this event , a group of Members from European hockey-playing countries , led by the Slovak Member of the European Parliament , Mr Peter Šťastný , organised an exhibition in the European Parliament in Brussels , reminding us of both the successes as well as the difficult times when athletes were oppressed in some countries under the communist regime .
Thanks to Mr Šťastný 's contacts , the Stanley Cup was brought over from Canada especially for this occasion and was put on display , for the first time , in Belgium and in the European Parliament .
In conclusion , I would like to express my thanks to you , Mr President , and to Commissioner Mr Ján Figeľ , for launching and sponsoring the exhibition , whose motto is ' Uniting people through the passion for a sport ' , and of course to all those who visited this exhibition and will pass the message on to others .
Thank you .
It was an impressive event .
I would be interested to know whether you are aware of any media reports .
That brings us to the end of the list of speakers .
All those who asked to speak , in writing or by raising their hand , have taken the floor .
( EL ) Mr President , this is the third time I have taken part in the one-minute speech procedure .
I am asking the Presidency for permission to speak , but you are not giving it to me .
Why do you not let me have my say ?
Mr Toussas , I have just heard that you may have asked to speak .
Normally , Members put requests to speak in writing to ensure that they appear on the list .
You are not entered in my list . But I will give you the floor as the last speaker .
I would ask you to put your request in writing next time . Then you will not be overlooked if there is any speaking time left .
( EL ) Mr President , for some days now , economic migrants employed on farms have been suffering in appalling working and living conditions .
Employed in the strawberry fields of Nea Manolada , in the Prefecture of Ilia , Greece , they have been on strike , asking for their daily wage to be increased from the humiliating amount of EUR 23 to EUR 30 .
Large-scale strawberry growers and their hired thugs attempted to intimidate the foreign workers . In an attempt to forestall a large rally planned by the workers for yesterday in the square of Pyrgos , Ilia Prefecture , the workers ' camps were attacked , shots were fired in the air , and many workers were savagely beaten .
We condemn this barbaric attack , to which the police and the legal authorities turned a blind eye .
We ask for measures to be taken immediately to protect economic migrants .
That concludes this item .
Commission : budgetary framework and priorities for 2009 ( debate )
The next item is the report by Jutta Haug , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the 2009 budget , Section III - Commission : budgetary framework and priorities for 2009 .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Hübner , ladies and gentlemen , this year 's budgetary procedure is special because it is the last one to obey the rules that have applied in the past .
As of next year we will be establishing our budget according to the procedure set out in the Lisbon Treaty .
That means our Parliament will have to concentrate more carefully because we will have to express our political will in budgetary items and budgetary figures at a single reading .
We will no longer be able to rectify , to amend compromises we have reached , or to make up for mistakes at a second reading .
The first and indeed only reading must remain and must serve as a workable basis for negotiations with the Council up to the end of the year .
It is therefore important for us to emphasise that alongside the 2009 budgetary procedure we expect to make preparations together with the Council and the Commission to ensure that we conduct the budgetary procedure in accordance with the Lisbon Treaty .
Our current budgetary procedure is , however , somewhat different already .
At the suggestion of the Working Party on Parliamentary Reform , the Committee on Budgets has decided it will no longer submit our usual guidelines in response to the Commission 's Annual Policy Strategy in the form of an initial motion for a resolution in plenary , but will instead present our proposal on the budgetary framework and priorities for 2009 .
The groups are responsible for the APS resolution , which will address all the policy areas .
We in the Committee on Budgets have concentrated on the overarching budgetary concerns we consider especially important and have set them out in 11 paragraphs .
I want to draw particular attention to three aspects .
Firstly , it is clear that our budgetary cloth has been cut very closely , i.e. it is a very tight fit .
The margins for the individual headings are very small .
We cannot fund political priorities that would urgently need budgetary flanking measures , such as playing a practical role in climate policy , without putting earlier priorities at risk .
The same applies to funding growth and employment or a sustainable Europe .
If we take , for example , Heading 1A we see that we can under no circumstances finance any new agencies with available funds .
We will have to stick to our old , but simple and eminently reasonable principle of ' new tasks , new money ' .
Secondly , it is clear see that Heading 4 is chronically under-funded .
The picture there remains the same year after year .
We expect the Commission to present us with a preliminary draft budget that has analysed the requirements precisely and is realistic .
We want at last to use the flexibility instrument for the purpose for which it was introduced , namely for unforeseen needs .
We do not want it to have been swallowed up , in part or even in full , by the end of the year .
Thirdly , we are firmly resolved to inform the Commission before Parliament 's summer recess of our intentions regarding pilot projects and preparatory actions .
We expect the Commission to leave us adequate margin for manoeuvre for this parliamentary instrument in the preliminary draft budget , and to do so for all headings .
We certainly noticed that it has not included the pilot projects and preparatory actions in the tables attached to the Annual Policy Strategy for 2009 .
In conclusion , we are resolved not to go beyond the financial framework but are very clearly aware of the restrictions and problems and therefore hope for good cooperation with the Council and the Commission .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to start by informing Ms Haug and the other Members of this House that the Commission has not only examined this resolution , but can also agree with a significant number of points , not least in respect of the principles of budgetary discipline and sound financial management .
We appreciate this opportunity to hold an exchange of views at an early stage in the 2009 annual budget procedure .
In that spirit I also fully share the view expressed in your draft resolution that we should start reflecting on the consequences of the Lisbon Treaty on the budget procedure .
The Commission has also taken note of Parliament 's continued support for activity-based budgeting and its proposal to come forward with ideas for pilot projects and preparatory actions before the summer .
This will no doubt improve the possibility of a smooth and timely implementation .
The Commission also appreciates Parliament 's detailed examination of the 2009 APS , which was the subject of an intensive debate last March .
The APS serves as a consistent reference framework for preparation of the preliminary draft budget and the Commission 's legislative and work programme , although it does not predetermine the final outcome , which will take account of the European Parliament and Council priorities .
It is on this basis that the Commission will adopt the preliminary draft budget for 2009 .
In terms of policy development and programming implementation , 2009 is the third year of the current programming period and should be a year of consolidation .
Accordingly , the Commission has not proposed , in the APS , any major changes in financial programming .
It has , however , proposed three main initiatives with a limited impact on the allocation of financial resources in 2009 .
Firstly , as part of our policy on the integrated management of the external borders , there is a reinforcement of Frontex in the budget , as already decided , in 2008 , by the budget authority .
Secondly , to follow up the EU 's new strategy on Central Asia adopted by the Council in June 2007 , the Commission is proposing to frontload assistance to that area in 2009 , while keeping the total allocation over the period the same .
Thirdly , in line with the Bali road map , it has proposed reinforcing support for the environment and the sustainable management of natural resources in developing countries .
In making these proposals , the Commission has taken care to carefully limit the impact on the available margins , and will continue to do so when presenting its PDB .
I shall conclude by stressing an important point .
During the course of the 2008 budget procedure , a number of joint declarations were agreed with regard to agencies , both executive and centralised , and the detailed information that should be available to the budget authority .
The Commission will implement those provisions during the 2009 budget procedure , and I am confident this will afford Parliament a clearer picture of the resources available .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( HU ) Thank you for giving me the floor , Mr President .
I am sure that Jutta Haug 's report will get the support of Parliament and I congratulate her on her work .
I would like now to express a few thoughts .
The first is that Parliament is trying , with its hands tied , to work out a budget to meet the new challenges .
We have heard about those just now .
We support the enhanced role for growth and job creation , since this will be one of the key elements in the development of underdeveloped regions , or it should be .
I am delighted that the Commission has this safe pair of hands as its representative , with responsibility for regional development .
A very important point in this report is that European citizens must be informed about how their money is being spent and how we are committed to spending their money to get as much value as possible .
We are waiting for the Lisbon Treaty to be ratified and so cannot behave as we would hope to at the end of the year , when all of a sudden , to coin a phrase , just like the rabbit being pulled out of the hat , the agreement which will regulate our work will magically appear .
We have to work towards that .
The European People 's Party is voting for this report and hopes the amended motions will be supported , especially those concerning small and medium-sized enterprises .
I am not in full agreement , however , with Mrs Haug that we are negotiating in time .
The previous budget will have to be in place , and we can agree it only if by some happy chance we have requested in advance items which the Commission also supports .
We will have to properly think through how we do that in the future so that Parliament can send its own message sooner to the Commission . Thank you for your kind attention .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , as Mrs Haug said , this is the last budget to follow the old model , at least if the new treaty is ratified , but it is also a budget which is a prelude to longer-term budgetary reform .
At the same time , we are , of course , heading towards the mid-term review .
This being the case , it is natural for us to view budgetary issues from a longer-term perspective .
We consider , and it is important in the resolution , that important new political priorities must also be borne out in the budget .
For example , at the moment we clearly have insufficient funds under heading 1 , sustainable growth , etc. and under heading 4 .
We therefore expect a courageous proposal from the Commission for the mid-term review , but we must also start as early as next year 's budget .
We have some points to raise which are particularly important .
Firstly , I am thinking about climate and energy policy .
I am budget rapporteur for the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and we have , for example , the major Strategic Energy Technology Plan , the SET plan , we have the measures for energy efficiency and so on , all of which have insufficient budgetary resources .
The second point I am considering is heading 4 , particularly everything that is happening in the Balkans .
Last year we had a major debate on investment in Kosovo .
This investment must continue and it must be long term .
Furthermore , it must take place at the same time as finding additional support to help Serbia and Bosnia draw closer to the EU .
The third thing we would like to focus on is the quality of the budget .
We have sometimes had rather too many pilot projects and preparatory actions , for example .
Now we should focus more on ensuring that these kinds of measures really are implemented successfully .
One of the things I am thinking of here is what I myself have proposed regarding preserving the cultural heritage of the war-torn Balkans .
We must now ensure that this really does become a permanent investment .
The fourth area I am thinking about is the food crisis .
We are now in a situation where the rising price of food really may have an impact on the EU 's budget .
We must not ignore this .
My conclusion is that in a changing society , we must also be prepared to change the EU 's budget .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , as many people have mentioned , 2009 will be an exciting year for the EU in many ways .
The European Parliament elections and the new appointment of the Commission , together with the anticipated entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , will make the practical work in connection with the 2009 budget quite difficult .
This is why we have decided to allow this year 's budget to be a general test of the new rules , so that we can gain experience .
In future , we should start the budget process earlier in the year and involve the technical committees in a better way .
In addition , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Haug , for her excellent initiatives in connection with this .
Today we are discussing the first announcements concerning the EU 's budget for 2009 .
It is of course important that there is a clear link between the political priorities , both before and after their implementation in the Commission 's annual legislative programme , so that the EU 's budget appears as an integrated political instrument .
We have a problem here , as the multiannual financial framework is too constrained on many points .
The EU now has a common energy and climate policy , yet there is no common funding to support this policy .
The component of the budget that finances research , innovation , education and transport is clearly inadequate .
Similarly , the frameworks for legal and asylum policy and for culture and health policy is much too constrained .
In addition , the EU 's foreign policy is chronically underfunded - priorities such as Kosovo and Palestine indicate the challenges that we face .
Therefore , it is important that we now discuss the forthcoming mid-term review of the budget to ensure that the EU can continue to finance important political priorities after 2009 .
We need flexibility and better opportunities for reprioritisation within the framework .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , on behalf of the UEN Group , I wish to draw your attention to the following issues in the debate on budgetary priorities for 2009 .
First , if the Lisbon Treaty is ratified by all the Member States , in 2009 powers will be transferred from the Member States to the EU , giving the European Union new areas of responsibility .
This , in my opinion , will have a significant impact on expenditure from the Union 's budget .
Second , the year 2009 - according to expert forecasts - will in all probability be the fifth successive year in which there has been a steady increase in the prices of foodstuffs .
This will cause increasing social problems among the poorer Member States , and also in the countries to which the European Union gives food aid .
The Union 's budget for 2009 should allow for more support both for growth of agricultural production in Europe , and for the export of agricultural produce by the Union .
Finally , my third point concerns the prevention of climate change , which is one of the budgetary priorities for 2009 .
This will put additional burdens on the economies of Member States , unfortunately without making any allowances for the delays in their development .
This will put the new Member States in a particularly difficult situation and could lead to serious and detrimental economic and social consequences in those countries .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , the rapporteur , Mrs Haug , shows immense technical skill and professionalism in her work .
Our group supports the call in the report for solidarity within the Union and a balance in regional development , and wants to see greater transparency and clarity in the budget .
It is important to give attention to the mid-term review of the budgetary framework for the years to come in 2009 , even though the outcome of the new negotiations will not yet have an impact on next year 's budget .
Our group has always made the comment that the Union 's budget lacks the tools for building the EU 's social dimension .
That is one of the reasons why we could not accept the final draft budget proposals in December .
Our group also believes that the Union 's trend towards militarisation will continue if the Lisbon Treaty is adopted .
It will add new elements to the work of the Union : a security and defence policy and permanent structural cooperation .
We observe how the Council is continually proposing new appropriations for the Union 's budget and how Parliament is ready to accept them .
An attempt to include the Athens financing mechanism in the joint budget is the conclusion one reaches from the determination with which the Council proceeds towards Union militarisation and from its consistent calls for more military appropriations .
We also note that next year 's budget contains no clear budget policy on the costs the Union will incur for Kosovo and how they will be paid .
There are unforeseen costs looming for the commitment of some Member States .
This is for the promotion of the national independence of an ethnic-based community which is unique in the European context .
( EL ) Mr President , we are today inaugurating the 2009 budget , with its various special features .
It is the last budget of the current parliamentary term and of the Barroso Commission .
In all probability , it will be the first budget to fall between the current and new legislative frameworks .
This budget will be brought in by the Lisbon Treaty , and as you know , it involves the European Parliament in many significant areas of competence .
When there are many areas of competence there are also usually many responsibilities .
In this context I should like to make four points about the 2009 budget .
The first point is that the budget must have added community value and not merely give the impression of the end of an era .
I welcome what the Commissioner said .
The reinforcement of Frontex , for example , is a qualitative element showing that even in the last year of the five-year cycle of the Commission and the Parliament we can tackle new challenges .
My second point is that it must be a developmental budget , not one that will fund micro-programmes and modest priorities .
In the prevailing atmosphere of economic crisis surrounding us , we must emphasise problems requiring developmental responses .
The third point is that for any new policy priority we must also have new possibilities of funding .
To be plain , new targets mean new money .
Finally , as 2009 will be a year of elections , I appeal to the Commission .
When you present the preliminary draft budget to us , do so in a simple and comprehensible way .
It is time for the citizens of Europe to be able to understand , easily the budget , which is about them .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today 's debate on the Haug report , I believe , represents a first essential step towards the politicisation of the budget procedure .
One way or another , 2009 will be a very full political year for Europe and our Parliament : parliamentary elections will be taking place , I hope the new Lisbon Treaty will be implemented and quite a number of changes will come into force in own Parliament .
In the midst of all these developments , the budget will undergo fundamental changes .
This is what is being prepared for in political terms in this report .
Let me focus on four important points in the procedure and report .
Firstly , it is important to react in good time to prepare for the new situation .
The next budget , which , as we have all said , will be the first of the new procedure , must be based on foundations already laid down so that it can work correctly .
I should like to emphasise the second point because the Socialist Group in the European Parliament has been calling for it for many years : opening up the procedure to the other committees .
Here , the rapporteur 's initiative is very important .
We have debated not only with the Committee on Budgets but also with the other committees about the policy priorities .
Thirdly , we must strive both now and every year to reflect the policy priorities of this Parliament according to what the budget says .
Here , I believe that the primary issues are the huge subject of poverty , agriculture , development and technology .
Fourthly and lastly , and I am just finishing , Mr President , is the importance of the pilot programmes .
They give us a vital glimpse at what will happen over the coming years in the EU .
( PT ) Mr President , among the important aspects affecting the 2009 budget is the planned review of the Community budget .
The exact form of this review has yet to be defined , but we are concerned about some of the objectives already indicated for the review .
Moreover , with regard to the guidelines adopted by the Commission and the Council , it is clear that there will be a repeat of what happened in 2007 and 2008 , namely , that spending will once again fall short of the limits laid down in the multi-annual financial framework , already insufficient to meet the needs of real social cohesion in the European Union .
In addition , there are increasing signs that the allocation for ' expenditure ' on social cohesion will not be used .
At the same time , there is an increase in the allocation for the EU 's external action , namely , intervention in theatres of war , which we reject .
In brief , insufficient funds for priorities we agree with and more funds for priorities we reject .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to begin by strongly supporting the words of the rapporteur and also by appealing to Parliament 's specialist committees really to concentrate on projects with European added value when it comes to what I hope will be prompt consideration of the pilot projects and preparatory actions .
Addressing the Commission and the Council , let me add that in the course of the debate we finally want an answer to the question how we can at last restore health to our foreign and security policy that is suffering from several years of chronic under-funding , to bring an end to the annual disputes in this area that benefit nobody and are also damaging to the Commission and the Council .
The Commissioner said she would respond to the outcome of Bali in the preliminary draft budget , along the lines of formulating a new Asia strategy .
But I would like to know when the Commission intends to present proposals on the budgetary implications of the Reform treaty , for the period up to 2013 .
Or are we supposed to wait for the next financial programming period ?
After all , we are concerned here with new aspects of immigration policy , climate change , energy policy , judicial cooperation and foreign and security policy .
We have heard nothing on those subjects .
Let me add that as part of this budgetary procedure we must create the framework for implementing the new treaty once it has been ratified , which means that we must - proceeding with due care and sensitivity - take account of the need to adjust the agreements , in relation both to the ratification process and to the legal basis .
That is most important .
There are three aspects here .
Where do we need preliminary agreements to ensure the appropriate transition from the old to the new treaty ?
Where do we need transitional agreements to ensure legal certainty ?
And where do we need a little more time to get subsequent agreements underway on the basis of the necessary legislative procedures ?
I want to make it quite clear - to the forthcoming French Presidency too - that any agreements we can reach in regard to those three aspects will depend on the results , and we must retain a degree of flexibility so that we do not set everything in stone from the outset and then have to break it up again with a sledge-hammer .
( NL ) Mr President , first of all I wish Jutta Haug bon courage in this important task , which she is taking on for the second time .
2008 will after all be a very important year , not only because we have to draw up the ordinary budget for 2009 - as many speakers have said - but also because we have to work out a procedure for agreeing the 2010 budget under the new treaty .
This year is the time to demonstrate exactly what Parliament can and cannot do .
There is still a considerable lack of clarity over agriculture .
From a careful reading of the treaty it seems that the Council can , this time , set the prices and quotas unilaterally .
How does that sit with our new budgetary powers on agriculture for category II ?
We are supposed to have equal powers .
Sorting that out has to be a priority .
Food and energy policy remains important and perhaps we can resolve this within the 5 % margin afforded us by the Interinstitutional Agreement .
I urge the Commission to give thought to it .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Haug , for her excellent work and cooperation .
She does indeed show professionalism and at this crucial stage the budget is surely destined for a happy outcome at the end of the year if this cooperation continues .
Is our budget sufficiently transparent for us to be able to gain the public 's confidence when the elections take place in 2009 ?
At the same time , however , we are preparing for a post-Lisbon time , and this is especially true of foreign policy , for example , and we need to prepare ourselves for a time when Parliament too shows that it has the will to contribute to this new approach to foreign policy .
I want to say something important while this budget is still being drafted .
I hope that the Commission will produce an initiative which the rapporteur could then develop .
It relates to the Baltic Sea Strategy .
I have heard that the Commission is working on such a strategy and I have also heard that Sweden , when it eventually holds the Presidency , intends to make the Baltic Sea Strategy a top priority .
This strategy will be of no importance if it does not have any money behind it .
At present we have many different pilot projects here and there .
This entire Baltic policy is a patchwork quilt , both in terms of its finances and politically .
That is why we need a separate heading entitled the Baltic Sea Strategy , so that we can implement the right kind of environmental policy , the right kind of transport policy and even the right kind of energy policy , as we know that a gas pipe will be passing though the Baltic Sea from Russia to Germany .
That is why we need this initiative , and I hope that the Commission will show some on this occasion .
( LV ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , from the procedural viewpoint the EU 's budget for 2009 can be seen as preparation for two important issues .
Firstly , with the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty the EU budget procedure has changed significantly and we need to do the necessary preparatory work to ensure clarity and successful work on the European Union 's budget for 2010 .
Secondly , we need to speed up the review of the EU budget , including issues concerning the reform of the common agricultural policy and the UK rebate , in order to ensure a successful mid-term report on the financial perspective .
The policy priorities set out by the European Commission for 2009 - promoting economic growth and employment , combating climate change and fostering sustainable development - are to be endorsed , but they have to be implemented with the necessary support from the EU budget .
Unfortunately , the restricted budget amount within the ceiling laid down in the financial framework means that the resources needed to finance the new priorities must be sought within the confines of the existing budget , and we have to redistribute resources .
It is possible that we will have to change the restrictions on obtaining individual EU budget resources .
For example , the restriction currently in force for the Structural Funds , that only 3 % of resources from the relevant operational programme may be channelled towards energy efficiency measures , prohibits new Member States from reviewing their priorities for obtaining Structural Funds in accordance with the new priorities on Europe 's energy strategy and climate change .
Thank you for your attention .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I want to give my views on two of the priority points , namely our rapporteur 's criticism that EU budgeting lacks transparency , and the Commission 's staff policy .
As rapporteur on the budget I am asking the Commission to address the point of budgetary transparency and to put forward proposals for the next planned reform of the budgetary system .
The information contained in the actual budget is absolutely inadequate and these lists of numbers are actually no use to us at all .
So far the Commission has been producing a lot of accompanying documents , which only devalues the budget itself .
Why not include more information within the budget itself from the outset , which would remove the need for some of the reports that have been requested and please both the Commission and Parliament .
I will work on those foundations for the next budgetary reform and would ask my fellow Members , even at this stage , to support the preliminary activities , because I would like to have several studies carried out on the subject .
My second point is this : in its December resolution on the 2007 budget , Parliament called for a progress report on staff screening , wanting it by 30 April 2008 .
I assume we will receive that report in a few days ' time .
This screening that Parliament called for has now turned into one of the Barroso Commission 's major success stories .
The President of the Commission is setting himself up as a reformer , but he can only continue to be taken as a reformer if he draws conclusions from the screening before the end of this Commission 's term .
That means he must undertake a critical review of decentralisation and take the first steps in that direction .
He owes that not only to the taxpayer and to Parliament but also to his staff , which is currently wasting its time and skills on far too much in-house administration and bureaucracy .
The Commission also owes it to itself , as given the challenges facing the EU and the important management tasks it is undertaking , we believe that - also in view of the 2009 budget , which as you know does not provide for any new items - it can succeed with those tasks only if it also embarks on the appropriate measures and changes within the administration .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
As one of those who drafted the 2009 budget , I would like to thank Jutta Haug and László Surján for their sound preparatory work .
To be able to produce a good end result we had to be disciplined and harmonious in our work since we often had to explore new routes .
And we can be quite confident about the environmental protection concerns in the parts of the APS ( Annual Policy Strategy ) that are known .
I welcome all three of the Commission 's initiatives .
As a member of the Central Asia Delegation , I particularly welcome the European Union 's new Central Asia Strategy and the increased support .
I also welcome its intention to promote sustainable development practices in developing countries , especially in biodiversity and energy .
This is not simply our moral duty .
It is in our own interests .
With my fellow Members , I am sure that we will be able to put forward many research projects for support , since this is what our citizens expect . Thank you very much .


Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like once again to thank Ms Haug for the report and also all the speakers for their comments : not only those related directly to the 2009 budget , but also those comments that went beyond 2009 , which are very useful in the context of our reflection on the policy agenda and on the future reform of the budget .
Concerning the Baltic Sea strategy , I would like to react to two very concrete points which were raised .
Firstly , on the Baltic Sea strategy : the Commission is working on this strategy , and I have the pleasure of chairing the inter-service work on this strategy .
It is envisaged that it will be on the agenda of the Swedish presidency , which means the second half of 2009 .
However , we are at the stage of consulting and taking stock of the situation in the region and also considering ideas for this strategy .
With regard to any budget consequences , it is far too early to talk about this today .
Concerning the new Treaty and the consequences for the policy agenda , one issue is the consequences of the Lisbon Treaty for the institutional change and the new legal frameworks .
The other thing is the policy agenda and , as you know , both the Council and the Commission are currently involved in the reflection and very concrete work , mostly on the legal frameworks and new institutional challenges .
However , reflection on the policy agenda is also taking place , as you know , as a result of the requirement to have the budget review .
I believe that towards the end of this year - or very early in 2009 - the Commission will come forward with the new policy agenda , and only then can the budgetary consequences be considered and taken care of in a reasonable way and with reasonable responsibility .
Concerning transparency , I have taken note of all your points on screening results and shall forward them , especially to Commissioner Grybauskaitė , but I think to the entire college , and I would like to confirm what you have just said .
With regard to 2009 , my understanding is that we are now aware of the guidelines which were expressed by both arms of the budgetary authority .
The preliminary draft budget will be based on sound estimates of the need to achieve all those priorities that have been already agreed and which are ahead of us .
There is no doubt that the Commission will need good ongoing cooperation with you to attain these results .
I would also like to say that good cooperation will also be essential in the context of long-term challenges , both the institutional and the policy agenda ones .
Thank you very much for the debate .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I thank all the speakers in this debate .
I am , of course , also grateful for the good wishes and praise I have received .
Let me also thank the Commissioner .
If I have understood correctly , the Commission is supporting us all the way and promising a preliminary draft budget that will take account of everything we want taken into account .
We have once again made our priorities plain .
They are neither few in number , nor are they exactly small : tackling climate change , creating growth and employment , a social Europe , research , training , education , aid for the poorest countries in the world , fulfilling our tasks in the world .
It is not easy actually to finance all that .
I wish the Council had been listening , for then it would have seen that - thank God ! - all , or at least nearly all the parliamentary groups stand united here .
For that , I warmly thank all concerned .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Hübner has just said that the Commission and the Council are both already working on matters relating to transposition of the Lisbon Treaty .
That is wonderful !
However , as Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , I would like to insist on behalf , I believe , of all fellow Members that Parliament is treated as an equal , including in regard to the forwarding of documents and non-papers on everything that will have to be discussed and negotiated jointly in the coming months , rather than as a second-rate institution .
Unless we are certain of that , we will face major problems at the end of the procedure , at the end of the year .
It is in the interest of the Commission and of the Council to ensure completely equal treatment in information policy too , in regard to documents and matters under consideration .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would just like to say very clearly that I cannot imagine that these three institutions would not work together .
The same is true , I assume , when it comes to Parliament working with the Commission and with the Council .
This is our common Treaty , our common achievement and our common task .
I can only pass your words on to President Barroso , but I am sure that everybody is fully aware of this responsibility .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 22 April 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) The Lisbon Treaty , which is due to come into force on 1 January next , will bring an unprecedented strengthening of Parliament 's prerogatives .
Before the end of this year , we will have to sign an interinstitutional agreement taking account of the extension of codecision and the end of the distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure .
In that context , we should emphasise that we are determined to press our case in the mid-term renegotiation of the financial framework for 2007-2013 and through the policy reorientation that we want to achieve , based on a budget that is fully commensurate with our ambitions and does not undermine the principles of solidarity that we hold dear .
While we must always be concerned to make our policies more efficient , we shall have to guard against any possible attempt at renationalising the CAP and regional policies .
It is also important that we should be able to facilitate the emergence of new and useful policies through the budgetary tools that Parliament has at its disposal in the form of the flexibility instrument , pilot projects and preparatory actions .
In addition , the European Commission needs to improve budgetary transparency so that we can properly monitor the use of public funds .
in writing . - We ought to prepare for the changes set to take place in 2009 with the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty and the European elections as they will have a major impact on the budget .
The new elected Parliament and designated Commission will indeed have to deal with new budget procedures .
It is therefore necessary to present for 2009 transparent and viable budgetary framework and priorities .
Among other aspects , it is essential to ensure that the budget matches the priorities with sufficient resources .
In this respect , I am glad to notice that our rapporteur , Mrs HAUG , puts the emphasis on the importance of the principle of solidarity as one of the cornerstones of European policies , especially with regard to cohesion and structural policies .
With new challenges ahead and the new inter-institutional balance within the institutional triangle it is even more essential to ensure coherence between policy priorities and the financial resources that are made available .
There are growing concerns that the re-prioritization toward competitiveness , climate change or sustainable development would be made at the costs of other priorities budgets .
Adding new priorities in the future should at no cost hamper the achievement of other political priorities such as solidarity .
in writing . - ( RO ) I would like to emphasize certain aspects related to the article reaffirming the importance of the principle of solidarity in this report .
The cohesion policy continues to draw one third of the European Union 's annual budget .
Nevertheless , we cannot ignore the fact that this field has become less and less important , as compared to the increases recorded in the competitiveness policy for economic growth and employment .
For instance , as compared to 2007 , budget line 1a - for competitiveness - has recorded an increase of 18.4 % , while 1b - which covers the field of cohesion - only a 3.1 % increase .
Moreover , we should take into consideration the effects of the Lisbon Treaty 's implementation on the cohesion policy .
Structural funds - which are currently non-mandatory expenses and on which the Parliament has the last say in the budgetary procedure - will become the subject of a joint decision of the Council of Ministers and the Parliament .
Nevertheless , it is known that every year , the Council operates important reductions of the European amounts designed for the cohesion policy .
For this reason , I believe it is very important to achieve the objectives of the Lisbon strategy , yet without neglecting the disparities continuing to exist between the European regions .
Proposed hearing of the Commission on crimes of genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes committed by totalitarian regimes ( 8 April 2008 ) ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on crimes of genocide , crimes against humanity and war crimes committed by totalitarian regimes .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to report on the hearing on crimes committed by totalitarian regimes in order to address legitimate concerns raised by Parliament .
On 8 April 2008 the Commission and the Slovenian Presidency held a hearing on crimes committed by totalitarian regimes .
This hearing was requested by the Council in April 2007 during the negotiations on the Framework Decision on combating racism and xenophobia .
The purpose of the hearing was to gain a better understanding of how the Member States have coped with the legacy of totalitarian crimes and of the nature of the methods and practices that have been adopted in order to face up to this challenge .
The hearing focused on two main themes : the recognition of totalitarian crimes , and reconciliation .
Given the sensitive nature of this issue and to prevent the matter from being exploited in any way , the Commission was keen for this debate to be , first and foremost , a debate among independent experts and academics from a variety of backgrounds who were committed to a scientifically based approach .
The Member States were invited to attend , as was the European Parliament , and I am delighted that many MEPs were given the opportunity to take part in the debate .
The hearing was conducive to constructive and dispassionate debate .
In general , four issues emerged from the discussions that were of particular concern to the Commission .
Firstly , there is the feeling that the old Member States should be made more aware of the tragic past of the new Member States .
This lack of recognition should be carefully reviewed so as to avoid the Union being divided on such a serious matter , one which should actually unite us .
Secondly , it emerged from the debates that establishing the truth is a prerequisite for reconciliation .
The spirit of reconciliation that informs the process of European integration is more important now than ever before .
The various experiences of reconciliation discussed during the hearing demonstrated how complex this task is , but also that there is reason to be optimistic .
They show that respect for fundamental rights is an essential factor in achieving genuine reconciliation .
Thirdly , there seem to be many different ways of dealing with the issues of recognition and reconciliation .
There is no one-size-fits-all model , and each Member State must find whichever one best suits its circumstances .
Finally , the debates revealed that the European institutions are being called on to address these issues more fully .
During the hearing , a group of participants submitted a document in which they put forward a large number of proposals for action .
The Commission has noted this call for greater European involvement on these issues ; however , it must be emphasised that it is up to each Member State to find its own way of dealing with the remembrance of these crimes and of addressing these issues .
The European Union cannot replace the Member States in this task .
The European Union has very few powers to act in this area .
Its role is to facilitate this process by encouraging discussion , fostering the sharing of experience and best practices , and bringing the various players together .
All contributions to the hearing must now be analysed ; however , I should like to reiterate the Commission 's determination to continue the process set in motion by the Council Declaration of April 2007 .
The Commission must report to the Council two years after the Framework Decision on combating racism and xenophobia enters into force , after which time , it will be possible to hold a political debate .
In the meantime , the Slovenian Presidency plans to publish the contributions received during the hearing .
For its part , the Commission intends to initiate a study to gain a factual overview of the various methods , legislation and practices used in the Member States to deal with the issue of remembering totalitarian crimes .
With regard to the importance of the educational and citizenship aspects , the Commission will also consider how existing Community programmes can be further used to raise awareness of these issues across Europe .
In conclusion , it is important to promote an objective and dispassionate discussion of these issues , and to move forward gradually within the limits of the powers of the Union .
The Commission is naturally prepared to participate fully in this process .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , while talking , debating and approaching an essential common position on the evaluation of crimes of totalitarian regimes in Europe , one obstacle is most evident as a barrier to more rapid moral and legislative success .
That main obstacle is the hardly understandable position of today 's Russian Government .
As far as the crimes committed in the Stalinist past of the USSR are concerned , instead of distancing themselves with proper condemnation of gross crimes against humanity , war crimes and other wrongdoings , Russia 's ruling elite is not following the good example of denazified Germany .
No , the Soviet Führer , Stalin , is praised , his own and his gang 's crimes denied or marginalised and the victims humiliated and mocked .
This strange political behaviour , so detrimental to Russia itself , cannot tear out the truth about deeds but continues to affect wrongly our European standards and fairness of evaluations .
We should realise how such hypocrisy and double standards are helpful for various neo-Nazis etc .
If anyone says : well , before official Russia changes its mind , we have to freeze ours and follow the Kremlin 's mind or postpone our evaluations and decisions , that is an entirely and deeply wrong stance .
No matter how harshly Russian-State-hired political historians will try to rewrite the European history of the facts , the two bloodiest international tyrannies of the 20th century , along with the smaller national dictatorships , should and will be assessed properly .
This has to be the best way Europe can assist the Russia of the future .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , our group helped to bring about this debate because we are concerned at the growing number of party-political interpretations of the past .
I speak here not just as a politician , as a Social Democrat , but as a historian too .
Interpretations of this kind often perpetuate myths which can be a breeding ground for xenophobia , for example , because they only present one side of the story .
That , of course , is very dangerous in a Europe of great diversity , including ethnic diversity .
There are no easy answers to difficult questions of history .
That misconception is often created by those who put a populist spin on historical events .
Falsifying the past is also used to make people forget it , for example denying the Holocaust or covering up the crimes of other totalitarian regimes .
And there is also the danger of being selective .
Historical criteria are sometimes applied to one situation and not to another .
Sometimes no distinction is made at all and one situation is judged in the same way as another .
The result is that people get confused and do not know how they ought to feel about the past - the politicians have hijacked historical truth because it is all too easy to draw comparisons .
Our group sees this as especially important this year , as this year we commemorate the Prague uprising , the Prague Spring , but also Kristallnacht .
We think it is important that Commission and the Council should give a lead and encourage a debate based on facts , based on scientific research .
Not in an attempt to reach some kind of common position , but to ensure people realise that our discussion is based on correct information .
And to ensure that the debate can be continued properly .
Once again I should stress that the aim here is not , of course , to airbrush important and terrible episodes out of our history .
Of course not , the aim above all is to learn from them .
But we have to make sure that history is not misused .
This is an important moral issue .
I think it is important to make the point once again that in our debate this afternoon and this evening we should also give the floor to a number of fellow Members who have had personal experience of the consequences of totalitarian regimes .
For us this is an important debate , which we shall certainly be taking further in the course of the year .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I believe that all the wrongs committed by totalitarian regimes - whether fascist , communist or Stalinist - must be thoroughly exposed .
But I am not in favour of criminalising in themselves the denial or condoning of such crimes , whether the Holocaust , the Shoah , genocide war crimes or crimes against humanity committed by any totalitarian or authoritarian regimes , any more than I am in favour of the criminalising of the so-called public provocation or apology for - or glorification of - terrorism .
In all these cases , I believe that freedom of speech should be paramount , and that criminal law should only be brought in when there is clear incitement to hatred , to violence or to terrorism .
Any freedom of expression is essential to establishing the truth .
One theme of the hearing was redress for injustice , and it is not possible to have justice without truth .
The greatest illustration of this was in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in South Africa .
And I believe that one of the proudest achievements of the European Union and its Member States in the last decade was the establishment of the International Criminal Court .
But there are still many people walking the planet who are walking with impunity , and I believe that we are not doing enough in Europe to bring them to justice .
I do not know what happened to the spirit that led the EU to support the International Criminal Court , when it came to being honest about collusion in torture flights and secret prisons .
We have had no satisfactory response from the Member States to our report of a year ago about such collusion .
We learn in the United States that torture at Guantánamo Bay and elsewhere was mandated at the highest level of the Bush Administration .
This has led to a tragic loss of moral authority and reputation for the United States .
Yes , we must bring truth to these crimes - but do not criminalise what needs to be thoroughly discussed .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the two most cruel totalitarian regimes of the 20th century , German Nazism and Soviet- and Chinese-style communism , committed heinous crimes .
The total number of victims probably exceeds 100 million dead and martyred in the Holocaust and through mass executions and deportations , artificially generated hunger , in death and concentration camps .
The Nazi system murdered people on racial grounds ; the communist system for reasons of social class .
The ideologies which provided the foundations of these systems excluded whole groups of citizens from the rule of law and designated them for death or for physical and social degradation in order to construct a new , allegedly better society .
A special kind of hatred was held towards religions .
Within these systems not only was there a monopoly of power , but also one of language , which was turned into a tool of propaganda and terror .
Today , more than 60 years after World War II ended , more than a dozen years after the fall of Soviet communism , it is amazing that within the European Union there are still people who refuse to recognise that communism was a criminal system .
Many ruses are being used to relativise communism 's past .
What moral argument is there to support the contention that the victims of Nazism are more important than those of communism ?
Why are we unable to produce some common resolution on this ?
Commissioner , this is not a matter for individual Member States only .
If the Union considers itself to be responsible and competent to deal with racism and xenophobia , it should muster sufficient courage to deplore communist crimes too .
I say this not only as a politician , but as a historian .
The similarities between both these systems do not necessarily lead to arguments about their compatibility .
To stress the uniqueness of communist crimes does not diminish the Nazi crimes at all , and vice versa .
Put simply , common decency and remembrance of the countless victims of these regimes requires condemnation of both .
The working group we have set up in Parliament , called United Europe United History , which already has some 50 Members , will be soliciting just such a condemnation .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I think our duty in this matter is threefold .
First , we must manage to formulate a uniform European interpretation of war and the reasons for war , that is to say a common European memory .
There is no point in continuing with this unending discussion and comparing Stalinist crimes with Nazi crimes .
Those are two separate examples of totalitarianism , two separate criminal systems , although they do sometimes have structural similarities .
Surely we can take the whole debate about openness , democracy , etc . , as expressing a common interpretation .
The common response is , for example , the European Union , or the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which basically reflect the lessons learned from those two totalitarian systems that created such destruction on our continent .
Secondly , if we look around us in the world , we see Rwanda , Bosnia , Darfur , and so on .
That means the destruction of human beings is continuing .
What we need - as Baroness Ludford rightly said - is the International Criminal Court , and common rules .
Today we must seek to ensure that all civilised states recognise the International Criminal Court so that crimes of that kind , which differ , which are not all the same , but which are all crimes in some form , really can be brought to justice .
We will only be able to counter such crimes if we can bring those responsible to justice , wherever they are , whether in Guantánamo , in Darfur , or in Bosnia , among Bosnian Serbs .
Justice will prevail only if those responsible can be taken to court .
Those are the lessons of history and that is why I believe that Commission initiatives of this kind are interesting if , in the end , they lead us to formulate a common , anti-totalitarian position .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , we will support any move to eradicate racism and xenophobia , promote fundamental rights and , even more so , condemn unreservedly war crimes , crimes against humanity and crimes of genocide .
This we will do , whatever the time or the place .
In this fight , there can be no taboos , neither with regard to the crimes of the past nor in connection with the tragedies currently taking place all over the world .
In terms of European history , this naturally applies to Nazism .
This also applies to the fascist regimes of Mussolini , Pétain , Franco , Salazar , as it does to that of the Greek Colonels .
We are also quite prepared to reiterate a radical condemnation of the atrocious crimes committed under Stalin .
What happened during the colonial period must not be forgotten either .
Our unwillingness to compromise must surely apply even more to the racist , xenophobic and overtly neo-fascist tendencies that are still tolerated today at a very high level in some of the Member States , both new and old , of the European Union .
There is only one thing that might be deemed unacceptable , not by our group especially but by those who have made personal sacrifices in the fight against the worst genocide in modern history , and that is the attempt surreptitiously to trivialise Nazism by placing it in a generic category that includes , in particular , Stalinism and even the regimes existing in central and eastern Europe prior to the fall of the Berlin Wall .
I should like to quote you three statements made recently from among many more on this subject , all of which speak for themselves .
Firstly , this excerpt from a statement made by the German Union of Survivors of the Neuengamme Concentration Camp .
I quote :
( DE ) ' The Neuengamme Association has always opposed equating National Socialism with Stalinism . '
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Next , this comment made by the Advisory Board of Former Prisoners of Buchenwald .
And I quote : ' Those who seek to generalise distort the significance of Nazi barbarism in Germany 's history . '
Finally , these words spoken by the Secretary General of the Central Council of Jews in Germany , denouncing those who venture to draw a comparison between the former GDR and the Nazi regime ; and I quote : ' Any attempt to draw a parallel between them is to diminish the magnitude of the denial of rights , deportation and mass extermination of millions of innocent men , women and children during the Nazi dictatorship . '
Thank you for devoting some thought to these statements .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , war is one thing , the destruction of nations and crimes against humanity quite another .
Not every war aims to exterminate the losing side , and a nation can be destroyed without war .
Often overwhelming hatred against the conquerors and oppressors filled the souls of those being wronged - this is how Hannibal and Mithidrates saw the Romans .
But this is not comparable to the feelings of enmity born in the souls of the criminals of the 20th century .
The history of that century came to be much more than just a sum of wrongs suffered by certain nations .
It became an addendum to the history of humanity , and of inhumanity .
Kant , the philosopher , formulated the following imperative : act so that humanity , in whatever shape , is for you an end , and not merely the means to an end .
The origin of the crime of genocide has often been fiercely debated .
It would be better to ask why nobody prevented such crimes at the right time .
In totalitarian politics , everything was planned and calculated .
Its first prescription was not to reveal anything prematurely , to pretend to be a friend until the last moment .
I mention this because today openly para-fascist and para-communist groups exist in many countries .
This is why the first two sessions of the European Hearing , on the subject of history of totalitarian crimes , were so important .
Let us speak plainly in order to clearly define what may not under any circumstances be subject to the so-called historical revisionism .
Genocide is not a phenomenon which can be opposed by a single nation .
It must be opposed by the society of the entire civilised world .
This is one of the reasons why it is a common task for the European Union .
( BG ) During the 20th century , in addition to the totalitarian regimes of communism and nazism , there is another fact : the atrocious assaults against the human rights of the Bulgarian and the Armenian people by the Ottoman Empire .
For almost five centuries , under the rule of the Ottoman state , the violence against the Bulgarian people was marked by the features of genocide .
A considerable part of the Bulgarian population was taken away into slavery , exterminated or forcibly converted to Islam , which is basically a purposeful ethnic cleansing .
Another undeniable fact is the forcible deportation and killing of over one and a half million Armenians by the Turkish authorities between 1915 and 1917 .
All of these acts against Bulgarians and Armenians fully match the elements of crimes defined in UN instruments on the prosecution and punishment of genocide .
The recognition of genocide against Armenians and Bulgarians would send a clear signal to the Republic of Turkey to assume its liability and apologize for the five centuries of oppression against the Bulgarians and for the crimes and mass murders committed , and to compensate the heirs of refugees for the suffering and for the private estates stolen from them which remain on Turkish territory .
( FR ) Commissioner , forgive me , but I was very deeply shocked by your introduction to this debate .
You told us that the Commission had held a dispassionate debate on crimes against humanity .
You spoke of how complex this task is , and , in conclusion , you said that the European Union had very few powers in this area .
When she was two months old , the wife of your Estonian colleague , Sim Kallas , with whom you are well acquainted , was deported by Stalin , along with her mother and grandmother .
Another of your colleagues , Mr Frattini , who will soon be leaving us , said in his letter to Mr Landsbergis : ' Your history - referring to Lithuania 's suffering under Stalin - your history is our history . '
Commissioner , in your reply , perhaps you could explain things in greater depth , as it may be that I have misunderstood .
I believe that it is here in Parliament and in the Council that a great deal has been done to remember the forgotten dead .
For we do not talk like politicians ; we address the general public .
There are people still living today in Poland and in the Baltic States who have lost their parents , their grandparents , but no one remembers them .
I do not believe that a debate on the suffering of six million Jews can be dispassionate .
Therefore , the length of such a debate and the manner in which it is conducted are extremely important factors .
As your colleague would say , the history of central and eastern Europe is our history .
The problem for us British and for us French is that we were Stalin 's allies at the end of the War .
It took 30 years for the British to admit that Katyn was a Stalinist crime .
The perpetrator was not Hitler .
( DE ) Mr President , we Social Democrats have been persecuted by every totalitarian and authoritarian regime of the 20th century , whether by the Nazis or by the thugs of Stalin , Franco or Mussolini - the list is long .
That is why we not only have no problem with but actually welcome a reappraisal of the crimes under Stalinism .
We can only applaud it .
Yet this reappraisal should follow the rules of historical methodology and not be confused with the rules governing criminal court proceedings .
We must guard against confusing these matters .
It is not a question of counting up the victims or of a re-run of the Nuremberg Trials ; this time we are trying an ideology rather than identified criminals .
There are , however , also points at which we must quite clearly say ' no ' and we Social Democrats have identified a few of them .
We say ' no ' to the attempt to establish a new framework for interpreting European history , which emerged from the speeches made by some Members of this House at a conference held on 22 January this year .
We are deeply opposed to the view that the extermination of European Jews by the Nazis came from a conception of history that was developed by the Soviet regime .
We reject that view .
We reject it all the more firmly because in 2006 we found that another colleague from the same ideological spectrum sent a roundmail to all Members of this House in which he described the two Latvian Waffen-SS divisions as part of the German forces , thereby playing down their role .
We reject that interpretation too , especially in connection with the first sentence .
We also reject the assertion that the West did nothing to bring about change in what was then the Soviet-ruled part of Europe .
It was the CSCE in Helsinki that first gave the civil rights movements in those countries room to breathe , with the successful and happy result we see today as we welcome representatives from those countries to our House .
These are points we insist on and will continue to pursue .
( LV ) Mr President , at the European Parliament we are accustomed to talk about common values , about a common and truthful history , but sometimes misunderstandings arise .
Commissioner Barrot , I think that you said rightly that in Europe it is still necessary to establish the truth .
What we are talking about is reconciliation , but perhaps not to the extent that Mr Cohn-Bendit has proposed .
Thank you , though , to Commissioner Frattini for the hearing that was organised .
I was able to participate and also on various occasions to speak in the hearing .
I think that the debate was pithy .
Unfortunately , what was missing was a clear , resolute , focused statement on further action .
Unfortunately , Russian representatives repeatedly continued to explain away the crimes committed by totalitarian communism in the territories occupied by the USSR .
Russia 's reaction is no surprise , but what will the European Union do ?
Will it continue to maintain double standards ?
Will it demand the acknowledgement of Nazi crimes in the denial of events or their gross trivialisation in the Member States ?
Will it demand that custodial sentences of up to three years be imposed ?
Will it , at the same time , turn a blind eye to the crimes of the USSR 's totalitarian regime ?
Some of the victims of the Soviet totalitarian regime are still alive , but the European Union 's position does not offer them any satisfaction - in fact , worse than that , it continues to humiliate them .
We are talking about EU citizens .
The European Parliament ought to range itself against such injustice .
Unfortunately , we repeatedly see the chairs of the political groups deciding not to table a resolution on this issue .
Therefore , we cannot have a written record of the thoughts we are expressing here today .
Commissioner Barrot , I call upon you not to depart from this important goal , but to strive for a uniform understanding and truthful history in the name of reconciliation .
Thank you .
( HU ) Mr President , the anti-Ceauşescu uprising in Romania started at my church .
I have had painful experience of what communism really is and it is therefore with a sense of satisfaction that I note that the European Union 's attention is once again focused on the criminal actions of totalitarian regimes .
In cases of crimes against humanity committed in the eras of national socialism and communism the world still applies a double standard .
Unlike the case of fascism , there has yet been no trial of communism .
Both types of dictatorial regime suppressed freedom , human rights and churches .
They crippled the lives of their national minorities .
The huge scale of human and social tragedy is common to fascism and communism .
Political , historical , human and moral restitution has hardly begun and must be continued .
Take the example of Romania and the Tismăneanu report .
It is my conviction that , for the regime change begun there in 1989 to be complete , the events of the past must be confronted .
Real European integration of former communist countries requires not just truth and restitution but also the condemnation of dictatorship .
Mr President , in just the same way as the Baltic Sea became an internal EU sea in 2004 , so the historical experiences of the 10 new Member States that suffered under the totalitarian rule of communism have become an all-European problem .

I absolutely agree with Mr Cohn-Bendit : we need a uniform or common interpretation of our common history .
So it is not a question of condemnation ; it is a question of moral and political assessment of all the crimes .
We are called upon to guarantee that all crimes against humanity , all acts of genocide and classicide and all war crimes should be treated equally .
Justice belongs to all citizens of Europe without any exception .
In that sense , I am a bit disappointed with the Commission statement , because the main theme is that the assessment of communist totalitarianism will be an internal affair for every relevant country .
I am afraid it is going to deepen double standards , because clearly Nazism and fascism are not considered to be internal matters in any of the EU Member States .
Every emergence of neo-Nazism and racism is viewed as a direct threat to the common values of Europe .
So , what do we need to do ?
There are still tens of millions of living victims of communist regimes , as well as their descendents .
As things stand today , they are bound to feel like second- or third-class victims .
The famous ' never again ' is still not guaranteed for them .
Lastly , this is not a problem of the past .
The absence of a political and moral assessment is continuously shaping our present day and is distorting our common future .
Could one imagine the return of the Soviet KGB leadership to power in Russia or a revival of communist political forces in Germany if there had been an assessment of the communist system at the end of the Cold War ?
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to open today 's debate with a reminder of the leader of the Polish Socialist Party , Kazimierz Pużak - who may be considered to be a symbol of this debate .
Arrested for the first time in the early years of the 20th century , in 1911 , Pużak , the leader of the Polish Socialist Party , the leader of the underground Socialist Party during World War II in the struggle against Nazism , and arrested again by the NKVD in 1945 , died tragically in a Stalinist prison in Poland on 30 April 1950 .
For us Socialists , democracy , the fight for human rights , for the rule of law , and the principles of liberal democracy were always the foundations of politics .
This is our inheritance in today 's Europe .
At the same time , Commissioner , I address you in particular ; history is today , regretfully , the subject of manipulation , a kind of crusade , colonisation undertaken by the populist right , by nationalist movements .
This creates paradoxical situations where we have the nationalist right which wants historical research , new tribunals , but at the same time opposes the Charter of Fundamental rights as part of European law .
An unbelievable paradox , indeed .
Democracy , the rule of law , liberal democracy , these are the foundations of contemporary Europe .
The unity of Europe , the Charter of Fundamental rights , the rule of law prevailing all over the world , no acceptance of torture - this is our response stemming from the legacy of the 20th century : the struggle for democracy , the struggle against all manner of dictatorships and against totalitarian regimes .
( Applause )
( PL ) Mr President , genocide is defined in international law , and that definition is based on the UN Convention .
As a Pole - a citizen of a country afflicted by genocide - I believe that this definition should be expanded by two elements .
It should stress that , as a rule , the purpose of genocide is the liquidation of the feeling of national identity , through the extermination of the intellectual and cultural elites .
Poland may serve as an example .
During World War II the Germans and the Russians murdered there , in the first instance , the intelligentsia , the professors , the clergy .
Secondly consideration should be given to how to punish under international law historical lies , false propaganda , and refusal to acknowledge guilt about genocide .
An example here is the attitude of Russia in relation to Stalinist crimes , and also towards the Katyń massacre .
Poland supports the admission of Ukraine to the European Union .
However , so that history should not divide but unite , we believe that Ukraine should acknowledge the crimes committed against the Poles and the Jews during World War II - when more than 150 thousands of people died .
The European Union should be an organisation which provides an example of uncompromising fight against genocide to the whole world .
This is why , as politicians elected by nations , we should condemn communism as a criminal ideology and a criminal system .
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a memory of historical events is essential for the process of European construction .
For this process to be fully successful , it is vital to understand that it represents the elimination of nationalism , totalitarianism , intolerance , autocracy and war , and the establishment of Europeanism , freedom , respect , democracy and peace as the values which govern the way we live together in Europe .
This is the lesson which we must teach the young people of today : the events of the past and the progress of the present , without hiding the crimes and mistakes which had to be overcome and pointing out the sacrifices entailed in overcoming them .
To know our history is the antidote to falling into the same trap twice .
It is only by knowing the truth , the whole truth , that we can move forward .
We must firmly denounce the barbarities of our past without diminishing them , much less falsifying them ; without falling into the Manichean logic of the Cold War , equating the West with good and Eastern Europe with evil .
We will explain that there were democrats and totalitarians , but without hiding the fact that both Western and Eastern Europe had their totalitarians , both equally odious and criminal .
As a Spanish democrat , I sympathise with democrats who were victims of Stalinism in their countries , but I also ask them to show solidarity with those in Spain who lived through the oppression and suffering imposed by the dictatorship of General Franco .
We understand the tragedy of our fellow Europeans in Eastern Europe who went from one form of totalitarianism to another , but they must also understand our tragedy , which entailed maintaining the same criminal form of dictatorship and oppressing our people .
It is only by knowing the truth , the whole truth , that we can move forward .
Lastly , we will remember that in Tehran , Yalta and Potsdam , Stalin was not alone ; leaders of Western powers shared in his decisions .
Therefore everyone had their share of responsibility for the partitioning of Europe and for the oppression , punishment and suffering that many millions of Europeans were to experience at the hands of one totalitarian regime or another .
Certainly central and eastern Europe bear a much greater responsibility for Stalinism , but it is also true that , for my country , the responsibility lay mostly with western democracies who accepted the Franco tyranny established by Hitler and Mussolini as part of their free world and were complicit in his misdeeds .
Mr President , we have achieved much together as a united Europe , and Europe will be that much stronger , and offer greater guarantees of freedom and democracy , the more its construction is founded on an awareness of the progress represented by sharing in a project which identifies and rejects the dark side of our past in order to build a future dedicated to the values which unite us .
( PL ) I would like to express my satisfaction that today 's debate on the matters related to bloody totalitarian systems has been possible .
It is regrettable that the debate is so short and perfunctory .
The fact that the usual principle of adopting a suitable resolution has been abandoned provides food for thought .
It is also curious that at various levels within the Union German national socialism , popularly referred to as Nazism , is being considered and mentioned before anything else .
International socialism , that is communism , is avoided in silence .
These systems were linked not only by their common ideological roots , but also by practical cooperation .
Communism has its origins with Rosa Luxemburg , Liebknecht , Marx , Lenin and Stalin , and led to the planned deaths of tens of millions of inhabitants of central eastern Europe .
Many bloody crimes , for example the Katyń massacre , are taboo topics to this day , and these crimes may not be called by their proper name , genocide .
The building of a democratic Europe is possible only on the foundations of truth , including the truth about anti-human communist totalitarianism .
We owe remembrance and justice not only to the victims of inhuman systems ; first of all we owe it to present and future generations so that this situation does not happen again .
( CS ) Mr President , the 20th century in Europe was the century of totalitarian and authoritarian regimes , of Nazism and fascism , of communism and its most terrible offshoot , Stalinism , of various right-wing dictatorships in Spain , Portugal , Greece and other countries .
The horrors and crimes that are the legacy of these regimes must never be forgotten : I therefore welcome this discussion on the past .
However , this discussion should take place on the basis of strictly non-partisan , objective and scientific criteria .
Under no circumstances should it be abused for political purposes ; unfortunately , this is often the case .
For example , if we look at many of the new Member States of the European Union , including my own country - the Czech Republic - we see continuous attacks on everything left of centre , on everything leftist .
Right-wing politicians , journalists and so-called historians , many of whom used to be members of the former communist regime and obtained the title of doctor or engineer from the communist regime 's educational establishments , constantly attack social democratic parties as if they were some kind of communist or post-communist parties , in spite of the fact that it was in fact social democrats who , both at home and in exile , fought communism for 40 years .
Czech social democrats died in communist prisons ; they organised the first anti-communist revolt to take place in the entire former Soviet bloc , in Plzeň on 1 June 1953 ; they were on the front line of the Prague Spring ; they formed the opposition in the 1970s and 1980s .
I myself had to go into exile , where one of my jobs was as editor of the Voice of America .
In spite of this , the Social Democratic Party is constantly being denounced as a post-communist party .
Commissioner , I would therefore like to know what the Commission intends to do to ensure that the discussion about the past is not abused for present-day political and ideological goals .
( LT ) Mr President , it is essential that we talk about the crimes of the totalitarian regimes of Hitler , Stalin and others frankly and honestly - starting with the former Soviet Union and finishing with Spain .
The neighbouring countries , especially Russia , Ukraine and Belarus , should sincerely offer to participation as well .
The occupation and annexation of the Baltic states in 1940 was not typical , as it had been attempted to cover it up under the guise of social liberation .
This was facilitated by the fact that - let us say that for 14 years Lithuania had been under an authoritarian regime , which had quashed democracy and abolished free elections .
A year ago the European Parliament opened an exhibition in which horrific data were presented by the Genocide and Resistance Research Centre of Lithuania .
During the three years of Nazi occupation in Lithuania 240 thousand people were murdered , among them 200 thousand Jews .
Over 47 years of Soviet Union occupation nearly 80 thousand Lithuanian people were murdered by the repressive bodies , in exile or in forced labour camps .
The immeasurable pain and tragedies behind these numbers must be revealed to Europe .
The actions and principles of Stalin and other communist leaders who encouraged the extermination of millions of people in the name of class struggle were criminal .
The communist movement has survived for 160 years and has different faces in different countries ; however , all communist regimes were antidemocratic .
At the same time , with Eurocommunism gaining strength , resistance to Moscow 's dictate was getting stronger too .
Let us remember such names as Imre Nagy and Alexander Dubček , the attempts of communists to escape from the vicious circle of dogmas and crimes that other communist party members ruthlessly tried to stifle .
Can all the leaders of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union , such as Stalin , Khrushchev , Brezhnev and Gorbachev , be tarred with the same brush ?
The dictatorial single-party system was destroyed not only by the efforts of dissidents , not even by pressure from the West , but mainly by the activities of the communist party members who strove for change , democracy and the implementation of the human rights .
I doubt that the EU will ever have a common history policy .
Nevertheless , it is important to get better acquainted with each country 's past so that we are able to appreciate democracy and adopt a brighter future outlook .
( CS ) This is an important day , a day of moral satisfaction for all the victims of totalitarian regimes .
My father , Štefan Kányai , spent nine and a half years in a Russian gulag .
In his book he describes the crushing reality accompanying the cruelty of Stalinism , which is something we must remember !
I thank you on his behalf .
I also thank you on behalf of Bishop Ján Vojtaššák , Monsignor Viktor Trstenský , Štefan Putanko , Štefan Janík and thousands of other brave sons of the Slovak nation who were victims of communism .
The Slovak priest František Dlugoš writes the following in one of his books : ' To investigate the events that took place during the 40 years of the communist regime , to find out people 's destinies , means revealing the soul of the nation . '
Following today 's debate , I can add ' the soul of Europe ' .
I welcome this debate because examining this unique period in time , and the events that took place during this period , can be very beneficial for us now and in the future .
( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , for the first time in EU history , with the help of debates on the assessment of totalitarian regimes at EU level , attempts are being made to cause people to consider the crimes of both communism and Nazism to be the terror of totalitarian regimes that caused damage to countries and their people .
Public condemnation of the crimes of communism , after equating them with those committed by the Nazis , would have a positive impact on EU law , education and culture .
Crimes committed by the European Nazi regimes have received global damnation , with Nazi parties being banned and Nazi propaganda being punishable by law .
At the same time the damage inflicted by communist regimes has not yet been properly ascertained .
Some European countries still have legal communist parties .
Lithuania is calling on the EU Member States to prepare official reports on the damage caused by crimes committed by totalitarian regimes , particularly Stalinism , and to ask the inheritor of the Soviet Union 's obligations - the Russian Federation - to compensate this damage .
Lithuania has evaluated the damage inflicted during half a century of Soviet occupation at LTL 80 billion .
Europe should show its solidarity in demanding that those responsible for the damage compensate the EU Member States , as Nazi crime perpetrators have been made to do .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would like to thank all MEPs who have taken part in this debate , at what is clearly a critical stage .
We have heard some particularly moving accounts of past events which some of you have experienced at first hand .
I should very much like to clear up any misunderstandings .
In the case of Mr Beazley , in particular , I do think that there has been a misunderstanding .
I made a speech that had been prepared for me , but I have to say that I may well have been misunderstood .
Every Member State has responsibilities , it has to be said .
However , the Union most certainly does intend to face up to its responsibilities .
We want the truth , we want the whole truth , and if the Commission opened the debate - it was my colleague , Franco Frattini , who opened the debate at the hearing - it is precisely because we want to get to the bottom of the truth .
This must be made quite clear .
We want not only each Member State to be held individually responsible for honouring this duty to remember , but also all EU citizens to feel a sense of solidarity and involvement in the tragic events that have taken place in some of our Member States .
In this respect , I would like to say , and , in fact , I did say in my opening statement , that I am aware that , in the west especially , we have not always grasped the full extent of the atrocities and heinous crimes experienced by our friends from those Member States that have been subjected to various forms of occupation and have lived under Stalinist occupation .
Therefore , I have come here today , in person , because I would like to reassure you that the Commission will continue this discussion and will ensure that it provides the basis , in particular , for the study that we are going to carry out in order to look at how the various laws and practices have actually been applied in the Member States with a view to remembering totalitarian crimes .
Obviously , the Council statement does not refer specifically to Stalinist crimes but speaks generally of totalitarian regimes .
However , it is quite clear from the context in which this statement was adopted , particularly in the Member States that were behind it , that the issue of remembering Stalinist crimes lies at the very heart of this process .
I believe that this has to be said , and , when I opened this debate , I emphasised that any form of totalitarism , any totalitarian regime that has resulted in a denial of the human person and his fundamental rights , is totally unacceptable .
In this regard , and some of you have emphasised this point , knowledge about experiences of other types of totalitarian regimes may be helpful in identifying the means by which the very acts of abuse and barbarism that you have condemned actually came about .
I therefore believe that this study must be very broad in scope and clearly should not disregard any form of totalitarism .
Nor should this debate provide an opportunity for base political exploitation .
The Commission is naturally aware of this risk , but were the European Union to remain silent on the tragic past of some of our Member States , this would serve only to increase such a risk and to create a great divide between the new and the old Member States .
This is why we must move forward together .
Therefore , Mr President , I should just like to ask what , essentially , is the purpose of all this ?
It is so that we may guard against any form of revisionism , any historical untruth .
Secondly , we must also , by remembering , prevent these totalitarian regimes from returning to haunt us .
Finally , we have a duty of reconciliation that is clearly associated with this approach .
However , I would also urge that we must look to the future , and some have emphasised the need to move towards the introduction of a directly binding European law to prevent these totalitarian regimes from ever returning to haunt us .
I should like to reassure you , ladies and gentlemen , that , quite apart from these few words of response , I am personally entirely convinced that we all , as Europeans , have a collective duty of solidarity to establish the truth , our truth as Europeans , without disregarding or diminishing the crimes that have been committed under various totalitarian regimes .
In this respect , I believe that our friends from Eastern Europe need especially to appreciate that we are committed to seeking the truth and will not rest until it is known .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FI ) Mr President , the most precious gift we have from our examination of history is events we know about - facts .
The more facts we know about , the better .
Interpretation is always a separate process .
Everyone should be able to examine and interpret the events that have taken place ; that is an ingredient in freedom of speech .
Political history can rarely be symmetrical in terms of its content but the effort has to be made .
There are still many areas left unexplored in recent history , thanks partly to political correctness .
Dictatorships and dictators get very special treatment .
The crimes of the Nazis deserve no understanding , but communism should not be earning any bonus points either .
in writing . - ( ET ) On 8 April the public hearing held by the Slovenian Presidency and the European Commission dealt with an extremely important topic for the European Union .
In the 20th century Europe lost millions of intellectuals and enterprising citizens because of totalitarian regimes .
The wounds that were inflicted on our history have not healed to this day .
The dictator of the Soviet Union , Joseph Stalin , wiped my homeland and the other Baltic countries from the map .
For half a century we were not allowed to have our own national anthems or flags ; and our capital city was Moscow .
Stalinism and Nazism evolved together and divided Europe with an iron curtain .
Hitler and Stalin 's brutality knew no national borders .
As a Social Democrat I condemn dictatorships whatever their guise .
I also stress that Stalinism and Nazism served as direct examples for other totalitarian ideologies .
Metaxas , Franco , Mussolini , Salazar and a host of lesser dictators perpetrated crimes of their own , following Hitler and Stalin 's brutality .
Their scope remained within the borders of their own countries and for that reason the countries concerned should have responsibility for establishing the true cost .
An awareness and the study of each other 's history is essential so that the citizens of the countries of Europe can start to develop an awareness of the fact that they are also European citizens .
We need an assessment , based on shared values , of the crimes committed by the Communist Party of the Soviet Union and the KGB .
Soon , seventy years will have passed since the conclusion of the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact .
The atrocities of Stalin 's apparatus of coercion are still not viewed on a par with Hitler 's war machine .
As a first step on behalf of common approach to history I would urge our governments to designate 23 August as a Europe-wide Day of Remembrance for the victims of Stalinism and Nazism .
in writing . - ( ET ) Unfortunately it is a fact that although nearly all westerners are aware of the concentration camps of Nazi Germany , most of them have heard nothing about the gulags .
A survey recently conducted in Sweden among 15-20 year-olds showed that their basic knowledge of communism is very poor , almost non-existent .
A study showed that 90 % of Swedes have never heard of the gulags , while 95 % knew what Auschwitz was .
Unfortunately , my father had experience of both types of camp and therefore I cannot accept the idea that the suffering under the Soviet regime can be considered second-rate , as if there is a fear that talking about it reduces the significance of the crimes of Nazism .
That attitude must be changed .
This is not always the simplest of matters for the Socialist Group in the European Parliament as several of the parties within it have a communist past .
Awareness-raising in the Socialist Group is therefore of even greater importance .
I remember debates on this same issue when the Council of Europe Parliamentary Assembly , of which I was a member , condemned the crimes of communism a couple of years ago .
At the time I was one of the people who took the floor and , thanks obviously to the fact that there are so many countries within that organisation with experience of the Soviet regime , condemnation was achieved more quickly than in the European Parliament .
I am entirely convinced that if the European Union truly espouses its own declared values , it must very clearly express its attitude to the past in terms of those values .
This is not to rewrite the past , as several critics of this matter have claimed .
It is to establish the historical truth .
in writing . - ( PL ) In the 20th century Europe has experienced many acts of genocide .
Some of these acts are spoken of much and often , whilst others are shrouded in silence .
In the press we read most frequently about the Nazi and communist genocides .
One act of genocide over which there is permanent silence is the murder of hundreds of thousands of Jews , Poles and Ukrainians in Polish territory under German occupation during World War II , perpetrated by Ukrainian nationalists from the so-called Ukrainian Insurgent Army .
A significant part of the cadres of this Army served earlier in Nazi SS units .
This genocide had the character of genocidum atrox , savage murder , perpetrated with extreme cruelty .
The total population inhabiting a specific territory was annihilated .
The victims were put to death and parts of their bodies were cut off or ripped out .
At present people who participated in these murders are seeking ex-combatant status in Ukraine .
I wish to stress that nothing can justify genocide , not even an attempt to gain freedom and sovereignty for one 's own nation .
Cross-border cooperation to combat terrorism and cross-border crime ( debate )
The next item is the report by Bárbara Dührkop Dührkop , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiative of the Federal Republic of Germany with a view to the adoption of a Council Decision on the implementation of Decision 2007 / ... / JHA on the stepping up of cross-border cooperation , particularly in combating terrorism and cross-border crime ( 11563 / 2007 - C6-0409 / 2007 - .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , the report which we have produced for debate and approval today embodies a 2005 initiative , in which the seven Member States decided to step up cross-border cooperation in all areas relating to terrorism , organised crime and illegal immigration .
The German Presidency proposed incorporating part of this agreement in the Community acquis by means of a framework decision , that is to say under the third pillar , on the lines of what was done with the Schengen Agreement , leaving aside , however , the matter of illegal immigration which , according to the Tampere mandate , should come under the third pillar .
It is therefore regrettable that clear Community powers were not included in the international treaty , since this not only creates judicial confusion , but leaves us with two legal frameworks of reference .
The first was negotiated in a less than transparent manner .
National parliaments were not consulted , nor was the European Parliament .
We were only consulted at the last minute , in haste and in a non-binding manner as the instrument was about to be incorporated into the Community acquis .
The report of our unfortunate fellow Member Fausto Correia sets out the position of the European Parliament on this matter .
Today we are pleased to be able to say that the Council consultation is being presented on the basis of the codecision procedure .
This is a consultation which does not confine itself to the agreement itself but includes its preamble and annex , which we appreciate , because , although they are technical , they contain provisions which are of great political significance .
Many of them are designed specifically to ensure the protection of personal and sensitive data .
However , we are sorry that the Council has still not approved the framework decision on the definition of data protection in order to lay down certain minimum rules .
It is incongruous for the Council to prepare to adopt this decision rather than its own general law .
Nor was the European Data Protection Supervisor consulted at any time .
Briefly , the report provides for cooperation in terms of exchanging data on DNA , fingerprints , vehicle registration numbers and personal and non-personal data .
The aim is to be able to compare the DNA profile of a person with the future databases of 27 national contact points .
The report clearly indicates that common guarantees must be laid down for the protection of data and the right of defence of suspects and guilty parties .
Only the non-coding parts of DNA , in other words the zones containing no genetic expression , may be transferred .
All shared information must indicate the stage of the proceedings affecting the person concerned and the database from which the information was obtained .
The European Parliament must be consulted again if the Council wishes to alter the initiative of the Federal Republic of Germany in any way and particularly regarding the number of loci needed to make accurate comparisons .
I would also remind the Council that the Conference of Representatives of the Governments of the Member States called for the possibility of incorporating this framework decision in the new Lisbon Treaty system , in order to allow recourse to the Court of Justice .
I would also like to point out that , in the paragraph relating to officers and the possibility of cross-border cooperation , I do not agree with the part approved in committee , which gives officers powers to detain and to take statements in a Member State other than their own .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , bilateral cross-border cooperation has always existed but this decision will be a first in terms of Europe-wide cooperation .
It is true that there is concern , serious concern , that , despite good intentions , the proliferation of networks may lead to abuse and possibly to serious mistakes .
Protecting the innocent is without doubt the foremost concern of everyone and of our House in particular , given that it represents all our citizens .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following the political agreement reached in the Council on 13 June 2007 on the first part of the legislative package aimed at transposing the Prüm Treaty into European law , Germany has submitted the initiative that we are about to discuss , namely the implementation of the decision which is the subject matter of the first part and its annex .
Mrs Dührkop , the Commission has consistently supported the integration of the Prüm Treaty into the European Union .
This is an instrument of major importance that will significantly strengthen police cooperation between the Member States by enabling them to take more effective action to combat terrorism and cross-border crime , for example by facilitating the exchange of the DNA profiles and dactyloscopic data of wanted persons .
The removal of checks on persons at the internal borders of the EU , between the signatory countries of the Schengen Agreement , is a major step forward in the process of European integration .
However , it is our duty to ensure that this area of free movement is also , of course , an area of security and justice .
Improving police cooperation between the Member States ' authorities , while fully respecting fundamental rights and , in particular , data protection , is essential for guaranteeing greater security within the European Union for the benefit of our citizens .
The draft decision that we are discussing today constitutes follow-up action required to ensure the full technical and operational implementation of the decision on which the Council reached political agreement in June 2007 .
This agreement aims to transpose the essential provisions of the Treaty of Prüm into the legal framework of the European Union .
The Commission has also consistently supported the need to involve Parliament in the procedure for amending the annex to this instrument .
In the Commission 's view , the provisions on data protection laid down in the decision of June 2007 , as well as in the draft currently being debated , will be supplemented by the provisions of the Framework Decision on data protection in the third pillar .
They clearly need to be supplemented , as you have said .
For its part , the Commission generally welcomes the amendments that you propose , Mrs Dührkop .
However , as this is an initiative put forward by the Member States , Mr President , the Commission will submit its detailed position on the amendments during discussions in the Council .
This is my response , and I would like to conclude by thanking your rapporteur once again for having been kind enough to highlight the means and conditions for the proper implementation of this decision .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are few issues on which the citizens of Europe broadly agree that Europe is making serious efforts on their behalf .
What we are debating here today is a significant issue of that kind : cooperation among Member States in order successfully to combat cross-border crime and terrorism .
I am very glad we managed to reach a consensus in committee too , thanks to the preparatory work and the very fair cooperation with the rapporteur .
That means that while we may not agree on every single point , we are broadly in agreement and want to play our part in making headway in this matter .
The Prüm Agreement process was very laborious and took a long time .
We only advanced bit by bit .
Yet it is a good thing that we now have European agreements on the exchange of data , that national databases are being linked up and that we can use those national databases to pursue and prevent crime .
I would have liked to see more progress in certain areas of this whole project .
That is why I am taking this opportunity not just to talk about what we have achieved to date but also to say this : of course this decision also includes a few points that may apply tomorrow and the day after .
For instance , we want to use joint police forces more efficiently and quickly and we want police forces from one Member State that have specific skills to be able to operate in another Member State .
Mrs Dührkop Dührkop has just pointed out that there are certain difficulties .
Yet it is important to drive this process forward , to ensure that we have more European responsibilities here and carry out more joint actions .
In the end we may find that a very good way to promote the European idea is by demonstrating to people that we are trying to resolve important issues in a manner they too consider positive .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I believe I am speaking on behalf of my group when I say that we had excellent cooperation with the rapporteur .
We cooperated very closely , as Mr Reul has just said .
Nonetheless , we have to ask why it is so urgent to take a decision , why it has to be taken now and , in particular , before the end of the year .
We would have been very happy to see the Lisbon Treaty rules apply here , such as judicial review , as also proper participation in the sense of codecision with the European Parliament .
As regards the data protection aspect that was addressed here , Prüm has its own data protection rules , and then there are the implementing rules and the treaty rules .
Indeed Mrs Dührkop Dührkop also noted the need for a framework decision in the third pillar .
If we take a careful look at the categories of data regulated by the Prüm Treaty , we see that it is more than necessary to have framework legislation on the matter .
We must also ask why so-called special categories of data are included , such as data providing information on sexual orientation , health , political and union activities , and religious belief .
That goes far beyond the basic data needed in relation to organised crime .
There are restrictions on the use of that data yet it remains incredible that it can be used at all .
In the case of DNA data , we strongly support the rapporteur 's view that - if that data is necessary and if it can be exchanged - it must be clearly restricted and used only for the purpose for which it was intended .
Furthermore , it must be made clear that Member States which do not have national DNA databases are not obliged to establish them .
I want to finish by saying that it would be very sensible - as personal exchanges of views with police authorities have brought to light - if , instead of concentrating on legislative measures , we financed programmes to assist the exchange of personnel between police forces .
That would be sure to improve cooperation in the Union .
It is astonishing that the funding has not yet been clarified given that the decision is to be taken very soon .
Before spending money , people should know how much is to be spent , before taking a decision people should know how much it costs .
Mr President , the German Government 's initiative and the report we are debating are not innocently technical , as they are being made out to be .
They are about the technical and administrative conditions necessary for the swift and successful application of preventive data recording enacted by the Treaty of Prüm , which was incorporated into EU legislation a few months ago .
DNA data , fingerprints , personal data and information of all kinds is gathered , processed and exchanged automatically in every possible detail , 24 hours a day , seven days a week , between the repressive mechanisms of the Member States and the EU .
Every citizen and worker in the EU may be under preventive surveillance and recorded as data .
The security forces act on the slightest suspicion that someone might at some point in the future commit offences or endanger public order and security .
In other words , everyone is guilty until proven innocent .
The report we are discussing takes things a step further in data recording legalisation , opening the door to the recording and exchange of data relating to political views , religious or philosophical convictions and party political or trade union membership .
Why do you need all of this ?
To tackle organised crime ?
That is a lie !
You want to record data on everyone in the world ! You want to ban and intimidate anyone who questions your policies !
For this reason , we , the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece , are voting against the report .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , since the 9 / 11 attacks if not before , the EU has concentrated its technical security measures almost entirely on combating terrorism .
Now , it is certainly right actually for us not to make it easy for potential assassins to download bomb-making instructions from the Internet and of course closer cooperation among Member States is to be welcomed .
Yet , in the fight against terrorism we cannot allow innocent citizens to become targets or awkward critics to be silenced .
I believe there is a dangerous trend worldwide constantly to erode the basic liberties for which our forefathers fought so hard .
We are running the risk of becoming a profoundly illiberal society , by passing on passenger data , by Internet surveillance .
I hope we do not soon find that every nonconformist who attends a demonstration supports a referendum , or even dares to criticise the EU is branded a potential terrorist .
Of course it is important to be vigilant - but not to the detriment of civil liberties .
And of course we must not allow other areas , such as combating organised crime , to suffer as a result .
We must not underestimate the dangers of ever-expanding parallel societies , migration-based violence and potential ethnic and cultural conflicts .
Mr President , when talking about incitement to terrorism in the age of the internet and the age of new technologies we are talking about completely new challenges and completely new threats and , as my colleague has said , we must strike a very fine balance between infringing the civil liberties of various political organisations and combating threats to our security and the security of our citizens .
In recent weeks , speakers from the Council of Europe , for example , have raised various concerns and asked us to adopt in full various recommendations presented by the Council of Europe .
We must be selective as to what aspects of the Council of Europe 's very valuable work we transfer to the European Parliament , because Parliament has its own , unique role to play in this matter .
In dealing with the new threats posed by terrorism , the most difficult problem we face will be to actually define what incitement is , and whether justified criticism of governments could ever be considered to be incitement to terrorism .
That was one of the arguments presented recently , at a meeting of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , by Mr Dick Marty from the Council of Europe .
He seemed to have little faith in our democratic structures , suggesting that various articles could be misused by governments .
I have more faith than him in our democratic procedures , and believe we will be able to handle this issue sensitively , but also with the prudence it demands of this institution .
Mr President , there are 4.3 million individuals whose DNA is on the UK national DNA database and available to police .
That is 7 % of the UK population - at least five times higher , as a proportion , than in any other country .
That figure includes 150 000 children under the age of 16 , of whom 25 000 have never been charged with an offence .
Britain 's most senior police forensics expert has even suggested that children as young as five should go on the DNA database if they exhibit behaviour indicating they might be potential criminals in later life .
This is taking predictive policing to a ridiculous level .
My party believes this to be the realisation of Orwell 's ' Big Brother ' Britain .
The DNA of innocent people should not be exchanged , and at the very minimum , in line with the advice of the European Data Protection Supervisor , there should be precise limitations on what data can be exchanged and a health warning in that exchange if the person has no criminal record .
( PT ) Mr President , Vice-President Barrot , ladies and gentlemen , today we are debating a second decision to establish rules necessary for the implementation of another initiative that already has the political agreement of the Council , but has not yet even been adopted .
I am aware that there has been a series of initiatives to combat terrorism and cross-border crime in order to strengthen security and vigilance , but I regret that the same attention has not been paid to increasing the protection of fundamental rights .
The European Union still has no standard set of procedural safeguards and no adequate third pillar legal instrument on data protection , as Vice-President Barrot has just recognised in his speech .
I ask you , Commissioner , to help us explain to the Council that this situation is unacceptable , especially if we take into account that most of the measures to combat terrorism and promote police cooperation have involved the collection and exchange of personal data .
This latest initiative is yet another example and it is all the more serious as it involves the collection , storage and sharing of DNA data and fingerprints , etc .
The data protection standards set out in Chapter VI of the Prüm initiative , which ensure more specific guarantees , are not self-sufficient and , in order to function correctly , they need a complete and general framework , which can only be effectively guaranteed through the framework decision on third pillar data protection .
It was with great satisfaction that we approved this initiative , in which essential aspects of cooperation in the Prüm initiative will be transposed into the Union framework . However , we cannot leave the job half done .
It is also essential to ensure the existence of a clear and effective judicial framework for data protection .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , in my opinion , Mr Coelho has just provided a very clear and objective picture of the situation .
The proposal initially put forward by the Commission was certainly more ambitious , and we regret , in particular , the decision 's more limited scope .
However , the purpose of the decision is to lay the foundations required to ensure a minimum level of protection in the third pillar .
Without the adoption of such a decision , we would have no general rule applicable in the third pillar , which would be even worse .
We hope that this decision will be adopted as soon as possible , once Parliament has delivered its opinion on the new text that the Council has submitted to Parliament for the second time .
As I said earlier , when thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Dührkop , once again , clearly , in the Commission 's view , the provisions on data protection will be supplemented by the provisions of the Framework Decision on data protection in the third pillar .
With these closing remarks , Mr President , I should like to thank all of the speakers for their contributions to this debate .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to thank all those fellow Members with whom it has been a pleasure to work on this report .
I will not answer you individually , but in general .
All of us are particularly concerned about the need to strike a balance between combating terrorism and crime and , at the same time , rigorously protecting private and public rights because no one may be stripped of his civil rights for the sake of the fight against terrorism .
Such a balance is sometimes difficult to achieve , but it is up to us democrats to be constantly on the lookout for any abuse in this area .
Secondly , reference has been made to police cooperation : this is vital .
I live in a region where terrorism exists .
I have police protection myself , and when I have to go to France , I have to ask my local police to send a form to Madrid , who will then ask France for permission to cross the border with a gun , and that takes a week .
I realise that we ought to have a swifter , less bureaucratic method , so perhaps there could be a European police permit .
I think , I believe that European police forces have more or less the same training .
Furthermore , Mr Alvaro , as Sarah Ludford and Mr Coelho also mentioned , we urgently need the Framework Decision , and this is a matter which we want to put to the Council .
We need minimum standards of data protection .
This is a fair demand on the part of all citizens .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 22 April 2008 .
in writing . - Today we are fortunate that law enforcement agencies have tools at their disposal such as DNA data , automated fingerprint identification and vehicle registration data .
I am all in favour of having a common database of all the necessary tools to fight terrorism and cross-border crime .
It is a fact that data protection is essential but in the fight against terrorism and international crime it is secondary .
Not only am I in favour of sharing databases but I am also in favour of having compulsory national databases .
The majority of European citizens and residents are law abiding and should not fear having their data , be it DNA and fingerprinting , available on a common European database .
Malta is a neutral state but where terror is concerned we are not neutral .
The targeting of innocent civilians can never be justified .
Terror is one of the most hideous crimes at par with genocide and war crimes .
At present the norm is that terrorists are tried in national courts .
The time has come to consider an international judicial structure specifically for trying terrorists .
in writing . - ( FI ) There needs to be greater cooperation between the border control authorities , customs , the police and the security authorities to improve the safety of Europeans .
The purpose of the Prüm Convention is to deepen cooperation between EU countries to counter terrorism , cross-border crime and illegal immigration .
The Prüm Convention will strengthen security within Europe .
A smooth flow of the exchange of information between the security authorities , especially border control authorities , will be a key priority .
There must be weighty reasons for information exchange between the EU countries .
Clearly , breaking the law is a good reason for this as is sufficient evidence of intended wrongdoing .
Information exchange needs to respect the protection of law-abiding European individuals so that abuses of human rights do not take place as a result of breaches of privacy .
The purpose of cooperation in matters of security is to keep Europe a safe place to live in and to protect law-abiding citizens .
Cooperation in matters of security must protect Europeans against criminals in order to make our everyday lives as safe as possible and to enable our children to live without fear .
Cost of obtaining a visa for Belarusian and Ukrainian citizens ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the cost of obtaining a visa for Belarusian and Ukrainian citizens
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for the questions that you have asked me on the European visa rules applicable to Ukraine and Belarus .
Firstly , in the case of Ukraine , the Agreement on readmission and the Agreement on the facilitation of issuance of visas , both of which entered into force at the beginning of 2008 , represent an important milestone in relations between the European Union and Ukraine .
On the one hand , they will promote people-to-people contacts , which in turn will help improve mutual understanding and strengthen relations in all areas , and , on the other , they will commit both sides , the European Union and Ukraine , to close cooperation to combat illegal immigration .
The first priority is to ensure the speedy , operational and harmonised implementation of the Agreement on the facilitation of issuance of visas to Ukrainian citizens .
To ensure that this Agreement is properly and uniformly applied , draft guidelines have been drawn up and approved by the Member States and the Ukrainian authorities .
These guidelines should be finalised and adopted in the near future by the Joint Committee established by the Agreement .
As stated in the preamble to the Agreement between the European Community and Ukraine on the facilitation of the issuance of visas , the introduction of a visa-free travel regime for the citizens of Ukraine is recognised only as a long-term prospect .
The process that will lead to the introduction of such a regime depends mainly on the satisfactory implementation of the Agreement on readmission and of the Agreement on the facilitation of issuance of visas .
I should like to emphasise that the enlargement of the Schengen area in no way affects the arrangements for carrying out checks at the borders between Ukraine and those Member States which became part of the Schengen area on 21 December 2007 .
Those Member States have been applying the Schengen rules on external border checks since their accession , and since September 2007 they also carry out checks on persons in the Schengen Information System - SIS .
However , to make travel easier for Ukrainian citizens living in the border area , agreements on local border traffic have been signed between Hungary and Ukraine , and between Ukraine and Poland .
Moreover , the Commission has called for amendments to the agreement between Ukraine and Hungary with regard to the demarcation of the border area in order to bring this agreement into line with Community rules ; this is also the case for the agreement between Ukraine and Poland .
That is all I have to say about travel for Ukrainian citizens living in the border area .
The situation for visas , on the other hand , is different .
Prior to 21 December 2007 those Member States that did not yet fully apply the Schengen acquis were not bound by the Schengen provisions on visa fees .
These Member States could therefore waive this fee for all Ukrainian citizens .
However , this is now no longer possible .
Nevertheless , the standard visa fee of EUR 60 does not apply to Ukrainian visa applicants .
As confirmed by the Agreement between the European Community and Ukraine that entered into force on 1 January 2008 , the fee for processing visa applications of Ukrainian citizens will remain at EUR 35 .
In addition , the Agreement exempts broad categories of Ukrainian visa applicants from the visa fee , which means that more than 50 % , I repeat , more than 50 % of Ukrainian nationals now wishing to travel to Schengen countries benefit from a full waiving of the visa fee .
I should now like to turn to Belarus .
In its Communication on strengthening the European Neighbourhood Policy , dated 4 December 2006 , the Commission emphasised the importance of facilitating the issuance of visas for relations with the countries covered by the Neighbourhood Policy .
The Commission restated the European Union 's willingness to develop Action Plans with neighbouring countries and to enter into negotiations with them in order to facilitate the issuance of visas and the granting of permission for readmission .
Belarus is one of the countries covered by the Neighbourhood Policy , but it has to be said that no Action Plan has been developed with this country yet owing to its overall political situation .
This is why there are no plans to open discussions on the possible facilitation of the issuance of visas and on readmission with Belarus at this stage .
Nevertheless , I should like to emphasise that the existing acquis on the issuance of short-term visas provides for exemption from visa fees for some categories of persons , such as children under the age of six , students and researchers .
In addition , under the current rules , the Member States may , at any time , cancel or reduce the visa fee in justifiable individual cases , for example for humanitarian reasons , to protect cultural interests or on foreign policy grounds .
Furthermore , the neighbouring Member States - Poland , Latvia and Lithuania in particular - always have the possibility of negotiating local border traffic agreements with Belarus .
This would be a means of facilitating border crossing and the movement of border residents between Belarus and its neighbouring countries , whilst promoting contacts between local communities .
Border residents holding a special local border traffic permit would be exempt from the visa requirement .
Poland and Belarus have already entered into negotiations to that end .
This concludes what I wanted to say , whilst emphasising the pertinence of the questions that you have asked and bringing you up to date with the most recent developments in this matter .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , I thank the Commissioner for coming and presenting the latest position of the Commission on visa issues for the Ukraine and Belarus .
A month ago , a delegation which comprised members of most of the mainstream opposition in Belarus visited Strasbourg at the invitation of the PPE-DE Group to discuss how the political situation is developing in that country , but also during that visit colleagues may have seen their appeals to this Parliament to support their efforts to reduce the visa fees they are currently paying , which are indeed prohibitive for the majority of Belarus citizens .
If we really want to encourage Belarus to pick a pro-European route in future - which we sincerely hope will be the case - the strongest arguments we have are those which the Belarus citizens can see with their own eyes .
It is very difficult for them , in the regime in which they live , to have a real insight into what freedom and democracy , human rights and rule of law really mean .
It is difficult to promote a civil society .
It is difficult to show them that Europe is open and friendly and supports their move towards a full democracy .
The best way we can do that is to allow those citizens access into Europe not at rates which will frighten or prohibit entry by most citizens .
Commissioner , you very rightly said that specific groups are excluded , and that is indeed children , and people with family contacts ; it is people who are visiting the European Union for cultural or scientific or educational reasons , and I would encourage individual member countries to make use of that legal provision to let those people actually make use of those facilities .
But it is very sad that Serbia and Russia are treated on better terms than Belarus 's citizens .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , first I want to thank the Commissioner for the very precise information , as ever , he has provided on this issue .
I myself have experienced the problems of visas and visa restrictions in the Balkans and I still come across them today , although things have eased up a little .
Let us take Serbia for instance , since it has already been mentioned .
In spite of the present simplifications , in the context of Yugoslavia - i.e. a communist regime - it had far more contact with the West , with the European countries , in the past than it has now , which means there is something wrong with the whole system .
We really do need fundamental changes .
The Commissioner rightly pointed out that in Ukraine more than half of all applicants enjoy exemptions of one kind or another .
I wonder what kind of system exempts 50 % or more .
I admit , however , that this is not his fault .
Let me now turn to Belarus .
I was happy to support the proposal from Mrs Grabowska and Mr Paleckis because I find it very difficult to accept that the citizens of that country should suffer twice over because of a bad regime : not just under the regime but also because we are not formulating any plan of action in face of that bad regime .
Sometimes we have to choose to act more unilaterally and decide on our own initiative to do something specifically to help those who receive no help from their own regime or government .
The Commissioner indicated that to some extent that is already the case .
Yet more needs to be done and we need to conduct a more aggressive policy toward Belarus .
For instance , I would be interested to know - and perhaps the Commissioner can answer me at a later date - which countries grant which exemptions .
Which European Union countries are particularly helpful and which are perhaps less so ?
Surely it is important to adopt a European Union stance and if some countries take a liberal approach it would be a disaster for others to be very restrictive .
I would ask the Commission and the Council - given that we know that they bear the main responsibility - to work together with us to ensure that we can offer the citizens and all concerned in Belarus more advantages than we have done - laboriously - in the past .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( HU ) Mr President , Ukraine and Belarus have a key role to play in the Eastern dimension of our Neighbourhood policy .
With Ukraine the aim is democracy , a market economy , consolidation of the orientation towards Europe while with Belarus the aim is the democratisation of the country .
Relaxation of travel requirements is a flexible and valuable tool for this .
Since 1 January citizens of Ukraine have benefited from a simplified visa regime , though the majority of them feel that the position today is harder than it was before , since getting into their major target countries , Poland , Hungary and Lithuania , is now more difficult than it was previously .
This is seen as a backward step , since the EUR 35 visa fee is a large sum of money for them , and the administrative burden and procedures are extremely complicated .
So we have to show that for Ukraine the immediate aim , the granting of visa-free travel , will happen very soon , and until we can do this , the granting of visas without a fee will have an impact on an even greater number of people , as well the relaxation of the administrative burden .
As for Belarus , we have to make it clear that Europe does not have a problem with the people of Belarus but with its oppressive regime .
We would wish its citizens to be able to travel more easily and so we have to relax the EUR 60 visa fee , a huge amount of money , as in Belarus it is equivalent to half the average monthly wage , and we also have to reduce the administrative burden , as the complicated regulations are difficult to comply with .
In this way we can reach a position where the citizens of Ukraine and Belarus feel that they are close to Europe . Thank you .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the European Union will not guarantee the security of its Eastern border by ignoring the interests of Belarusians and Ukrainians .
We should support visits to the Union by the widest possible groups of people specifically from Ukraine and Belarus , and at the same time isolating the Lukashenka regime .
Democratic processes and the changes in the mentality of our Eastern neighbours , for example as far as their perceptions of NATO in Ukraine are concerned , will take place more quickly thanks to personal experiences of visits in the European Union countries .
At the moment Belarusians must pay EUR 60 for a visa .
This is equivalent of one third of average salary and precludes most of the society from visiting .
This situation suits the Lukashenka regime , since the more contacts with Western Europe are restricted , the easier it will be to control Belarusian society .
The visa requirement isolates the Belarusian youth and those people who have opposition sympathies .
The West should want to maintain contacts with these social groups .
Expensive visa charges lead only to an increase in the activity of the visa mafia and to other pathologies on the borders .
Such barriers also cause tangible losses to tourism in Poland .
Skiers from Ukraine and Belarus have visited Polish mountains in large numbers in recent years .
They have tended to arrive in early January , when the Orthodox Christmas begins .
By now Polish skiing resorts are empty .
Ladies and gentlemen , especially now , when at the NATO summit in Bucharest Vladimir Putin threatened to cause the break-up of Ukraine and stated that , and I quote , ' Ukraine is not even a state , and one part of its territory is Eastern Europe and another - a large one - was gifted to it by Russia ' , a clear signal is needed that the European Union will not tolerate such threats against its nearest neighbour in international politics .
I appeal for the fastest possible commencement of a dialogue on specific actions so that the Ukrainians will not require EU visas .
I wish to state clearly that a real vision of a contemporary and safe Europe is not possible without Ukraine .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , official EU policy towards Belarus is known as a policy of ' differentiation ' : on the one hand it is critical of the dictator Lukashenko while , on the other , it seeks to encourage and facilitate dialogue with the people .
But charging EUR 60 - a third of a month 's salary in Belarus - for a visa flies in the face of that policy .
As a result , ordinary people in Belarus regard EU policy towards them as a policy of empty words !
This issue has completely obscured our Schengen policy and is actually undermining the credibility of EU foreign policy .
We cannot allow such a situation to continue .
The democracy that we want to see developing in Belarus can come into being only if we make it easier for people from Belarus to see for themselves how democracy works in our countries .
Any other approach would simply play into Lukashenko 's hands .
So we need to make a change and the Council told us , in its answer , that the reason why no change has yet been made is that the Commission has not tabled the necessary proposal .
So , please , get to work !
Put a proposal before the Council that will make it easier - in the interests of promoting democracy in Belarus - for people there to obtain visas .
( LT ) Madam President , whatever has been said about the cost of visas for Belarusians and Ukrainians , there is no doubt that urgent decisions should be taken on this issue and that they should be taken by the European Union .
On the subject of visas , the European Union has signed a visa facilitation agreement with Ukraine , as well as with Russia , Moldova and the Western Balkan states .
However , negotiations on the agreement with Belarus have not even begun , because Alexander Lukashenko is not interested in offering Belarusian citizens the possibility of seeing the standard of life in the free world , especially if they find it to be much higher than that in Belarus .
The issue of the cost of visas remains important not only for Belarus , but for Ukraine too .
The fact that Ukrainian citizens have to pay EUR 35 for a Schengen visa does not solve the problem , because only certain small groups of Ukrainian citizens qualify for the visa facilitation regime .
The case of Belarus is even more eloquent - Belarusians have to pay more for a Schengen visa - that is , they have to pay the price for Lukashenko 's dictate .
Is the visa regime adequate in view of the situation on the EU 's Eastern border ?
I do not think so .
According to statistics , Poland alone issues about 600 000 visas to Ukrainian citizens each year ; as a comparison , the number of visas issued by all the Schengen countries in the same period is only 300 000 .
Prior to joining the Schengen area , Lithuania , Latvia and Poland maintained very low visa prices for Belarusian citizens : Lithuania and Poland charged only EUR 5 and Latvia issued visas free of charge .
Poland , Lithuania and Latvia used to issue 400 000 visas to Belarusians , i.e. three times more than the number issued by the old Schengen countries .
Would you say it is a good thing that only 26 % of Belarusian citizens have ever visited an EU country , and that 60 % of Belarusians have never seen a foreign person during the last three years ?
Of course not .
We , the European Union , must find an efficient way to solve this issue , as we know from our own experience that it is better to see the EU once than to hear about it a hundred times .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , as a co-author of a question on the cost of visas for Belarus I wish to thank you for today 's explanations and to draw your attention to several additional matters .
The point is that Belarus is not only a close neighbour of the EU .
It is also the closest one of my country , Poland , hence my concern and my intervention on behalf of the interests of those who live in that country .
After Schengen enlargement you said that the cost of visas for Belarusians went up .
In reality the cost went up by a factor of 12 , from EUR 5 to 60 .
In Belarus EUR 60 is the monthly salary of a medical doctor under training .
EUR 60 for many Belarusians is a real barrier preventing them from obtaining a visa and from visiting EU neighbours .
We can already see that after the visa price rise there has been a visible and drastic fall in the numbers of Belarusian citizens travelling to the EU .
This happened at a time when the EU wishes to establish direct contact with its citizens and when the policy of good neighbourliness is enshrined in the Lisbon Treaty .
It is therefore a painful paradox for this country , even if it is ruled undemocratically .
Please believe me that the decision to increase visa fees is an excellent present for the Lukashenka regime which discounts this politically .
The regime says to Belarusians : you see ?
They have introduced high , prohibitive fees .
Nobody is waiting for you in Europe , nobody wants you there .
This needs to be changed .
I value the fact that the Commissioner mentioned Poland as the country which intends to press for lower visa fees for Belarusians .
However this is not a task for Poland , Lithuania and individual countries .
It is a task for the entire EU .
Should we be unable to solve this , how are we to build a common foreign policy within the EU ?
I therefore appeal to the Commission to take all the steps necessary to lower visa fees for Belarusians .
( PL ) As early as May 2005 Ukraine withdrew the requirement to obtain visas for citizens of the European Union .
However the EU needed as long as three years to take any position on this .
I want to say that the final EU reaction was far from clear .
On the one hand , early this year visas became easier to obtain , certain procedures were simplified and visa fees were waived , but only for selected groups of citizens .
For most Ukrainians the European Union appears to be an impregnable fortress , opening its doors only for those who can cope patiently with the long and very expensive struggle at consulates of Schengen countries .
For many Ukrainians visas are too expensive .
The institutions involved in the visa issue process generally charge twice or even three times more than the set maximum fee .
Secondly , the time required for a visa to be issued at many consulates is unpredictable and very long .
Thirdly , many consulates require additional documents , not mentioned in the agreement .
Even diplomatic passport holders may have problems at border crossings .
The necessary final aim for Ukraine is a clear road map attempting to introduce bilateral visa-free travel , albeit with difficult preconditions , as was the case with Serbia .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , Europe without borders , the European Union within Schengen , cannot mean the creation of a new wall between the EU and Eastern Europe .
European dreams of a single borderless Europe have materialised within the EU .
However , what is happening now on the border between the EU and Ukraine and Belarus is a political scandal of sorts for my generation - the Solidarity generation in Poland , which fought for the unity of Europe .
Today the problems of reaching the European Union for the Ukrainians and Belarusians must be resolved as soon as possible .
Commissioner , I appeal to you !
We , Europeans in the rich , democratic countries , must do everything we can today so that the EU is open for the civil societies of Belarus and Ukraine .
( SK ) Mr President , the fact that you are chairing today 's debate is highly symbolic and I thank you for that .

In my speeches I mention at every opportunity the request by the leaders of civil society in Ukraine and in the EU to the Member States and EU institutions , and to the Ukrainian Government and Supreme Council , for Europe to give greater consideration to the Ukraine-EU visa issue .
As Ukraine is one of the European Union 's strategic partners , I welcome today 's debate and the information the Commissioner has provided .
While I accept that this is a very demanding process , I also think that it is vital to find a solution .
Visa issue involving Belarusian citizens were also examined during Belarus Week in the European Parliament at meetings with Alexander Milinkevich , the winner of the Sakharov Prize .
It is our duty to help the people who are the hapless victims of Lukashenko 's regime .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have to adopt as quickly as possible a solution to simplify the visa regime : that will send a positive and constructive signal to the pro-European and pro-democratic forces in Ukraine and Belarus .
( PL ) Mr President , the youth of Belarus is often punished by the withdrawal of the right to education for holding beliefs not liked by the authorities .
Poland provides higher education places for many of these young people .
We must not waste this by imposing an economic blockade on such young people who want to enter our country to study .
This economic blockade should be dismantled and the visa fees should be lowered .
Before I hand over to the Commissioner - and we have a bit of time - I wish to add something .
As a frequent traveller to Ukraine I wish to say that a crucial issue in the visa problem , in the entire visa regime , is explaining to the societies of Ukraine and Belarus whether what they have to go through today is a transitional stage .
This applies to prices and to procedures .
The prices are prohibitive and the procedures humiliating .
These people queue for long hours , for dozens of hours .
Is this transitional or permanent ?
The Ukrainians often say that a Schengen wall has been erected , that what has been introduced and greeted with joy by everybody , by us Poles , by the French , for a long time now by the Germans , is in reality just a process of natural isolation , that the queue in front of a consulate , the refusal , the price - all that is merely a signal to their societies , a signal received very negatively in the context of all the aspirations we speak so much about in this Chamber and elsewhere .
The debate is closed .
Please forgive me that I have broken the golden rule , that the President does not interfere in such matters , but I simply could not remain silent on this issue .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I have listened carefully to what you have just said , and it supports a great many speakers who have emphasised the need to facilitate access to the European Union for the citizens of our neighbouring countries .
I believe that many have spoken with a great deal of common sense !
The more opportunities there are for people-to-people exchanges , the more likely it is that citizens will influence their own country 's move towards democracy and commitment to European values .
Nevertheless , I must first reply on the subject of Belarus .
I have explained why , so far , there have been no plans to enter into negotiations on an agreement on visa facilitation .
The political situation may well change , and I should like to add that the European Union is making every effort to make its presence felt in the country , as , a few days ago , a European Commission office was set up in Belarus .
At all events , as I have already said , Belarusian citizens already have the opportunity to travel within the European Union under existing EU legislation .
However , I have listened carefully to all sides of the argument , and I cannot say more than I have already said regarding Belarus .
As far as Ukraine is concerned , I should like to say that the situation is much more positive .
The Agreement on visa fees for Ukrainian citizens stipulates that the Schengen states will charge EUR 35 for processing visa applications of Ukrainian citizens , and not EUR 60 , which is considered to be the average cost of a visa .
Therefore , efforts have already been made .
I also mentioned that there are some categories of Ukrainian citizens who could benefit from a full waiver of the visa fee .
Nevertheless , Mr President , I am acutely aware of what you have just said .
The price is an issue , but , occasionally , so is the way in which these formalities have to be completed : very lengthy procedures that give these citizens the impression that the European Union is a long way off .
I have to tell you that , at present , my attention is drawn to the problems faced in particular by the citizens of the Western Balkan States .
I am trying to determine ways in which we can also make these procedures easier .
I believe that , if we succeed , we will probably also do so in the case of countries such as Ukraine .
That concludes , Mr President , what I wanted to say to Parliament , whilst being fully aware that all the Members ' remarks are justifiable to some extent , but that , as things stand , some progress has already been made .
It is true that a lot more remains to be done , but I also feel that each Member State should endeavour to take advantage of the opportunities that are already available .
I , for one , shall be making every effort to do so .
The debate is closed .
Organ donation and transplantation : Policy actions at EU level ( debate )
The next item is the report by Adamos Adamou , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on organ donation and transplantation : Policy actions at EU level .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , let me first thank the European Commission for its communication and the excellent cooperation we have had together .
I should also like to thank all my colleagues , particularly the shadow rapporteurs , for the very difficult work we have done together to reach the compromise amendments which have been unanimously adopted .
The main issues the Commission deals with in its communication and which I have been dealing with as rapporteur are : transplant risks and safety , for instance the transmission of diseases , the organ shortage and illegal organ trafficking .
Permit me to talk about each of these in turn .
With regard to quality and safety , when organs are used in therapy diseases risk being transmitted to the recipient .
Donor testing is therefore important to minimise the risks to the recipient .
Donors must be screened to establish whether or not there is a risk of any disease being transmitted .
To establish a standard of donor safety , a minimum set of examinations should be performed .
We must point out , however , that there is no consensus today between the Member States on these tests .
The severe shortage of organ donors remains the main challenge facing Member States in organ transplantation .
Growing waiting lists are a serious problem .
The establishment of an efficient system to identify those who might become organ donors on their death , provided , of course , that all the mandatory consent requirements in Member States have been met , is thus a key element in fighting organ shortage .
Another important option to increase the number of donors is the possible promotion of altruistic donations from living people .
Careful consideration is also required of those potential donors who would not normally be considered ideal candidates , known of course , as expanded donors . For example a transplant could be allowed from one HIV-positive patient to other .
Now , with regard to trafficking in organs , Commissioner , everyone knows that organ trafficking takes place .
We all know that rich tourists from the West exploit the economic needs of people from the poorest countries .
We have all heard that there are price lists of organs , that there is a black market in organs , particularly in countries of the Far East , such as India , Pakistan and China , and that these things are even happening in the enlarged Europe .
I therefore endorse Amendment 7 to paragraph 57 by my fellow Members Mrs Brepoels , Mr Liese and Mr Bowis , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , and it is important to improve the control of cases of organ trafficking so that we may , finally , draw the necessary conclusions .
At the same time , I would like to stress that altruism must constitute the main element of organ donation and transplantation .
The economic terminology used in the Commission 's communication is therefore not adequate , in particular from the viewpoint of the principle of non-commercialisation of the human body .
This is also the reason why I could not support Amendment 2 to paragraph 38 by Mr Martin and Mr Matsakis .

Of course , following my detailed talks with Mr Matsakis , he - as he will explain to you himself - intends to withdraw it and will submit another oral amendment , tomorrow , which I support .
I consider , however , as I have said before , that organs should not be treated as a commodity of the internal market and , consequently , I would not agree with the removal of this addition .
Besides , the principle of non-commercialisation of the human body is expressly stated in Article 3 ( 2 ) of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
Ladies and gentlemen , I do not have any more time because the four minutes are up .
I intend to continue in my conclusion , when I speak again following your remarks .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me first congratulate Mr Adamou on the excellent report he has prepared on organ donation and transplantation .
I am particularly pleased that the report supports the Commission 's view that action on the donation and transplantation of organs must focus on : firstly , improving the quality and safety of organs ; secondly , increasing the availability of organs ; and thirdly , making transplants safe .
Ensuring high quality and safety standards in human organs is a benefit to everyone .
We know that a number of organs are exchanged between EU Member States .
At present , there is a lack of common quality and safety standards in the procurement of human organs and , therefore , meeting this need is very important .
It provides not only a comparable safety standard to apply across the EU , but also leads to a feeling of security and solidarity in the transplantation system .
The Commission plans to propose a legislative framework on the basic safety and quality principles in relation to the donation and procurement of human organs .
These requirements will be broad and flexible , to maximise the number of transplantations taking place .
After all , this is all about saving lives .
We must keep uppermost in our minds the fact that there are 50 000 people on organ waiting lists across Europe at this point .
Increasing organ availability requires raising public awareness of the issue .
Citizens need to know that transplantation systems are safe and reliable . Otherwise they will not consent to donation .
We already have some good examples in Member States where the addition of transplant coordinators , for example , has had a positive impact on donation rates .
The Commission intends to propose an action plan with 10 priority actions to meet the challenges of organ donation and transplantation in the EU .
The Commission recognises the importance of fighting organ trafficking as reflected in the communication on organ donation and transplantation .
I also noted Dr Adamou 's comments and will seriously consider them .
His report makes it clear that we should look very carefully at how we intend to respond to the menace of organ trafficking in the EU .
The Commission will monitor the situation in collaboration with our international partners , the Council of Europe and the World Health Organisation .
We shall also support Interpol in order to continue with the monitoring of this problem .
Moreover , I believe that by increasing organ availability in the European Union , we shall indirectly fight transplant tourism and trafficking of organs .
In addition , organ trafficking will be included in this year 's Commission report on an EU action plan on trafficking in human beings .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs . - Mr President , organ donation and transplantation is a sensitive and important issue , where good legislation , together with good practice , might save thousands of human lives on a yearly basis .
Issues on the fragile line between life and death are really sensitive .
It is hard to help with legislation , but it is easy to harm .
That is why it is profoundly important to respect good practices in the Member States .
On the other hand , it is vitally necessary to discover all those practices which cause lack of trust and transparency in managing waiting lists or lead to scandalous cases of misused loopholes in legislation .
I would like to point out three topics in the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs .
First , living donors are mainly unrelated .
In this regard , legal procedures should minimise the possibility of illicit organ selling .
The question of reimbursement of the social costs of donors is still awaiting a suitable solution .
Secondly , in those cases where international cooperation is included in the transplantation process , legislation should ensure rules as clear as those within Member States .
Transplantation tourism raises new questions , as the Commissioner mentioned .
How should we handle such cases ?
Thirdly , international cooperation in detecting cases of organ trafficking should be more organised and more serious , because hidden trafficking and its consequences can destroy the hopes of thousands of patients waiting for life-saving organs .
On the other hand , European legislation on trafficking in human beings should also include organ selling and trafficking , even if it is still hidden but becoming an increasing global problem .
I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and also the shadow rapporteurs and thank them for good cooperation .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , organ transplants do indeed save human lives in Europe every day .
Sadly , a shortage of donors means that thousands of Europeans die every year whilst still on the waiting list .
The challenge is how to increase donor numbers safely .
As shadow rapporteur for the Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats I am very happy today to see Parliament wholeheartedly endorsing the Commission 's initiative and acknowledging that Europe can play an essential role here .
Organ donation and transplantation is a highly complex and emotive subject , as other speakers have said , and views on it vary widely in the Member States .
Whilst working on the report I myself talked to quite a few doctors , patients and organisations .
The hearing we held and the study visit to Spain also provided us with interesting insights , and I must thank the rapporteur very sincerely today for having incorporated all our contributions into his report .
Four points .
One , we must above all take care to ensure that the directive on quality and safety , put forward by the Commission , is sufficiently flexible and does not create additional administrative burdens or even a decrease in the number of organs available .
In our view it must be the doctor who ultimately decides on quality and safety .
To guarantee quality and safety we also ask that Member States monitor and evaluate post-transplantation and post-donation results .
Since data comparability between Member States is very important here , we might perhaps think about having a common methodology for analysing the data .
Two , we think the most essential factor in recruiting more donors , even more important than legislation , is the way in which the donation system is organised .
We would thus like to see hospitals deploying more staff to identify potential donors , but also to counsel and assist the next of kin .
In countries that use transplant coordinators of this kind , the number of donors rises .
Three , this also demonstrates how crucially important it is to exchange good practice among Member States .
The European Union can easily foster this .
It is also important that hospitals publicise the positive results of transplantation and be proactive in their dealings with the media .

Four , we think it is very important to consider living donors as well as post-mortem donors . And we would like to see living donors not being discriminated again , by insurance companies for example .
Lastly , organ donation must remain a strictly non-commercial , altruistic and voluntary process .
Any payments made must in our view be only for the expense and inconvenience of donating .
The Commission , together with Member States , must be far more proactive in countering the sale and trafficking of organs and transplant tourism .
Traceability is very important here and Europol too must monitor things better and identify cases of organ selling and / or trafficking .
I am certain that Parliament , through this report , is sending out a very balanced and firm signal , and I urge the House to vote in favour of the report tomorrow .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , I look forward to the forthcoming proposal for a directive from the Commission which will establish quality and safety standards for the donation and procurement of organs throughout the European Union .
In the interests of transparency in this process , I would like to say that as Socialists we support the measures aimed at protecting donors and ensuring that organ donation is made altruistically and voluntarily , ruling out any payment other than strict compensation for the expense and inconvenience involved in making the donation .
The forthcoming legislative framework should not create an excessive administrative burden for the Member States , nor jeopardise the use of existing good practices .
As for the practical process as such , I would like to point out that a few very stringent quality standards should not increase costs and in particular they should not reduce the number of organs available for transplant .
Clearly , measures should not be adopted if they prevent organs from being transplanted , which would currently be regarded as acceptable , because what we are trying to do is to save human beings and ensure that human life is as comfortable as possible for the sick .
Unfortunately , the excellent results obtained from transplants , in terms of increased lifespan and improved quality of life , have increased demand for this form of treatment .
I come from Spain , a country which is a world leader in organ donation and transplantation .
If we have managed to achieve this worthy ranking it is doubtless due to the existence of a National Transplant Organisation which coordinates all the teams of professionals in the relevant hospitals , each of which has its own transplant coordinator , a medical professional who coordinates the entire team and the process leading up to the donation .
I hope that the proposed legislation from the European Commission will take this type of model into account since it is proving so successful .
Finally , I would like to emphasise the desirability of including a reference to the need to involve citizens from third countries , with different cultures and religions , in the donation culture , by means of specific awareness measures , campaigns in their native language , cultural mediators etc . , and of calling on States to combat trafficking wholeheartedly by adopting criminal liability measures against European citizens who pursue health tourism with a view to obtaining organs in third countries .
It only remains for me to thank the rapporteur , and all the rapporteurs not mentioned individually , because it has been very easy working together and reaching agreement .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I am trying to put myself in the position of the parents of a three-year-old girl diagnosed with a heart defect , for whom a three-year-old donor heart - not easy to find - was not available in her own country .
In another European country one might well be available , but that country was not interested in cooperating with the rest of Europe .
In that case I would be demanding action from Europe . And there is good reason why European action is needed .
We currently have 400 000 people on a waiting list for organs in Europe and about ten of these will die every day because there is a shortage of donor organs .
Regarding safety and quality criteria , the excellent Adamou report rightly warns against any further bureaucratic burden being imposed by legislation from Brussels .
And the proposed legislation - I am glad that the Commissioner has just given it his blessing - certainly must not add to the red tape .
If there is one sector that is vulnerable to red tape , it is this one .
I was also very happy to hear you say just now that you want to open the way for as many transplants as possible and do not want to restrict the numbers .
I think that is an important principle .
We do need guarantees of closer cooperation between Member States .
Cross-border cooperation means that the transplantation process is handled by hospitals and doctors who are governed by different legal systems .
Last year , former Commissioner for Health Markos Kyprianou argued for the introduction of a European donor card . And Cyprus , as we know , Mr Adamou , Mrs Vassiliou , is a fount of wisdom .
This card , whether or not it is combined with the European health insurance card , can ensure that organs which become available are used as efficiently as possible .
Eurobarometer surveys show that 81 % of Europeans back the use of an organ donor card , but only 12 % of them actually carry one .
The Adamou report calls for a voluntary European donor card and so I would like to take this opportunity to urge the Commissioner to put forward legislation by the end of the year to introduce a card of this kind to complement national cards .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Adamou for a very good report and excellent cooperation during the preparation of this report up to now .
We need more organs - we are certainly in agreement over that .
However , it is important that this takes place in a proper manner .
Cooperation is good , and I personally believe that proper information is needed , better information , so that people will feel comfortable about being organ donors .
As a result , people will know that everything will be done with respect , and this also applies to the next of kin , who are of course facing the most desperate situation of their lives , and people can also be secure in the knowledge that their relatives will be taken good care of .
If this makes it is possible for them to discuss the matter with each other , then something good will come of it .
However , under no circumstances should the need for organs lead to the commercialisation of the process .
I believe that everyone is very pleased and in agreement that this issue is now to be addressed and we are going to tackle the trafficking that is taking place .
It is unacceptable that we have not involved Europol sufficiently , because it is really a criminal matter .
Even in places where it is not illegal , it is of course criminal that poor people are being persuaded to sell their kidneys in order to support their families .
Finally , allow me to emphasise how many assurances we will have to give ; we will need to be aware of this , as we will be subject to immense pressure .
For example , I feel that a formulation such as people are dying ' as a result of the chronic shortage of organs ' is poisonous .
People are dying because they are ill .
In addition , we will never have enough organs .
There are some people who are fortunate enough to receive an organ and whose lives are saved as a result .
Being able to achieve more cases like this is why we have to adopt this report .
However , we will never be in a situation where we have enough organs .
Even if we abolished all speed limits throughout Europe , it would not be enough .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to congratulate , as a physician and a Member of this House , my colleague Mr Adamos Adamou on his excellent work on this report .
The issues of organ transplantation and donation can sometimes cause controversy and the reasons are evident : on the one hand , we have to take ethical issues into account , while on the other hand we should not allow medical progress to come to a stop , thereby restricting or hampering our ability to help people .
I welcome the fact that the report is based on the pillars that I value .
The first of these is the legal instruments : they have to guarantee that organ donation will continue to be voluntary rather than a commercial activity .
It will be good to have standards but these standards must not affect implementation and options in the individual Member States .
The second pillar relates to cooperation between the Member States , which is essential , as in many other areas .
The third pillar relates to the fact that no measures can be taken without the cooperation of the citizens .
I therefore welcome the measures to ensure greater public awareness and transparency .
The common goal , which is evident in the report , is to eliminate illegal trafficking at all costs .
Mr Adamou 's report certainly paves the way for this .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the noble objectives of the Commission 's Communication on organ donation and transplantation and policy actions at EU level , as well as Mr Adamou 's report , which stresses that organ donation is a gift and that it is important to respect and protect the freedom to donate or not to donate organs for transplantation , are insufficient .
Similarly , the regulations providing for the introduction of a European organ donor card will be insufficient if all the amendments concerning guidance by ethical and moral principles contained in the European Parliament documents are rejected .
Lack of moral principles and of their use in legislation leads to loss of our societies ' moral health and to various abuses in all areas of social life , including science and medicine .
In addition to the spread of liberalism and commercialism , vast social differences are a cause of the trade in organs and of other abuses .
There are very rich people who can buy anything , including organs for transplantation .
There are also those who are destitute .
They may donate their organs as a last resort or under duress , and thus reduce their chances for good health and survival .
This state of affairs will not be changed by assurances about equal opportunities and equal access to health services .
There is a requirement for real social protection and for statutory protection of human health and life .

( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to congratulate Dr Adamos Adamou on this report , which was adopted unanimously by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
Not a single Member voted against it ; nor did anyone oppose it any of the committees that were asked for their opinion .
That this unique level of consensus was achieved is also due to the frequent and long debates on this report organised by the rapporteur , and I would like to thank him for that .
Our task in the area of organ transplantation is twofold .
On the one hand , we want to help people for whom transplantation offers the only possibility of staying alive , and on the other hand , it is our duty to prevent organ trafficking , which is one of the most serious criminal acts .
We know that trade in organs is at present particularly active in the poorer parts of the world , where organ donation is providing the poor with the only possibility of survival .
I therefore find it shocking that in today 's European Union , based on values , morals and ethics , some people are asking for this trade to be legalised .
Since there is a vast difference between the supply of organs - from either live or deceased donors - and the demand for organs , it is important to increase the number of donors .
In the Health Programme 2008-2013 the Commission includes evaluation of post-transplant results among its health safety priorities , which means that grants can be awarded for these purposes .
Although I very much welcome the possibility of financing projects from grants , I have a few reservations .
I know that this debate is not about the Health Programme 2008-2013 but I must emphasise the following aspect .
As far as the projects concerned , I was surprised at the mathematical discrepancy between the number of projects approved and the number of projects completed : in 2004 , 72 projects were approved and 9 were completed ; in 2005 , 61 projects were approved and 7 were completed ; in 2006 , 87 projects were approved and not a single one was completed ; and in 2007 , 6 projects were approved and none was completed .

Are there any mechanisms available to verify the effectiveness of the projects cofinanced by the European Union ?
Mr President , the use of human organs for transplantation has increased steadily over the past decades .
Organ transplantation is now the most cost-effective treatment for end-stage renal failure .
For end-stage failure of organs such as the liver , lung and heart , it is the only available treatment .
Transplants are one of the most miraculous achievements of modern medicine , but less than 25 % of the UK population are registered organ donors .
Last year , around 2 400 people in the UK benefited from an organ transplant , but more than a thousand die every year whilst waiting for such a transplant .
Organ shortage is a common dilemma in all European countries , and there is clearly a need to improve the system supporting organ donation across the EU .
Therefore , I warmly welcome this report , and I especially welcome the expanded section on organ trafficking .
A lack of donors has resulted in an exponential growth in transplant tourism to the world 's developing nations .
The international black market in organs is attracting people in search of a kidney or other organ , and people living in abject poverty or other vulnerable circumstances are being exploited .
They have become a spare parts inventory for the sick .
However , when illegal organs transplants are practised , safety is often ignored and the lives of both donor and recipient are put at risk .
British newspapers have already exposed several macabre websites aimed at so-called ' transplant tourists ' , including the offer of kidneys from executed prisoners in China .
We should not view this as a distant crime .
Several European nations have also become embroiled in the transplant trade , including Moldova , Serbia , Turkey and Russia .
Governments across Europe must do more to prevent this shameful crime , so I would like to congratulate Mr Amadou on what is a wide-ranging and thoughtful report .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on his truly excellent report .
Allow me to take this opportunity to raise an important but highly controversial issue , which , although not the subject of decision presently , nevertheless needs to be addressed at some stage : this is the concept of presumed consent .
Most potential donors ' organs never become available , because the system of obtaining the consent of the donor in life , or of his or her relatives , can never function to such an efficient degree so as to overcome the constraints of narrow time limitations , the sensitive psychosociological manifestations of bereavement and the complex technicalities of organ harvesting and transportation .
The answer to this problem of organ availability is decidedly to presume that all dead people are donors unless this is specifically objected to in time by a close relative or by the donor when alive .
I know that this is not easy for legislators to accept , but I hope that this will cause some serious and mature thinking in the future , based on realism and bearing in mind the enormous number of lives that could be saved if such a system were put into effect .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Adamou , we know that demand for organs outstrips supply .
We also know , however , that the only way to increase supply is to secure the principle of non-commercialisation .
So there can be no trade in organs , and we cannot permit expense allowances and reimbursement of costs to turn into covert forms of payment .
The problem of organ trafficking is not taken seriously in the European Union .
I am pleased to hear from the Commissioner that organ trafficking is to be included at last in the report on trafficking in human beings .
However , what happens if a European citizen comes , with an organ , from a third country such as the Philippines ?
No doctor or hospital will query the origin of the organ .
The European citizen will not be required to prove that it did not come from trafficking .
That is why we need traceability if we are to eliminate organ trafficking effectively .
It is here that the European Union has a big responsibility because we cannot permit a situation where people in China , Ukraine or other countries have to live in fear of an organ mafia .
It is tragic that poverty and desperation should drive people to sell their organs .
It is equally tragic , of course , that people should have to die because there are too few organs available for transplants , but we do need to consider both sides of the coin .
Mr President , to be reprieved from death and disease through the gift of an organ is a wonderful thing , but we have a shortage of organs .
Adult stem cells are a promising development , worthy of mention .
Many people who would otherwise have needed a transplant are being taken off the list , as their own stem cells are being used to repair their damaged organs .
Also , in a research setting , new organs have been made for animals , using their own stem cells .
Such replacement organs do not present rejection problems for the recipient .
I would like to thank the rapporteur for supporting the amendments on equality in organ donation for people with disabilities .
Research by the Disability Rights Commission suggests that people with disabilities are four times more likely to die from a treatable disease , with organ failure being one of these conditions .
We must fight such institutionalised discrimination and ensure fair , free and equitable access to organ donation for all .
I also want to congratulate Mr Derek Rowe and all those at Irish Air Ambulance who , despite receiving no support from the Irish Government , will finally have the first air ambulance operational in Ireland by the end of the year .
They have based it on the Cornwall Air Ambulance .
The very first mission of the Cornwall Air Ambulance involved a person who had drowned and donated four of their organs - organs that would have been lost without an air ambulance .
( PL ) Mr President , transplantology is suffering from a shortage of organs .
Demand is high and therefore big money is involved .
Where there is big money , abuses will be found .
Consequently a new kind of crime emerges .
There are examples of purchases from poor donors - for a few pennies kidneys can be bought for transplantation .
We hear of organs being harvested from executed persons , whose permission has not been sought .
We hear of potential donors being kidnapped and killed so that organs can be obtained .
There are cases of death being accelerated to harvest organs .
This is what I wish to address .
Since transplantology emerged , the definition of death has changed .
A criterion of brain death emerged - defined for the first time in 1968 in Boston . It is known as the Harvard Criterion .
Since then new criteria of brain death has emerged , each successive one being less restrictive .
Cessation of brain activity does not amount to an observation .
It is a prognosis .
To verify it , the life-support machine is disconnected , and that in itself can cause death .
Sometimes the assistance of anaesthetists is enlisted to obtain the organs of the allegedly dead , so that harvesting of a dead body is painless .
What is needed is a stricter , not more liberal , definition of death .
Taking of one life to save another is not acceptable .
( DE ) Mr President , if we want a joined-up health policy , then the call to the Commission to table a proposal for a directive on organ donation and transplantation is a timely one .
The extremely short supply of organs , which persists in some Member States , means that many patients there are on waiting lists for years , and many of them die .
If we had just 20-30 dead and live donors per million head of population , the European Union would have a good supply of organs .
Achieving that depends , however , on transplant laws that provide in principle for the removal of organs after death , unless the person concerned has left instructions to the contrary .
Only Member States with this type of legislation - and there are currently 11 of them - can hope to resolve the problem fairly at European level .
Article 38 , or rather the proposed amendment to it , is at odds with such a solution .
In Austria , although the principle of organ removal is enshrined in law , an intensive-care specialist with psychological training will also discuss the procedure with the family of the deceased donor , and this system has been very successful .
If the relatives oppose the organ removal , then their view will be respected .
Other approaches - such as that taken in Austria 's largest neighbouring country - lead to major difficulties with organ supply and thus turn the whole thing into a European problem .
A functional system of obtaining organs depends on having the same set of rules throughout Europe and on arrangements for organ distribution that are transparent and fair and can be supervised at national level .
Any approach that fails to put these elements in place will be a capricious waste of time and , at worst , will generate a dubious form of business for poor and mainly non-European countries .
I know what I am talking about because , as Health Minister in Austria , I was responsible for this issue and our experience with it today is positive .
The proposal now before this House does not go far enough to resolve the problem at European level .
I expect and hope for more from you , Commissioner !
( NL ) Mr President , previous speakers have already made the point that organ donation is an emotive subject .
It is also a subject which in my view ought largely to be dealt with at Member State level .
But a European approach may make sense , chiefly when it comes to quality criteria and information-sharing .
We need to take a tough line on illegal organ trafficking .
Mr Adamou 's own-initiative report makes a significant contribution here and I thank him for it .
Some members have advocated the introduction of an ' opting out ' system , but I have grave reservations about that .
We cannot force anyone to make a choice about organ donation when the sector itself has not yet weighed the issues clearly and responsibly .
I am glad that the resolution now before us makes this point a matter for the Member States .
Lastly , I endorse the amendments tabled by Mrs Sinnot , Messrs Liese and Bowis and others regarding the proven benefits of using adult stem cells .


( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should first like to congratulate Mr Adamou on his work .
If one of the objectives of this report is to break down the barriers to organ donation and to ensure the safety of organ transplantation , the first problem clearly concerns self-sufficiency within each Member State and within the European Union .
Organ shortage is a problem facing all the Member States to varying degrees .
Whilst this situation , which has tragic consequences for people who are waiting for an organ transplant , may be one of the causes of organ trafficking , it is not the only one .
It appears that the root cause of trafficking in human organs is their market value .
To remedy this situation , at least within the European Union , organ donation must be guided by three basic principles : it must be unpaid , voluntary and anonymous .
If commercialisation of human organs is not possible , then trafficking will be more difficult .
In an attempt to resolve this fundamental problem of organ shortage , as highlighted in the report , it is necessary not only to conduct effective public awareness campaigns but also to raise awareness among potential donors .
Some Member States are already leading the way on this issue .
It should be noted that , in the case of the donation of blood , which is also in short supply in Europe , several years ago now , we called on every Member State to conduct blood donation campaigns .
What was the outcome of this request ?
Can we build on this experience and extend it , and possibly improve it , to include organ donation ?
Nevertheless , I would like to emphasise a couple of points which worry me : firstly , the donor card is not fit for purpose , and , secondly , the issue of the living donor needs to be regulated more effectively .
These two points highlight the central role to be played by doctors and surgeons .
Finally , the report refers to the various possibilities of treatment available using adult stem cells .
I should also like to mention the opportunities offered by the use of umbilical cord blood stem cells in the treatment of blood cancer , as a substitute for bone marrow transplants .
Let us not dismiss this approach .
I already mentioned it at your hearing , Commissioner .
( SV ) Mr President , the question of organ donation is an ethically sensitive issue and must be guided by national values .
Cooperation across national borders can take place in order to ensure quality and safety , but the choice of whether to donate or receive organs must be the choice of the individual or his or her family .
This choice often has its roots in a cultural context .
The proposed European donor card is inappropriate , as rules on consent , allocation and organisational structure differ from one Member State to the next .
Health is and should remain a national issue .
Nevertheless , the Swedish June List is in favour of voluntary exchange of organs and expertise among the existing organisations in Member States .
Parliament 's proposed measures to encourage debate on organ donation , on national transplant hotlines , positive media exposure for organ donation and educating sports stars may possibly be justified , but these initiatives must be decided by the Member States themselves on the basis of the prevailing social climate in the respective country .
( SK ) I would like to extend my heartfelt congratulations to my fellow Member Mr Adamou .
Because of the shortage of organs , some people are quick to use criminal methods .
They have turned concern for human beings into lucrative trade in human organs , and children are the group most at risk .
Two weeks ago I made an appeal in Slovakia , and now I am appealing to the European Parliament and the European Commission , for an intensive campaign to increase parents ' awareness of the dangers threatening their children .
We must launch a pan-European campaign entitled ' Do you know where your child is now ? ' .
This campaign should increase parents ' sense of responsibility for their children .
We need to take this issue very seriously and the European Union must adopt measures to tackle the transnational nature of the illegal trade in human organs .
( HU ) An unreasonably large number of people die or suffer because there is no organ available in time for transplantation .
But many people do not consider use of their organs after death an ethical problem , if they know that this can be done , but because of inadequate information they do not donate their organs .
Naturally everyone must make their own decision , and no one can overrule them or force them .
It is important , however , that citizens in our various countries understand that , with different rules in different Member States , if they do not make provision for donating their organs , some countries will permit transplantation while others do not .
I welcome the European Parliament 's proposal for a legal representative to decide on the use of organs after death if the deceased person has made no other provision .
The illegal trade in organs is a most loathsome crime associated with organ transplants .
Robust action must be taken against it , and , especially when those who are termed allies of the west pursue it , covering up these crimes would be a collective shame .
( ET ) Organ transplants must take place quickly .
No more than a couple of hours must elapse between removal and transplantation .
Therefore public awareness and public opinion play an important role in increasing organ donation .
Organ donation and transplantation are medical procedures , and in order for them to be further developed there must be full public involvement and greater public awareness .
The most effective means of increasing public readiness would appear to be improving knowledge of transplant issues among the public and the media .
This must be the first step .
Secondly , I would like to emphasise that , given that there is currently no European coordination of organ exchange , making an improvement in that area is very important , specifically with regard to coordination of the system for organ exchange such as it currently exists between the Member States , for example through a European donor card or a European hotline .
( PL ) Mr President , I see that in general we all agree that organ transplants must not be a commercial activity .
Any commercial utilisation of organs is simply unethical and contrary to basic human values .
Huge demand for organs for transplantation may lead to pathology or , indeed , crime .
All of Europe was recently appalled by those parts of Carla Del Ponte 's book where she spoke of Albanian terrorists who used Serbian citizens from Kosovo for commercial transplantation .
This is the issue that the European Parliament and the Member States should address .
I believe that the informed consent of the donor must always be a basis for donation and for transplantation of organs .
There is a need to secure such a solution which must be the norm in Europe .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , perhaps not everyone knows that the first organ transplant in the world was performed in Vienna in 1902 by a person of Hungarian origin , Imre Ulmann .
This particular link with the Austrian capital has existed since then , and so strongly that , even though personnel and technical resources are roughly the same , Hungarian lung transplants are still carried out in Vienna .
And why not ?
It costs three times as much and even then the number of patients is even limited .
There is no doubt but that transplant coordinators have to be appointed in the intensive care units of European hospitals .
The number of these in Hungary is at present precisely zero , while Spain reportedly has 156 .
As regards heart transplants , my own country has outstanding results , performing well in international comparisons , but we are at the bottom of the list in Europe .
The reason is the lack of donors , lack of equipment , air travel , and the human resources required .
Hopefully this report will help to address these anomalies since the problem lies not in our hearts but in our minds .
Thank you , and I propose that the report be adopted .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur for his report .
Tonight , there are 700 people in Scotland waiting for an organ transplant : that is 700 families waiting for calls that could guarantee their loved ones ' survival .
The need for consensus on this sensitive subject is essential , and it is a sad day when Member States cannot agree on this .
I would like the system of organ donation to be , as Mr Matsakis has said , a system into which everyone has opted in to donate , unless they have requested to opt out .
That would help with the supply side , particularly for the young and those from an ethnic minority , where shortages are most acute .
Such a system would help save European lives .
While I welcome the Commission 's action plan , let us make sure that it is not too little , too late .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , this has been a very interesting and lively debate and no wonder , given the seriousness and importance of this problem .
Now , a lot of issues have been raised .
I will try to comment on some of them .
Non-commercialisation of organs is a very important issue and I believe , and agree , that organ donation should be done on an altruistic and voluntary basis .
That is why , of course , donor cards should be voluntary , and the same applies to the European donor card , which we intend to introduce in our action plan .
Good practices exist in some Member States and these good practices should be shared with other Member States for the benefit of all .
The Commission 's directive on quality and safety will , I assure you , be flexible enough not to affect donation whilst ensuring basic requirements throughout the European Union .
I also want to confirm that traceability will be included in the directive .
Consent for donation is a particularly sensitive issue , which needs to take into account local and cultural attitudes to donation and transplantation .
I wish to point out , on this point , that national authorities are responsible for deciding the legal requirements and practices regarding donation consent in their own Member State and for ensuring that their citizens are aware of their rights in this area .
I would like to say that the use of stem cells from cord blood has proved to be useful for the treatment of some malignant diseases , such as cancer .
The Commission supports the development of cord blood banks and the use of this technology .
I also think that it is very important that we raise awareness among European citizens , so that we encourage the increase of both live donations and donations after death , because , in this way , we shall also - as I said in the beginning - indirectly fight trafficking .
In order to prevent transplant tourism , I think it is very important that citizens should be made aware of both the dangers regarding the safety and security of organs and the ethical questions that may arise .
As we know , in many third countries , very poor and vulnerable people are being exploited for the purpose of organ extraction .
Finally , honourable Members , I would like to thank you once again for providing us with such a constructive report .
In particular , I want to stress the fundamental aim of saving lives , whilst recognising the important scientific advances in organ donation .
I therefore look forward to continuing our close and constructive collaboration and presenting the Commission 's proposal to this House later this year .
Mr President , let me thank all those who have spoken on this particularly sensitive subject and allow me to make some comments .
Mr Maaten and others spoke about the European donor card , which we have adopted as an addition to what is provided in Member States .
Mr Maaten quoted some correct figures : 80 % of citizens surveyed were in favour , but only 12 % have a donor card .
However , another statistic should give us cause for concern : of those who had a donor card when the time came for them to become donors , 50 % did not donate their organs because their families refused .
There are thus problems that we cannot be sure will be solved with a European donor card .
As for the point raised by Mr Matsakis about ' presumed consent ' , this is a matter for the Member States .
According to my fellow Member who spoke about Scotland , presumed consent solves the problem .
It is up to the Member States to decide whether to adopt such a measure .
We should not forget the principle of subsidiarity .
In this case , we must see which systems have succeeded , so that we can exchange experience and procedures , as in the case of Spain , to which Mrs Sornosa Martínez has referred .
Why do we not have in different hospitals coordinators , specialised doctors and nurses , able to recognise potential donors so that transplants can go ahead and we can thus increase the availability of organs ?
Mrs Auken , who is not here at the moment , has said that we will never be able to fill the shortfall in organ donation .
As a doctor and a scientist , my answer is that perhaps I will not live to see the day , or future generations will , but in the decades to come we will be able to make the organ we want from the cells of the individual who needs it , maybe from his skin or from elsewhere .
Commissioner , you spoke about umbilical cord blood cells and about their storage .
Now let me point out that we really must not let them fall into the hands of private firms operating for profit . In my country , Cyprus , the Karaiskakio Foundation provides this service free of charge .
There are also three private firms charging parents to store umbilical cord blood cells .
These cells are also precursor and stem cells ; they are very valuable , as you know .
What can I say about the reference made to trade ?
My fellow Member referred to the report by Carla Del Ponte .
I expected to see this report earlier , to be honest .
Naturally , it is yet more proof that trafficking is also taking place in the enlarged Europe .
I thank all of you once again .
I think that the time has now come for us as European citizens to take action .
We must mobilise , coordinate , raise the awareness of those around us and set a good example : we must become organ donors ourselves .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 22 April 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( BG ) This is to express my deep satisfaction with Mr. Adamou 's report .
I support the opinion that to reduce the shortage of organs is the main challenge EU Member States face in terms of organ transplantation .
On 9 / 04 / 2008 my colleagues from the ATAKA Party Dimitar Stoyanov and Desislav Chukolov and I submitted a written declaration in support of informed consent for organ , tissue and cell donation in Bulgaria in which we called upon the European Commission to come up with a proposal on the quality and safety of organ donation .
The introduction of a European donor card as a supplement to existing national systems will contribute for the rapid identification of donors and thus increase the availability of necessary transplant material .
Public awareness about organ donation and transplantation and the introduction of uniform EU legislation and strict criminal prosecution measures against those engaged in organ trafficking , including against medical staff , will serve as safeguards for donation procedures and informed consent .
Once again I congratulate you on your report , sir .
in writing . - ( RO ) Support for the proposal of a European Parliament resolution on policy actions at the European Union level on organ donation and transplantation .
I request that the European Commission propose a more comprehensive directive that would set quality and safety requirements for the donation and transport of organs in the European Union .
This directive would also provide methods of preventing potential abuse .
The new legislative act should supplement and strengthen the Member States ' efforts to improve the present situation , imposing lines of conduct at a European level , by taking into account the progress in medicine .
I insist on Member State involvement , including the Member State I come from , Romania , in educating citizens by presenting the advantages of organ donation and acknowledging the fact that organ donation and transplantation mean lives saved .
I also support the involvement of the European Commission in organizing public debates together with the relevant European non-governmental organizations , in order to identify the best solutions , both as regards the communication campaign and the turning to account of the Member States ' experience and good practice .
The response speed is essential in such cases .
Better organization of the medical system at a national level is necessary , as well as making paramedics sensitive to such emergencies
in writing . - This is a crucial report and a real opportunity to save lives .
Chronic shortages of organs across Europe are causing 60 000 unnecessary deaths .
Therefore , urgent action is needed :
1 .
Removal of restrictions in organ donation and increased cooperation across Member States and the number of quality safe organs available for transplantation .
What is required is a Commission directive that adds value and sets common EU-wide quality and safety standards which complement existing arrangements in Member States .
2 .
Encourage Member States to adopt a system of ' opting out ' rather than ' opting in ' to organ donation .
This would enable greater awareness of shortages , and would allow more people to actively consider their position on the issue .
3 .
I fully support the emphasis in this report on illegal trafficking of organs .
I am especially concerned that it is often the poorest who are targeted for donating organs .
We must end this cruel exploitation of poverty and protect the innocent victims who are tricked into losing their organs .
This is not just a problem in developing countries but also in eastern Europe .
I want to see strong measures put in place through Europol and Interpol to curb this illegal trade .
in writing . - ( HU ) I welcome Mr Adamos Adamou 's report on organ donation and the trade in organs .
Even though technical expertise in this area is unfortunately often at very different levels in the Member States , the use of human organs for transplantation has increased dramatically in recent decades .
There are around 40 000 people on waiting lists in western Europe , and as a result of this the trade in organs , as a form of livelihood , is flourishing in the poorer areas of eastern European countries .
The European donor card represents a good solution to the legal issues of donation , but more robust measures need to be applied to trafficking and trading in organs .
Given that , despite isolated attempts , there is no easy-to-use record system for organs available for transplantation even at national level , it is important to introduce a certificate , similar to the Schengen system , accessible on the Internet , valid throughout the whole Union , supported by medical opinion and a single Union transplantation database .
Certified establishments engaged in the legal transplantation of human organs would have this life-giving information available instantly and could set up bipartite agreements , while the poor and vulnerable would be protected from becoming victims of organ trafficking .
The creation of a database is an absolute necessity so that organs available in several countries can be used , and it is therefore vital that the Member States discontinue legislation prohibiting this .
It is also important that organ donation remains strictly ' non-commercial ' but the conditions under which financial compensation can be offered must be defined .
Any lack of or delay in action in the sector of organ donation costs lives that could be saved .
As Europeans we have a lot to learn from one another .
Moreover , countries with experience and infrastructure in this sector can help other countries , like Malta , that may not have the critical mass , especially in cases of rare conditions .
Recently the Maltese and Gozitan people were moved by the case of Jamie Zammit .
Jamie is having problems finding a donor to save him from a condition known as Fanconi anaemia because in Malta we do not currently have a register of bone marrow donors .
The Maltese Government has now announced that it is going to set up such a register .
This is good news .
However , in order to set it up , we require the specialised procedure of HLA typing , which does not yet exist in Malta , and we also need long-term training in other countries so that this can be introduced .
I am appealing that , out of European solidarity , Malta is given all the help it needs , particularly until this system is set up in our country , so that we can save as many innocent lives as possible .
in writing . - ( RO ) The penury of organs , which has led to the rapid development of mercantilism and tourism in organs , represents an essential health problem the European Union is dealing with .
Organ trafficking is caused by a combination of factors such as poverty , corruption and criminality , a reason why the countries of Eastern Europe are the most exposed to this phenomenon .
In order to prevent this " transplantation tourism ” , the report of the Committee on the Environment requests that organ donation be performed altruistically and voluntary , without becoming a source of profit for the donors .
Member States should take action to protect the poorest and more vulnerable donors so that they do not become victims of organ trafficking .
Nevertheless , there are considerable difference between the EU Member States as regards the ways in which they organize donation and transplantation activity , the community of donors and the sources of organ procurement .
For instance , the low number of donors in Romania is due to the absence of an efficient system for identifying donors and doctors prepared to coordinate the organization of transplantation .
For this reason , the European average for the number of donors is 20 , and in Romania , only 0.5 .
We need adequate technical and logistics infrastructures , as well as psychological and organizational support to reduce the differences between demand and offer .
Today , almost a thousand patients are registered for transplants in Austria .
Unfortunately not all these seriously ill patients will get the transplant that may save them .
Every year some 150 patients die while awaiting a transplant because of the very limited number of available donor organs .
Organ shortage is a major challenge facing Europe .
That is why we need a directive on the quality and safety of organ donations .
Equally , however , we need cooperation between Member States and an exchange of good practice .
There are , currently , considerable differences within Europe in the number of organ donations and in the transplant quota .
Cooperation among Member States should focus on discovering the most efficient systems , exchanging experience and promoting well-established procedures .
Member States must learn from one another .
I am convinced that live donation should always remain complementary to post-mortem donation .
Moreover , it is important for donations to remain voluntary and unpaid .
Transfers of money between donor and recipient are unacceptable .
The Commission and the Member States must take measures to combat transplant tourism and the illegal trade in organs more effectively .
The role of volunteering in contributing to economic and social cohesion ( debate )
The next item is the report by Marian Harkin on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development on the role of volunteering in contributing to economic and social cohesion .
rapporteur . - Mr President , thank you for the opportunity to say a few words on my report on volunteering and the contribution that volunteering makes to economic and social cohesion .
First of all , I would like to thank all my colleagues on the Committee on Regional Development for their excellent cooperation on this report and , in particular , the shadow rapporteurs .
I also want to record my thanks to the Commission officials , the ALDE Group staff and Parliament staff on the Committee on Regional Development for their interest and assistance .
Over 100 million Europeans volunteer - that is an incredible figure !
According to the Commission , between one third and half of the EU population are involved in some kind of voluntary activity .
In my opinion , we as an institution have a responsibility to recognise , to value and to support voluntary activity at every possible opportunity .
Volunteering is a unique activity in many ways : it is open to all and is freely given ; it contributes to social cohesion and to economic cohesion ; it puts one of the most important European values - that of solidarity - into action .
Whether it is an individual delivering meals on wheels to an elderly neighbour , or the thousands who mobilise in the event of a natural disaster , such as floods or forest fires , volunteers can help build communities and reduce alienation .
Volunteering as an activity spans generations .
It is a resource , sometimes latent , residing within communities , organisations and networks .
It is an energy within each one of us , but it is only activated when we engage with others .
It is , in my opinion , a most valuable form of renewable energy .
There is a strong link between volunteering and active citizenship : involvement in voluntary activities is a tangible expression of participatory democracy .
In this Parliament , we represent our citizens and we as politicians engage in representative democracy , but sometimes we do not pay enough attention to the other side of the equation : participatory democracy .
This is where citizens , through their activities , participate in the democratic process , and volunteering facilitates this important process .
Moving on to my report , it contains a number of practical suggestions as to how we can add value at European level .
The Commission has a role to play in ensuring that Member States adhere to the partnership principle enshrined in the Community strategic guidelines on cohesion and to ensure that we do not continue with the illusion of inclusion of NGOs , voluntary groups etc . , as is the current situation in many Member States .
I also believe that a system should be put in place across all European funds , whereby voluntary activity is recognised as a contribution to co-financing projects .
If we do this , we show by our actions that we support volunteers .
We should expand the opportunities and programmes already in place to facilitate volunteering among young people and put in place similar opportunities and programmes to facilitate volunteering for older people .
And we should , at every possible opportunity , promote intergenerational volunteering .
Another area where the Commission can act is in facilitating a more liberal visa regime , where volunteers from neighbouring countries are involved in EU-sponsored programmes .
Member States can play a significant role by producing regular satellite accounts , so that the value of volunteering and not-for-profit institutions can be measured .
The figures for many countries , including the US , Belgium , the Czech Republic and Canada , indicate that not-for-profit institutions account for between 5 % and 7 % of GDP .
Policymakers cannot ignore these figures and must take them into account when formulating policy .
Furthermore , for every euro organisations spent on supporting volunteers , they received an average return of between 3 % and 8 % .
Not even the ECB can match that rate of return .
Member States can also support voluntary activity by establishing sustainable volunteering infrastructure to deal with issues such as core funding , insurance cover and VAT exemptions where appropriate .
Finally , one of our tasks in the EU is to make a positive impact on the lives of citizens and to add value at European level .
We can do this by supporting volunteers and voluntary activity in a tangible way .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank Ms Harkin very much indeed for her report .
The report relates to many EU policies and many initiatives , emphasising the strong link between volunteering and active citizenship .
I particularly appreciate your comments on the PEACE programme , where the involvement of volunteering was indeed strong .
We will meet here again in May to discuss the report of Ms de Brún , in which , I am convinced , examples of local empowerment , in particular through the voluntary sector and non-governmental organisations , will be strongly present .
With regard to your recommendation on in-kind contribution , let me say that , while Article 56 of the general Regulation on the European Regional Development Fund , the European Social Fund and the Cohesion Fund already allows for in-kind contribution to EU co-financed projects , the real challenge is the use of this provision .
But let me say that , in particular in local initiatives , which are co-financed by the Social Fund , it is quite common for volunteers to provide a noteworthy contribution , while there have been also many activities , especially within the URBAN initiative in Germany , Italy , the UK and Greece , which have supported a wide range of voluntary organisations .
Volunteering can be seen as a strong component of the partnership principle .
Many times in this House , I have reiterated the Commission 's full commitment towards the effective implementation of the partnership principle , in particular in the new generation of cohesion policy .
We insisted on partnership during the negotiations of new programmes and we have now many positive examples of strong commitment to the partnership .
But of course , as you know , we have a great variety of approaches towards partnership and volunteering in our Member States .
I also see the role of your report in preparing the ground for the next own-initiative report on governance and partnership at national , regional and local level , to be presented by Mr Beaupuy .
Let me say a few words on specific policies and initiatives in the area of volunteering in which the Commission has been particularly active .
Worth mentioning is the European Voluntary Service and active European citizenship in the EU 's new lifelong learning programme .
My colleague Ján Figeľ is currently preparing a new initiative on voluntary activities of young people , which will incorporate many of the aspirations expressed in your report .
Enhancing and promoting trans-European voluntary activities will further reinforce the mobility of our young citizens .
In its new initiative , the Commission will seek to ensure a greater interoperability of existing national voluntary schemes .
The White Paper on sport also stresses that voluntary activities in the sport sector strengthen social cohesion and inclusion and promote local democracy and active citizenship .
There is also the reference to sport in the Lisbon Treaty , which provides for ' the promotion of European sporting issues , while taking account of [ ... ] its structures based on voluntary activity ' .
Here we share the view that we need a more holistic approach to the contribution of volunteering to Europe 's economic and social cohesion .
This should certainly take into account the challenge of the ageing European population .
In this respect , your suggestion of ' intergenerational volunteering ' merits further exploration .
In this context , I am happy to tell you that the Commission 's Directorate-General for Education , Training , Culture and Youth is about to launch an assessment of the state of play of volunteering in Europe .
This assessment will serve as a source of better knowledge and a solid basis for further initiatives in this field , as no systematic and integrated approach towards volunteering has been developed so far at EU level .
I am convinced that all those you are addressing in the motion for a resolution will be responsive to your call .
You can certainly count on the Commission 's support .
Let me also assure you that all other requests that are addressed more specifically to the Commission will be examined , in particular by Commissioners Figeľ and Špidla .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , I would like first of all to congratulate Ms Harkin on an excellent and timely report .
The point is to have better understanding about the potential and role of volunteering , which could be called one of the backbones of civil society .
Indeed , volunteering is about citizens ' initiative and so it is directly related to solidarity , the core value of a united Europe .
As the rapporteur put it just now , it is one of the most efficient forms of renewable energy .
I think the point of this report is to encourage Member States to recognise the value of volunteering in promoting social and economic cohesion .
The state is , of course , not expected to finance volunteering , otherwise it would lose its meaning , but the state is called on to provide incentives for the private sector to support the voluntary sector .
Parliament also addressed the Commission about the delays in the proposed European Charter on Volunteering , which is expected to define better the role of volunteering .
A very important part of this report is the call for the promotion of volunteering through education at all levels , beginning with creating opportunities for voluntary activities at an early stage of the education system and also to promote volunteering as part of lifelong learning .
I would like to express my thanks once more for this excellent cooperation .
We were able to discuss almost all amendments in a positive and constructive spirit and to make use of the majority of initiatives .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I welcome Marian Harkin 's report on volunteering and congratulate her on her collaboration with colleagues in its drafting .
Over a hundred million EU citizens volunteer , and every one euro spent in supporting them generates a return of between three and eight euros .
With 1.2 million volunteers in Scotland - with its population of 5 million - and the voluntary sector amounting to 5 % of Scotland 's workforce , we must publicly recognise volunteers ' efforts throughout Scotland and the EU .
The report gives credit to volunteers and focuses on the benefits of volunteering for the economy and social cohesion .
It rightly demands that this contribution should appear in national accounts .
It states that volunteering contributes about as much to gross domestic product in a wide range of countries as the construction industry or the utilities industry .
This means that the not-for-profit sector accounts for 5 % to 7 % of the GDP in some EU countries .
Volunteering is good for you , your community , your region 's economic development and your national economy .
It also helps build the social capital that public policies need to succeed .
I urge the European Commission to put in place a plan ' B ' which would ensure valuing , validating and visibility for volunteers throughout Scotland and the rest of the EU , and I urge colleagues to support the Harkin report .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , should like to join my colleagues in thanking and congratulating Mrs Harkin for having produced this report .
The choice of rapporteur is not a random one , as Mrs Harkin has extensive experience in the area of volunteering , and it is therefore only natural that she tabled this report .
We have , of course , approved heartily of her being given this report , which she has drafted in a true spirit of consensus , for , as you will have noticed , we have tabled only one amendment , with which she is in agreement .
This demonstrates the quality of her report , and I feel that this deserves to be strongly emphasised .
Commissioner Danuta Hübner , you have , to some extent , beaten us to the punch and given answers , right from the beginning of your speech , to questions raised in this report .
I should like to thank you in advance , and it is most likely that several of the other speeches made by Members will enable you , later and over the next few days , to provide further answers from the Commission .
I should like to emphasise , in addition to what has already been said and further to what has been written in the report , that if there are 100 million Europeans who dedicate themselves to helping some 500 million Europeans every day , it must not be forgotten that these 100 million Europeans who volunteer receive personal gain from so doing , not in the financial sense but in the sense of personal fulfilment .
You all know , we all know , I am certain , of sports teams and cultural and social leaders without whom our non-governmental associations and organisations would not operate .
It must be said that these people need this commitment for their personal development .
In an ageing society , in a society where there is an increasing number of young retirees , we also need this individual work-life balance that is achieved through volunteering .
Therefore , for economic reasons , but also with a view to the fulfilment of the human values shared by Europe 's citizens - more than 100 million of them - let us make efforts to promote voluntary work in our societies and hope that , in the years to come , there will be well in excess of 100 million European citizens engaged in voluntary activity .
Thanks to Marian Harkin , thanks to the Commission , thanks also to the governments and the regional and local authorities that are ready , tomorrow , to show their support , through their actions , for the wishes expressed by the European Parliament .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , on behalf of the UEN Group I wish to express our huge appreciation to Marian Harkin for tackling this subject .
Voluntary activity is voluntary , unpaid and intentional work for others .
It transcends family or friendship relationships .
Although this is work without material remuneration , a volunteer receives satisfaction of a different kind : he or she fulfils his or her motivation , realises him or herself , and shows solidarity with others .
Voluntary activity is highly educational for the youth and very invigorating for the elderly .
In this context the influence of voluntary organisations on the strengthening of local and regional communities should be seen as very positive .
I believe it helps to build civil society in which one individual selflessly helps another and is sympathetic towards others without being a threat .
The Irish example , which I had the pleasure to learn about , is a good one .
Such understanding of voluntary activity also means that the volunteer , who is often also a benefactor , must not suffer any material penalty when helping others and offering them gifts .
I refer here to a case that is well known in Poland , of a baker whose business folded because he was required to pay taxes on bread he gave to poor people .
I also wish to highlight the very fine idea of declaring 2011 European year of volunteering .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , I too would like to thank Marian Harkin very much indeed for her balanced and comprehensive report .
It is the product of a shared effort to give greater recognition at European level to the aims , substance and social significance of voluntary work .
There are countless voluntary initiatives currently in place in the Member States which make important contributions , not only economically but also socially and in terms of integration .
However , the European dimension so necessary for networking is often lacking .
We are already familiar with the European Voluntary Service for young people , and we need similar programmes for all age groups , particularly for the growing numbers of retired people who are active , healthy and experienced .
They too could contribute significantly to making the European Community more meaningful , and existing measures under our regional and cohesion policies could be used to make this possible .
We need appropriate framework conditions and definitions that are as clear as possible , in the interests of long-term and short-term development for all the voluntary sector partners .
Initial steps have been taken by the Commission and also by the Council .
My hope is that both those institutions will take up Parliament 's proposals and suggestions , so that we can make the European Year of Volunteering - jointly proposed for 2011 - a real success .
( NL ) Mr President , volunteers do a great deal , at both local and regional level .
Their efforts give social cohesion a very personal face .
There is a difference between towns in certain parts of Europe .
In the ' new ' Member States the level of volunteering is still much lower .
A lot of work is being done , and Mrs Harkin 's report emphasises positive ideas for supporting volunteers and encouraging action at all levels .
The Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats takes the view that there is no question of volunteers on the one hand and professionals on the other .
The two are not mutually exclusive : neither group can function without the help of the other .
Both groups , professionals and volunteers , are part of the social model that Europe exemplifies , of civil society , in which the citizen too has an important voice .
That is the famous partnership principle .
There is one point I would like to raise following the debate in committee .
The new Paragraph 17 deals with whether or not volunteer work should be rewarded with tax incentives .
The answer is yes , but the form these take may vary considerably .
That is a matter for our individual states to decide when we talk about VAT .
My home country of the Netherlands has its own special system : the activities of sports associations are exempt , for example , and other activities such as canteen management are partly exempt , as is third-party sponsorship .
So in 2010 , when the VAT system comes up for review , it would be good to take this report on board and be able to point to examples of good practice in the Member States which others might usefully emulate .
Lastly , to make the point once more , volunteering deserves our broad support in the work of churches , politics and the rest of society .
( PL ) Mr President , promoting an active and conscious role for citizens in society is one of the main principles held by the European Socialist family .
We support involvement in voluntary activities when this is a concrete expression of participatory democracy .
At European level voluntary activity is a practical expression of such European values as solidarity , cohesion and social integration .
For many people , except for taking part in elections at various levels , their participation in organisations of this nature is their only experience linked to the democratic process .
It is therefore satisfying that more than 20 % of EU inhabitants take part in various voluntary activities .
Such activities help to reduce economic differences and are a catalyst in the activities of various associations , and they therefore create social capital .
The concept of social capital is increasingly used by organisations such as OECD or the World Bank in the context of local socioeconomic development .
The European Union should increase its support for the various forms of participation , in particular in relation to regional planning and local development , utilising EU 's political strategies and European funds .
( RO ) First of all , I would like to congratulate Mrs. Rapporteur for her work and the special involvement in this subject .
I have followed this report closely , since volunteering has a major importance in current society .
The positive effects can be measured in terms of social cohesion , human rights protection , medical-sanitary assistance , promotion and organization of cultural , artistic and educational activities .
The effects are essential for the population and the economy .
Yet this activity is underestimated , in my opinion and too unfamiliar to the public .
The consequences are negative for volunteer work since there are insufficient actions of support from the state , even if it can represent a considerable part of a country 's economy .
As a Member of the European Parliament , coming from a former communist country , I can tell you about the very low volunteer participation in my country .
Since the communist regime introduced mandatory unpaid work in order to serve the state , this practice is now associated with that period in the people 's subconscious .
Today , the percentage of volunteers in Romania is much lower than in most Member States .
The activity is often unknown to the citizens , the state policy does not encourage it and people 's mentality is also not in favour of this activity .
Citizens should be informed about the positive effects of volunteering .
On the other hand , we should avoid the abusive situations that have happened , for instance organizations that have adopted this legal status for making profit .
I support volunteering as an important activity and I would like it to be promoted and supported throughout the European Union , especially in the former communist countries where efforts should be strengthened .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , let me also congratulate the rapporteur on her excellent work , and stress that contributing and volunteering in society are invaluable .
At national and local level they are the means by which participatory democracy expresses itself and they allow for the active participation of citizens in the public arena .
At European level , volunteering can contribute to the creation of stronger ties between EU citizens .
Furthermore , through the additional human resources it offers to social and economic life , and also through its contribution to the creation of social capital , volunteering contributes importantly to achieving the EU 's goals for economic and social cohesion .
The added value of volunteering should not be underestimated .
Particularly today , with the EU facing significant social , economic and environmental challenges , volunteering should not only be encouraged , but also supported by European policies , especially by that of cohesion .
Member States and regional authorities ought to try to ensure that voluntary groups and projects can transparently and flexibly have access to adequate , sustainable funding from the Structural Funds .
Mr President , can I first of all begin by thanking Ms Harkin for all her hard work and this insightful and timely report , which was so well received by the Regional Committee .
I fully support the central theme of the report - that volunteering , through its emphasis on participation and solidarity , strengthens civil society and bonds between the communities .
I welcome the report 's stance on the role that Member States should play regarding volunteers .
I fully agree with the position that volunteering should be complementary to - and should not be intended to replace - public services .
In this regard , the role that carers play in our societies , in countries all over Europe , comes to mind .
Often these dedicated people are forgotten , even though their care of the elderly and the disabled removes a huge burden from state resources .
The report also wisely points out that volunteering can be hugely beneficial for young people , fostering a sense of community and allowing them to develop practical skills which complement their formal education .
Another point advocated by the report is that special efforts should be made to promote volunteering among senior citizens .
The involvement of this age group affords communities an opportunity to benefit from their wealth of experience and reinforces their essential place in society .
For me , however , this report has added significance : in my constituency in Northern Ireland we are in the process of rebuilding a society which has been deeply affected by violence and conflict .
Although we have now entered a period characterised by peace and greater prosperity , in certain areas of the province the effects of social exclusion , under-development and division are still all too evident .
Ms Harkin 's report specifically acknowledges the positive role volunteering can play in divided societies , and , if we consider the case of Northern Ireland , the whole concept underpinning the peace process packages has been that people work together on a cross-community basis in order to promote understanding and reconciliation .
To a great extent these initiatives have had a positive effect .
Therefore I hope that Parliament 's adoption of this report will ensure that the importance of volunteering is acknowledged and that the Commission and Member States will do all in their power to facilitate and encourage this practice .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report by our fellow Member Mrs Harkin on volunteering is a way for the European Parliament to demonstrate its social aspect to European citizens .
The report promotes the idea of contribution , which is dealt with comprehensively and objectively on both a theoretical and practical level .
Our fellow Member 's work is important ; I welcome it and congratulate her warmly .
We in turn have also tried to contribute to her activity .
We have among other things brought out the importance of corporate volunteering , the coordination of voluntary initiatives reconciling family with professional life , as well as the creation of rapid action volunteer sections in every region to deal speedily with natural disasters and accidents .
In general terms , volunteering helps among other things to increase GDP .
As has been said , volunteering boosts skill acquisition and improves employability of a volunteer .
It provides socially and educationally excluded persons and the unemployed with genuine opportunities and encourages immigrants to participate in the local community .
The actions and the activity of volunteers speak for themselves .
In my country , Greece , for example , the 2004 Olympic volunteers won us our most significant medal .
Both individual and group volunteering are vital in social , economic , environmental and cultural terms .
They unify all differences and peculiarities , while promoting them and revealing them in a spirit of concord and common aims .
I congratulate the rapporteur once more .
I call on you to support Mrs Harkin 's report and to join us in signing the joint written declaration that we have drawn up with other Members , asking that 2011 should be declared the European Year of Volunteering .
Mr President , voluntary work , apart from its economic aspect , is of great educational value , particularly for young volunteers , be it at home or abroad , in various areas of social , economic and educational life .
Voluntary may mean ' no payment ' , but we as European institutions can help intensify it by various means .
Regarding the report , which I consider important in raising our level of consciousness , there is something missing .
One group not mentioned here are male and female convents , missionaries who either do voluntary work around the world or organise and promote such work .
I would welcome a monetary estimation of their contribution to people 's well-being .
Voluntary work is the product of intrinsic motivation and pure altruism , which are values that cannot be overestimated .
This is a report crucial to our way of thinking .
( PL ) Mr President , the work of volunteers is not always valued as highly as it should be .
The shaping of civic attitudes through voluntary work is not always given due attention .
Local authorities are responsible for organising and delivering social assistance , including feeding the poor .
Sometimes a local NGO charity performing voluntary activity has to pay high rent to local government for premises such as kitchens and canteens for the poor and homeless .
Moreover , it sometimes does not receive any resources for food or for insuring volunteers .
Since the volunteers are not remunerated , they are unable to support the activities of the NGO .
In this context I would draw your attention to Paragraph 15 of the report .
The demographic situation in Europe highlights the increasing role of the voluntary sector , primarily in helping to care for the elderly .
That is why the document presented here is so important .
I wish to congratulate the rapporteur , Mrs Harkin .
( PL ) Mr President , I wish to draw your attention to two specific forms of voluntary activity .
The first is the transfer of know-how in a highly specialised area .
Experienced and educated people transfer their knowledge , skills or perhaps the achievements of their occupational group to others .
Those benefiting from such know-how are often in the early stages of their education , of assimilation of knowledge or skills , of facing new challenges , of their own transformation .
The other area of volunteering concerns young people .
It teaches life skills and promotes their involvement in civic life .
Travel to other countries as part of volunteering , in turn , promotes inter-cultural dialogue and teaches tolerance and respect .
This is why local and national authorities and international organisations should do more to support and promote volunteering .
( BG ) We all agree with the conclusion made in Mrs. Harkin 's excellent report that volunteering can play an important role for the development of local communities , civil society and democracy .
That is why volunteering and volunteer organisations need encouragement and support .
I would like to note , in this respect , that the establishment of a European database to provide basic information on the various volunteer organisations in the European Union and detail on best practices will provide necessary guidance on how to improve the system of volunteer work .
The establishment of a single European database will enable a more effective partnership and cooperation among volunteer organisations and strengthen international volunteer exchange arrangements .
This is particularly important for young people and school children .
By acquiring experience in volunteer organisations at an early stage , they would perceive participation in volunteer work as a routine contribution to the life of their local communities and to European society .
( PL ) Mr President , today we are debating Mrs Harkin 's report on volunteering in the European Union .
The importance of the role of volunteering in Europe in the future depends partly on us .
I wish only to remind everybody that annually millions of EU citizens volunteer , whether directly or indirectly .
Voluntary activities take place at local , regional and international level .
Wherever they take place , they yield profits several times higher than the outlays .
This is why I believe that there is a need for closer and stronger cooperation between Member States and non-profit organisations and for creating effective systems to facilitate cooperation between all voluntary organisations within individual countries and across borders .
Taxes imposed on sponsors for their gifts and the fact that VAT is payable by voluntary organisations on purchases made to achieve their objectives are the principal problems holding back and limiting voluntary activity .
I believe that such problems should be resolved as soon as possible .
( RO ) Allow me to express my full appreciation for the relevance of Mrs Harkin 's report , by the discussions on the new economic , social , European model and constant efforts to improve the economic and social cohesion at the European Union level .
Taking into consideration the solutions it identifies , I consider the report a text that provides a series of generous and extremely useful principles , able to lead to an increase in European citizens ' quality of life .
I believe , as I did on the occasion of the submission of amendments , it probably would have been better to emphasize more firmly , in the report , the modern concept of volunteering , by explicitly stipulating the conditions without which all voluntary action could be interpreted as a unilateral act .
I would also like to emphasize the role of religions in the achievement of Christian principles related to volunteering .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , just two very short points .
Let me say that even the best-equipped policies cannot deliver without the strong involvement of all those who feel a co-responsibility , and also the need for commitment and contribution .
Volunteering and partnership are the best ways to ensure that involvement .
Let me also assure you that I will share your conclusions with my colleagues in the Commission .
I am convinced that the future assessment of the state of play of volunteering in Europe , and the follow-up to it , will take inspiration from the resolution you are going to adopt , and also from the discussion I have had the privilege of sharing with you tonight .
rapporteur . - Mr President , first of all I want to thank everybody for their kind comments and their support in the drafting of this report .
I would just like to make one or two final comments .
I appreciate the Commissioner 's reference to in-kind contributions by voluntary groups and , while I recognise that in-kind contributions are applicable in some EU-funded projects , I believe we need to ensure that this becomes the status quo .
I also look forward to Commissioner Figeľ 's communication on youth volunteering and Commissioner Hübner 's commitment to investigating and , I hope , promoting intergenerational volunteering .
I am again calling on the Commission to ensure that the partnership principle is adhered to in all negotiations and consultations in the drafting of EU programmes at national level .
This is crucial , because it is a real recognition by the EU that volunteers , NGOs etc. are part of the process , not just some add-on , not just there for the optics , but an integral part of the process .
With regard to the one amendment proposed on possible VAT exemptions , it is a good compromise and I am very happy to support it .
I also want to take this opportunity to call for 2011 to be designated the European Year of Volunteering and ask for the support of Parliament in signing the written declaration which has been proposed by Members from the five largest political groups .
In this call , I am supported by the Committee of the Regions , the Economic and Social Forum , the Portuguese presidency conclusions and very many voluntary groups across the EU .
If the Commission were to designate 2011 the European Year of Volunteers , this would allow the EU institutions , in collaboration with voluntary organisations , to work towards common objectives , as I said earlier , to add value at European level .
Finally in this context , we should encourage the development of civil society and of participative democracy , thereby giving real meaning to the aim of bringing Europe closer to its citizens .
The promotion , support and facilitation of volunteering and voluntary action , accompanied by the growth in social capital , will prove to be an invaluable tool in achieving those objectives .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 22 April 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
, in writing . - ( HU ) In Europe more than a hundred million people work as civilian volunteers for the public good and for others .
In the United Kingdom 38 % of the entire population is involved in voluntary activity and in Poland the figure is 18 % .
Voluntary activity cannot be separated from European working life and is seen as a basic tenet of democracy at both local and public level .
The voluntary work done by our citizens helps solve social problems and promotes the acquisition of skills and social awareness .
Volunteering offers people from different groups of the population the opportunity for integration and inclusion , the elderly can take part in the life of society , invest a lifetime of experience and feel they have a useful role for longer .
The incentives for voluntary work are the same as the basic European values : solidarity and a sense of responsibility .
There is increasing recognition within the EU of the usefulness of voluntary activity and voluntary organisations are being more closely involved in decision-making processes .
In recent years voluntary sector has become more ramified .
Interest in volunteering is increasing but due recognition is wanting , material rewards are restricted and the infrastructures are lacking .
This has to be changed .
To give support to voluntary work and enhance social recognition , it is important that a community of purpose is created , with transfer of best practice and experience by the active players - government , business , trade unions and voluntary organisations - working together in dialogue and in partnership .
in writing . - ( SK ) I would like to speak on a very personal note .
Although I am a member of the board of a large Slovak national association , the Forum for Life , I know that the volunteers who act independently rather than through specialised associations also represent a ray of hope that penetrates the darkness of loneliness and support the fight against temptations of violence and egotism .
What prompts a volunteer to care for others ?
The first element is the natural heartfelt enthusiasm of humans to help those around them .
This is an almost existential principle of creating the human capital that is so in demand for the future of social cohesion in the regions .
Volunteers experience happiness that goes beyond their work because they are willing to do their best for others , without expecting any reward .
It is not enough just to meet people in financial difficulties : it is also essential to respond to their desire for values and their deepest wishes .
Although the type of help we offer is important , what is even more important is the heart that offers this help .
Irrespective of whether we are talking about a micro-project or a huge project , volunteering should always be a practical lesson , especially for young people , since it is an educational contribution to the culture of solidarity and togetherness , of offering one 's time and energy .
For me , this is the most important contribution for both present and future generations and their coexistence .
Statute of the European Ombudsman ( debate )
The next item is the report by Anneli Jäätteenmäki on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs on the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament amending its Decision 94 / 262 / ECSC , EC , Euratom , of 9 March 1994 , on the regulations and general conditions governing the performance of the Ombudsman 's duties .


rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Diamandouros , ladies and gentlemen , first I wish to thank all parties for their excellent levels of cooperation whilst this report was being produced .
It was not easy finding a solution that would satisfy everyone , and I understand that some people are still hoping for some changes , but we have achieved a unanimous result in committee .
It seems appropriate to move forward from here .
There were four issues relating to the role of Ombudsman .
These were access to documents , the testimonials of officials , information on criminal cases , and cooperation in the field of human rights .
There was also a fifth issue in the European Ombudsman 's original proposal , his or her power to intervene , but this was contentious and right at the end of the discussion the Ombudsman said that he wanted to withdraw it .
The most important amendment concerns the obligation of the EU institutions and bodies also to grant the Ombudsman access to classified information and sensitive documents , if deemed necessary for the Ombudsman to do his or her job .
Up till now the institutions have had the right to refuse to disclose information .
This will now be the subject of objective , and no longer subjective or arbitrary , consideration .
This is an important , albeit small , step in the right direction .
The institutions supplying classified information or documents to the Ombudsman must inform the Ombudsman of their classified status .
Furthermore , for the rules to be implemented , the Ombudsman may agree with the relevant institutions the operational conditions for access to classified information or other information covered by the obligation of professional secrecy .
The role of the European Ombudsman has become more important over the years for the European Union institutions and the citizens of Europe .
With the Lisbon Treaty , the Charter of the Fundamental Rights of the European Union will become legally binding , which will make the job of the Ombudsman even more important .
In the future we will need to do more to ensure that the Ombudsman has sufficient resources , that his or her Statute reflects the current times , that he or she obtains the information needed and that officials give him or her the right information .
Under the Charter of Fundamental Rights , every person has the right to have his or her affairs handled impartially , fairly and within a reasonable time by the institutions and bodies of the Union .
The resources therefore have to be in place so that citizens do not have to wait years for decisions and can also have confidence in the fact that the Ombudsman will be in possession of all the necessary information and that officials will tell him or her what they know instead of what they want to say .
Otherwise there is no rule of law , something we are so fond of talking about , even if the EU is not a state as such .
We ourselves should also comply with the rule of law ; only then can we expect others to .
vice-president of the Commission . - Mr President , it is now 14 years since this Parliament first adopted the European Ombudsman Statute .
Much has happened since then .
It is therefore normal and appropriate that the Ombudsman has taken the initiative to modify his statute , and the Commission welcomes that .
The important thing is this . The citizens must have confidence in the Ombudsman 's capacity to conduct thorough and impartial inquiries in alleged cases of maladministration .
So the Ombudsman needs clear , concise and efficient rules for his important work .
Right from the beginning , the Commission has followed this initiative very closely , and we have had fruitful discussions with the Ombudsman and Parliament 's rapporteur , Ms Jäätteenmäki .
Our respective services have also had a lot of contact and cooperation .
The Commission welcomes the general line of this report , and I want to thank the chairman , Mr Leinen , and all committee members - in particular Ms Jäätteenmäki - for their work .
From the Commission 's side , we will deliver our formal opinion very shortly after Parliament requires us to do so .
Today I would like to briefly summarise our main reflections .
They have to do with four specific issues .
First , the hearing of witnesses ; secondly , access to files ; thirdly , OLAF , and fourth , cooperation in the field of human rights .
I will say very shortly a few words about each of these points .
First , about the hearing of witnesses .
The Commission agrees with Parliament 's amendment on the hearing of witnesses , and the purpose of this provision was to recall that officials give testimony not on a personal basis , but in their official capacity .
We are conscious that the current wording could give the impression that officials might act under instructions and not give authentic and complete evidence .
This has never happened , but I agree that it is important to modify the wording to avoid misunderstandings .
Secondly , on access to files , the Commission is in favour of allowing the Ombudsman to consult documents that he needs in the course of his enquiries .
The Ombudsman has proposed to lift the secrecy exception for access to a file .
The Commission has never used this exception , but it is important that we are very clear .
The treatment of classified information has to be carefully considered .
The same goes for privacy of individuals , protection of proceedings and business secrecy .
That is why the Commission welcomes Parliament 's amendment that , where these kinds of documents are concerned , the Ombudsman should use rules which are strictly equivalent to those in force in the institution concerned .
With regard to sensitive information , such as data protection and business secrets , the Commission fully shares Parliament 's views .
This also goes for documents relating to proceedings in litigation .
This means that the Ombudsman should apply the relevant Community law when dealing with requests from third parties for access to documents obtained by the Ombudsman in the course of his inquiries .
As you know , the relevant Community law - Regulation ( EC ) No 1049 / 2001 - is currently being updated and the Commission will take a decision in just a few weeks time .
For these reasons , the Commission agrees with the aim of the amendments on access to documents , but we think maybe a more precise wording would improve the text even more , and we will come back to that when we present our formal opinion .
The third point , on OLAF : when it comes to the transmission of information on possible criminal activities , the Commission entirely agrees with Parliament that the Ombudsman should be able to notify the European Anti-Fraud Office of any information on matters within its remit and it is not entirely clear that the proposed notion of ' competent institutional body ' would cover OLAF .
A slight rewording could improve the text even more .
Finally , on cooperation in the field of human rights , the current statute has proved to be a good basis for the European Ombudsman to cooperate with national ombudsmen and similar bodies in the Member States .
The Commission fully encourages this practice .
It brings the European institutions closer to its citizens .
With a tabled amendment , Parliament would like to widen the scope of cooperation to other institutions for the promotion and protection of human and fundamental rights .
According to Articles 302 and 303 of the Treaty , it is the Commission , as representative of the Community , which establishes all appropriate forms of cooperation with international organisations in general and with the Council of Europe in particular .
This is why the Commission considers that this proposal goes beyond the mandate given to the Ombudsman by the Treaty .
This being said , the Commission would be open to an alternative wording , and I hope we will be able to strike the right balance between the Ombudsman 's important working contacts and the Treaties that does not impinge on the Commission 's institutional prerogatives .
So these are the Commission 's reflections on the issues raised by Parliament 's amendments , and after the vote tomorrow we will prepare our opinion and start discussions with the Council .
This should be done quickly , since we want to facilitate an agreement on the file under the Slovenian presidency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the EU is undoubtedly going through a particularly difficult period of crisis in credibility .
Is the EU , I wonder , democratically credible ?
Indeed , for it to be so , it needs the legitimisation of its citizens , and this is becoming increasingly complex as Europe is enlarged .
There is always the common foundation on which we built Europe and on which our fellow citizens rely .
It is a system of values protecting their fundamental rights .
The need to communicate with European citizens is more pressing than ever .
It is meaningful only when the EU receives their messages of concern and manages to convince them that the institutions are endeavouring to meet their expectations .
Citizens do not trust us because they do not feel that we are promoting or even extending their rights .
Our attempt has got to have a lasting effect , ladies and gentlemen .
We must monitor historical developments and the new requirements they give rise to .
The European Ombudsman 's primary concern is to ensure the correct operation of the institutional bodies and organisation of the EU , boosting the confidence that citizens need to have in it .
The proposed changes in the rules of procedure revising the Statute of the Ombudsman equip him effectively for this .
On behalf of the Committee on Petitions , we support them unreservedly .
Finally , let me congratulate in particular the rapporteur responsible for this issue , Mrs Jäätteenmäki , for her tireless efforts to achieve a universally acceptable report .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PT ) The debate on the changes to the Statute of the Ombudsman in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs was not easy .
It was a long and very controversial debate and the question at issue was essentially to decide whether extending the Ombudsman 's powers was a rational step .
We started from a clear premise , that the role of each institution in a democratic culture must be well defined and there must be no confusion over these roles .
The clear definition and rational distribution of roles is the only way to promote legitimacy , effectiveness and accountability of the institutions .
It was for this very reason that the Ombudsman withdrew his proposal for access to the Court of Justice .
However , compromises were reached on data protection , access to secret files and cooperation with other institutions on fundamental rights .
The Ombudsman will now have access to secret files but will not be allowed to disclose such information to third parties .
Data protection will follow European Union data protection rules .
It is clear that the Ombudsman can work with other institutions on the issue of fundamental rights , and it seems to me there can be no other way of proceeding .
Cooperation with institutions on the subject of fundamental rights makes explicit an unwritten principle , given that fundamental rights form the foundations and aim of the European Union .
However , the compromise reached in what was not an easy debate clarifies what I think must be the inevitable conclusion on this issue : the Ombudsman , as an institution , must always be clear that , when exercising his powers , he must do so in accordance with the criteria of need , appropriateness and proportionality , because these are the criteria of justice .
Mr President , European Ombudsman , ladies and gentlemen - my dear nocturnal colleagues , perhaps we have delayed a little in debating the improvement to the Statute of the European Ombudsman .
However , I think that in the end we are doing so at an appropriate moment , because now that the European Parliament is debating in citizens ' rights general , it is confronted with a new treaty on the operation of the EU and with a Charter of Fundamental Rights containing an article specific about the right of citizens to make complaints to the European Citizens ' Advocate .
I think it is therefore the right moment to debate the subject of the confidence of citizens in the EU bodies .
Let me remind you that the European Ombudsman is at the service of European citizens to help them combat maladministration .
I should like to add that it is high time for the European Parliament itself to show confidence both in its institutions and in the European Ombudsman .
I think that our debate about the changes started at the initiative of the current Ombudsman contained two misunderstandings , which we managed , I believe , to resolve in committee .
The first related to the subject of competences .
Some people have said that we are giving too many competences to the European Ombudsman , but this is not true .
This report attempts to supplement the existing institutional competences of the European Ombudsman so that he can use them appropriately in all the areas which the rapporteur has spoken about .
The second misunderstanding was over the confidentiality of documents .
This particular report does not state what documents the public has access to .
It refers to the documents which the Ombudsman may see and lays down two clear rules : those documents which are sensitive , according to the regulation , may not be seen by anyone ; documents subject to the confidentiality regime must continue to be subject to it .
In conclusion , let me say that in the current circumstances it is very important for us to promote this report .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , this initiative is a timely strengthening of the Statute of the Ombudsman , and a signal of confidence in the way that Mr Diamandouros and his predecessor , Mr Söderman , have exercised their functions .
It also reflects a change in the political climate since the inception of the Office of the Ombudsman , especially with respect to increased transparency .
It would be palpably absurd for us as a Parliament to decline to allow the Ombudsman full access to documents on the grounds of secrecy .
Public opinion would be bound to treat such a caveat with great cynicism .
I agree with Commissioner Wallström that it would be splendid if we could conclude these long-standing negotiations under the Slovenian presidency , so that we are properly prepared to face voters at the elections in spring 2009 .
We should be proud of these reforms , which I believe the entire Parliament will feel able to support .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Mr Diamandouros , the Greens want to strengthen the institution of Ombudsman in order to increase public confidence in the European institutions .
How can we do this ?
By agreeing that the Ombudsman should have full access to all types of documents , including classified documents .
Moreover , we are delighted that the Ombudsman is to be able to hear the testimony of officials of the European institutions who are to be free of the constraint of having always to speak in accordance with the instructions of superiors in their administration .
That is important .
It is also important , as mentioned in the Treaty of Lisbon and in this report , for the Ombudsman to have the power to intervene in cases before the Court of Justice , and we endorse the call made by the Ombudsman for greater transparency in general , including in this House , as regards the finances of MEPs .
This is the second time that the European Parliament has proposed improvements to the Statute of the Ombudsman .
On the last occasion , the Council blocked those improvements .
I am confident that this time the actual powers of the Ombudsman have finally been clarified , and that we have genuinely created a means of increasing the confidence of the man in the street in the European institutions .
( ES ) Mr President , some of my fellow Members here are going to say : what is happening today ?
Have we lost all sense ?
A Committee on Constitutional Affairs item at ten to eleven at night ?
What has happened , then ?
Did Mr Duff strike a blow and relegate Mr Watson to the second row of the Liberal Group ?
What did we do here in the People 's Party ?
No , all we did here was comply with the recommendation of the Working Party on Parliamentary Reform , which says that , when there are only a few of us , we should try to meet together , if only to keep warm and not feel alone .
Seriously though , Mr President , I believe that the meeting tonight deals with an important topic .
I am very pleased that the Ombudsman is here with us .
This is because , as Mrs Wallström , Vice-President of the Commission , so rightly said , after a decade of operation , it is normal and right to stand back and look at what is not working and what could be improved .
This is precisely what the report of Mrs Jäätteenmäki aims to do and I would like to thank her for working so well with us all , and for seeking a consensus which demonstrates that , here in the European institutions , we live in a consensual and not a conflictual democracy .
So , congratulations , Mrs Jäätteenmäki .
What we have tried to achieve , Mr President , is something very simple .
When the position of Ombudsman was created by the Treaty of Maastricht , we were at an important crossroads between a basically economic Union and an encouragingly political Union .
The Ombudsman was a key element in that transition .
Today we want to continue to support the Ombudsman in his work so that he can continue to be a vital player in this rapprochement between the institutions and European citizens .
I am therefore convinced that the reforms proposed - by consensus , I would repeat - by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs will go in that direction .
At the next mini-plenary session we will debate the report of Mr Stubbs , who is dealing with another important aspect , transparency in the European institutions .
Both reports are leading in the same direction , Mr President , and show that here , even at five to eleven at night , we are concerning ourselves with our citizens .
Mr President , the European institutions are unavoidably more distant from citizens than are national or local institutions .
That is why we have the principle of subsidiarity , which states that we should not act at European level if national or local action is perfectly adequate .
That is also why we have an institutional system such that when we do act at European level we can offer citizens the guarantee that the institutions operate to the highest degree of openness , democracy and propriety .
That is why we have a European Parliament , so that Europe is not just left to government ministers and technocrats , diplomats and bureaucrats .
That is why we have the Court of Justice , to ensure the rule of law .
That is also why we have the Ombudsman , so that even those citizens who do not follow our deliberations week in , week out - and there are many of them - can rest assured that we operate to those high standards , and that if there are allegations of maladministration then they will be properly and impartially investigated .
However , as Commissioner Wallström said , citizens must have confidence in the Ombudsman 's capacity to do that .
Even if there have not yet been any cases of officials , when questioned by the Ombudsman , having been given instructions from ' higher-up ' tantamount to censorship , and even if there have not up to now been problems of access to confidential documents , it is important that our citizens see that these things cannot become obstacles , and cannot be used as excuses to hide things from the Ombudsman .
That is why I welcome the initiative the Ombudsman has taken in proposing changes to his statute .
My group will be supporting the changes approved by the Constitutional Affairs Committee , and I am sure that Parliament as a whole will endorse them whole-heartedly .
( BG ) I would like to congratulate the rapporteur Mrs. Jäätteenmäki for that fact that since the Lisbon Treaty and the Charter of Fundamental Rights were signed a new framework on the Ombudsman 's role in modern social relations has been proposed .
I am confident that this document will contribute to the more efficient execution of his duty and will make him an actual guarantor of effective protection for European citizens against cases of bad governance on the part of European institutions
Both our discussions and the report focus on the sensitive topic of the Ombudsman 's access to information , including classified information .
In my opinion , if the Ombudsman 's work is to be done effectively and if we are to ensure the best possible result in the inquest into objective truth , which is primarily in the public interest , European institutions should have the obligation to provide access to any type of information .
At the same time , however , the Ombudsman must be informed of the type of such information , especially in cases where it is confidential .
Indeed , it is very important to respect citizens ' privacy , particularly when using classified information .
I think that the rapporteur has managed to strike a balance between personal rights and public interest .
This provides the Ombudsman with access to the entire information on a given case , so that he or she can rule on it while at the same time there is compliance with all rules which are followed also by those institutions providing such information , and this will ensure both the protection of the information involved and the protection of European citizens ' rights .
Strengthening the Ombudsman 's role as a mediator between the European institutions and the citizens will make a contribution to the development of democracy and reinforce the principles of rule of law .
That is why it is very important that he or she is present not only at the European but at the national level as well , especially in countries where democratic principles and supervision are still in the process of being built and where government structures cannot provide effective remedy for their citizens at the national level , yet those citizens are also citizens of the European Union .
That is why I would like to stress on the need to improve cooperation between the EU institutions and the Ombudsman .
Contacts between the Ombudsman and Committee on Petitions of the European Parliament are particularly important ; they need to cooperate in the interest of European citizens .
It is also important to develop and implement a more effective system of practical mechanisms for cooperation .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Jäätteenmäki 's report comes at a very important time in the process of European integration : the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon and the European Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The acknowledgement , for the first time , of the right of the citizens of Europe to a good administration constitutes significant progress towards greater transparency and meets the need for the actions and the behaviour of Community bodies to comply not only with the rules in force but also with the expectations of the European taxpayer as regards a responsible , impartial and efficient administration .
The proposed changes would make it possible , during an investigation , to overcome any unwillingness on the part of the Community institutions to cooperate fully in the clarification of the facts .
Any possible willingness to gloss over certain aspects of the truth by adopting vague texts whose wording is open to ambiguous interpretation cannot be tolerated .
This allows an administration far too much latitude and increases its discretionary powers in a disproportionate and unacceptable manner .
The Ombudsman needs the confidence of the citizens who expect him to intervene judiciously in the protection of their rights .
However , he is also duty bound to respect the confidentiality of the information that he receives .
For this reason , I congratulate Mrs Jäätteenmäki for having struck an appropriate balance between these two requirements and for having proposed balanced solutions that strengthen the effectiveness of the role of the Ombudsman as a moral authority and improve the transparency of the Community institutions , confirming , in the spirit of the new Charter , the right of every European citizen to good governance and a good administration .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I wish to thank the honourable Members for this discussion and their remarks .
Many Members have mentioned that this is an issue of competencies and also of confidentiality .
Those two issues are linked , and I am sure that these reforms will remove the ambiguities that institutions might , on occasion , have used to hide behind .
The reforms will modernise and open up procedures and ensure greater clarity and transparency , which is necessary in these times and in order to meet citizens ' expectations .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Ms Jäätteenmäki once again for working in an open and constructive way with us , and for informing us on her work .
I would also like to thank the Ombudsman himself , because I have had the opportunity to follow his work , and am aware of the level of correctness , seriousness and commitment with which he carries out his tasks .
It has really impressed me , and I have great confidence in him .
By this initiative we are also helping the Ombudsman align his statute with what we would expect from the Ombudsman in his examination of cases of maladministration within our institutions .

rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , I just want to thank everyone for their excellent cooperation and at this final review stage I hope that we will find the right wording so that there is greater confidence as a result of EU acts , that there will be adequate resources in place and that the Ombudsman can be provided with all necessary information .
If not , as I said , it will be a bad day for the rule of law and for transparency , although I believe that a common view will be found , because now there are only a few minor changes to make .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday , 22 April 2008 .
New Flame shipwreck and its consequences in Algeciras Bay ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the New Flame shipwreck and the pollution in Algeciras Bay .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I am pleased to be here today to inform you of the Commission statement in connection with the resolution that you are going to adopt on the New Flame shipwreck and its consequences in Algeciras Bay .
This resolution refers to two matters of great importance to European citizens : maritime safety and the protection of the marine environment , that is , the protection of our coastlines , our bays and our beaches .
Europe has had to cope with ecological disasters caused by accidents at sea , such as the Erika and the Prestige .
The New Flame shipwreck has had serious consequences , but it has not caused a disaster of such magnitude .
Nevertheless , this shipwreck reminded us that maritime transport could be dangerous and that such incidents could still occur despite the numerous measures taken by the European Union over the past few decades .
The European Commission has monitored the accident very closely ; it has remained vigilant with regard to the application of Community law , and it now wishes to put forward a number of practical proposals aimed at further improving maritime safety .
The Commission has very closely monitored this accident , which occurred in August 2007 .
The Commission 's services , in particular the Monitoring and Information Centre of the Environment Directorate-General , responsible for civil protection , have been in contact with the Spanish authorities , the ASMAR Sociedad Estatal de Salvamento y Seguridad Maritima and the British authorities .
In response to requests by the Spanish authorities , we have provided , through the European Maritime Safety Agency , EMSA , various satellite images in order to detect any potential oil pollution in Algeciras Bay .
In addition , Spain decided to request , through the Monitoring and Information Centre , the mobilisation of one of the EMSA-contracted oil recovery vessels .
This pollution response vessel , the Mistra Bay , is still on site , ready to assist on the basis of instructions given by the Spanish authorities .
These two EMSA services , namely the CleanSeaNet satellite-based monitoring system and the oil recovery vessels , were created by European legislation .
It is thanks to the support of the European Parliament that EUR 154 million have been allocated to combat pollution for the period 2007-2013 .
Moreover , EMSA has recently concluded contracts with other oil recovery vessels in order to provide Europe 's coasts with even better protection , and , in the very near future , two new vessels , the Bahia Uno and the Bahia Tres , will be operating out of Algeciras Bay .
In general , the Commission is responsible for ensuring that the existing body of EU legislation in the field of maritime safety and the protection of the marine environment is properly applied .
EMSA was established to assist the Commission in enforcing and implementing the existing body of EU legislation .
Inspections carried out by the Agency enable an assessment of the steps taken by the Member States to comply with Community law .
Where appropriate , the Commission may initiate infringement proceedings against any Member State that fails to transpose Community law correctly .
In the aforementioned fields , several matters are pending , including what is commonly known as the directive on criminal penalties and the directive on environmental liability .
The practical application of the provisions of the penal code and the prosecution of polluters nevertheless remain a matter for the individual Member States .
I should like to come back to the matter of the New Flame .
The Commission is currently considering a complaint received from the Andalusian Regional Government regarding a possible failure to comply with Community legislation .
It should be remembered that the third maritime package , under discussion today , aims to make further improvements in the area of vessel traffic monitoring and the liability of maritime transport operators .
In conclusion , the Commission would point out that the European Union has implemented ambitious policies for maritime safety and for the protection of the marine environment .
Accordingly , any Member State affected by an accident has at its disposal , should it so wish , effective tools to combat polluters and pollution .
The Commission hopes that the wreck of the New Flame is soon removed from Algeciras Bay .
The arrival of the specialist barge Big Foot 1 in late March suggests that further attempts are being planned .
That concludes the information that I wished to give to Parliament .
Mr President , I shall now listen carefully to what Members have to say on this subject .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is eight months since the shipwreck of the New Flame and there is still a risk of further oil spills , especially oil emanating from the cargo contained in the wreck .
This situation has arisen due to factors which are daily occurrences in that area , failure to manage high-density traffic and massive oil transfer operations between vessels at sea .
However , in this particular case , there has also been a chain of errors and abandonment of responsibility , in terms of monitoring of the vessel as well as after the collision .
Therefore , Commissioner , this Parliament would be glad if you could answer the following four questions :
One , do you have any information on the origin and degree of toxicity of the 42 500 tonnes of scrap metal not recovered ?
Two , can you tell us whether , following the collision and over these last eight months , there has been recourse to the Community Mechanism for Civil Protection and if so how many times ?
Three , do you know of any plans and time schedules to refloat the vessel - to which you referred just now - or of any plans to monitor the risk of contamination being released from its cargo ?
Four , the European Commission has opened an inquiry .
Is this to establish whether the competent authorities breached the Community rules in force ?
If so , Mr Barrot , if there has been a breach of Community law , please give this House an undertaking that you will refer those infringements to the Court of Justice of the European Communities , because when all is said and done it is always citizens and the environment who pay .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I should like to think that we are all concerned about protecting the environment and maritime safety , and that is the only reason for dragging the New Flame incident into our debate .
I cannot believe that anyone could maintain that this case is even remotely comparable to the Prestige catastrophe .
The spillage from the New Flame has only amounted to 24 tonnes to date , compared with more than 70 000 tonnes from the Prestige .
It would be like comparing a scratch to terminal cancer ; however , an incident such as this is never a minor matter .
We need to reinforce the mechanisms for preventing and managing certain risks on our seas , especially in the Mediterranean .
There is no doubt that the Spanish authorities acted calmly , efficiently and competently , perhaps because they have learnt from the serious chain of errors and stupidities committed by the government at the time of the Prestige disaster .
This action on the part of the Spanish Government and the Junta de Andalucía was facilitated by the European Maritime Safety Agency and the services of CleanSeaNet , which provided the Spanish authorities with eleven satellite images and two incident assessment reports , and the Commission response was mentioned by Mr Barrot just now so I will not repeat it .
Nine months after the incident the matter is under control and the British and Spanish authorities , together with the Commission , are acting strictly within the framework of the Forum of Dialogue on Gibraltar .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the oral question that underlies this debate smacks to me of atavistic resentment of a constitutional nature .
This House is at its worst if we allow such sentiment to stain our approach to the politics of the European Union .
I would ask the Commissioner to clarify three points for us , and I hope he will come back at the end of the debate and do that .
First , that the collision and sinking of the New Flame happened not in the Bay of Gibraltar , which the Spanish call the Bay of Algeciras , but on the south-east side of the Rock of Gibraltar , off Europa Point in the Mediterranean Sea .
Second , that the New Flame incident had nothing to do with the bunkering of oil , as the ship was carrying scrap metal .
Third , that there have not been seven oil spills , as claimed in the oral question , but one minor spill during a storm on 9-10 February .
Seven hundred and eighty cubic metres of fuel were pumped off the vessel in the month following the incident , none of which was spilt .
I would be grateful if the Commissioner would confirm that to the House .
If there is oil on the coast , it is more likely to have come from the Sierra Nava , which broke anchor in a storm earlier in the year , ran aground and leaked oil .
Perhaps the Commissioner would also comment on the cooperation between the Gibraltar authorities and the Spanish authorities .
I believe that cooperation was exemplary .
Gibraltar is in compliance with all its relevant international obligations , and I would invite my Spanish colleagues , particularly from the Partido Popular , to come with me to that part of my constituency , talk to the authorities and take a look at the wreck .
There are indeed legitimate concerns over maritime safety and the danger of pollution , not just at sea , but also of the air and of groundwater , in the busy , heavily-populated industrial area in which Gibraltar and its Spanish hinterland are found .
However , let us not allow the party-political devices of a disappointed opposition to colour our European considerations .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I think that this New Flame situation was best summed up by Greenpeace when it planted a banner on the wreck bearing the slogan ' vertido diplomático ' - diplomatic spillage .
The problem is in fact twofold : there is the ecological problem and then there is the diplomatic problem .
However , the latter cannot be used as an excuse for not tackling the former seriously .
For example , the New Flame incident is symptomatic of the chronic oil pollution of the Bay of Algeciras due to the failure of Gibraltar to comply with European legislation and also the excessive permissiveness of the Spanish authorities .
In any case , I should like to highlight , or perhaps I should be grateful for , the sudden ecological concern of fellow Members in the Partido Popular .
I get the feeling , at any rate , that the interest in the New Flame is not so much to do with the need to tackle the ecological problem as with creating the internal opposition to which we are so accustomed .
To reiterate , I believe that there is a diplomatic problem but the fundamental problem is an ecological one which must be tackled immediately .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , since August I have taken part in various Parliamentary initiatives and have made various speeches in this plenary .
The basic issue - as we all know - is that the area around the Straits is one of the busiest areas in Europe for maritime traffic with more than 100 000 vessels per annum , 30 000 of which anchor in the area between the Bay of Algeciras and Gibraltar .
The underlying problem is that these two ports have no body to coordinate and monitor maritime traffic .
That is the basic problem .
We are launching a clear and precise initiative so that the two Member States involved in this matter can resolve this lack of coordination as soon as possible .
We are talking about two ports with the greatest volume of maritime traffic and it is unacceptable , in this day and age , that there is still no monitoring entity .
We are not just talking about the New Flame , we also had the Sierra Nava and the Samotraki , and these are incidents which obviously threaten maritime safety , the safety of persons and the natural environment .
Therefore , I think that Europe must take the initiative and give the Member States a clear directive .
It is unacceptable , in the 21st century , for the vessel still to be in its current condition .
Perhaps Spain was wrong to entrust salvage of the vessel to Gibraltar ?
Perhaps the two administrations should have done it jointly ?
I have a substantive matter to put to the Commissioner .
I put a question to the Commission - which Mr Dimas answered in March - highlighting an issue which is still not clear , namely what the vessel was carrying in its hold .
What type of scrap metal was it carrying ?
The Commission replied saying that it was carrying 700 tonnes of IFO-380 fuel but we still do not know what type of scrap metal .
I think that this is unacceptable .
I call on the Commission to tell us once and for all what type of scrap metal the vessel was carrying .
( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am speaking in this debate because the situation of the New Flame , shipwrecked in Algeciras Bay and Gibraltar in August 2007 , has yet to be resolved .
As is well known , there were several spillages of fuel and oil from the vessel between August 2007 and February 2008 .
We all know that the consequences of this kind of accident have no respect for the borders of states and harm both the environment and coastal populations .
I therefore add my voice to those of my Spanish colleagues who are asking for a response to the questions raised about New Flame .
These are relevant questions and require an urgent response because this accident not only concerns the Spanish and Gibraltar authorities .
It is the kind of accident that has consequences for the environment , maritime safety and the maritime economy , and therefore affects all of us .
We cannot ignore the fact that the collision and sinking of this vessel took place in one of the busiest sea routes in the world and that its cargo has still not been unloaded .
The diplomatic quarrel is therefore the least of our worries .
However , the issues raised are all the more relevant when we consider that this Parliament has just approved legislation on maritime safety in a package of measures that aims to strengthen European legislation and harmonise it with important international instruments .
It therefore makes sense for us to ask how the relevant resources approved by European legislation are being used , at least those that are already available , and how the necessary cooperation between Member States and the Commission is being coordinated , particularly with regard to the exchange of information , the allocation of responsibilities and the practical measures required to resolve the situation .
It is in this context , moreover , that we evaluate the statement that Vice-President Barrot has made to us here and that I understand communicates the Commission 's position .

( ES ) Mr President , this debate and the answers from the Commissioner have left no doubt that the Spanish and Andalucian authorities are highly sensitive to spillages of pollutants and maritime safety ; these are important matters for the Spanish Government both in terms of its response , which was fairly immediate in terms of time and manner , and because it has embarked upon a series of very large-scale actions to resolve the problem and to avoid even worse disasters .
We have already talked about this .
Clearly the New Flame incident is not remotely a catastrophe on the scale of the Prestige , but its consequences have occupied and concerned the Spanish Government , the government of my country .
The Spanish Government certainly cannot be accused of inaction , quite the reverse .
Right from the time of the incident , Spain has been in contact with the United Kingdom and with Gibraltar and has been seeking information on the vessel and on the collision , and it has offered to collaborate in and coordinate the initiative proposed by my fellow Member , Mr Meyer Pleite .
As the Commissioner said , assistance has been sought from the European Union since August .
The ship-owner and his company have been instructed to bear the cost of the damage and the Junta de Andalucía has also made a complaint to Gibraltar for potentially failing to comply with legislation .
It is vital for Spain to have fulfilled its obligations - which it did , and there was no repeat of what happened with the Prestige - but there is also a need for coordination and it is that coordination which was found wanting .
Therefore , I believe that Spain 's recourse to the Forum of Dialogue on Gibraltar as a measure which can genuinely enable us to manage such situations and prevent further undesirable incidents should conclude this matter for us all .
Everything else is just the apathy which some people felt and want to drag through Parliament again .
( ES ) Mr President , as far as the Greens are concerned , it is not a matter of apportioning blame , but of seeking an effective means of remedying a catastrophe such as this , or rather the chronicle of catastrophes which occur daily in the Straits of Gibraltar .
This collision was a grave warning and we should take note .
We have asked the Commission to adopt measures to combat the foolhardy and dangerous practice of bunkering which is turning the waters of Gibraltar , Great Britain and Spain into an enormous , lawless , floating petrol station , without supervision or safeguards .
Hundreds of dubious single-hulled vessels sail these seas .
Last year there were six thousand fuel transhipments , more than ten thousand of them on the high seas , without the safety measures laid down in the Marpol Convention .
We have told the European Commission that we cannot continue learning from disasters and have asked it to submit a protocol to this House , an effective protocol on maritime transport collaboration in the Straits of Gibraltar , in defence of the environment and common sense .
We cannot cope with this sort of catastrophe on top of our everyday disasters .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Barrot for his answers .
Algeciras Bay has become the dumping ground of the Straits of Gibraltar .
In addition to unlawful bunkering practices , the continual spillage of pollutants , albeit in small quantities , and accidents involving spillage of cargo are threatening to transform a protected area into a sewer .
The case we are debating in no way threatens relations between Spain and Great Britain , who are discussing their old grievances in a rational manner .
In the case of the New Flame - if you will permit me to use the saying - ' unos por otros , la casa sin barrer ' - ' a hedge between keeps friendship green ' .
It is scandalous that in six long months no competent authority has been capable of taking effective decisions to prevent the vessel sinking and that polluting spillages resulting from the collision have not been prevented .
The wreck is now at the bottom of the sea along with 42 500 tonnes of scrap whose nature and potential for pollution is unknown .
Commissioner , we are working hard on the Erika III package , which the Council is showing little inclination to tailor to Parliament 's demands , to ensure that there is an independent authority to combat maritime pollution , an authority which has the power to take decisions after assessing the scale of an incident .
This New Flame case seems tailor-made to justify the establishment of just such an independent authority , equipped with decision-making powers .
Moreover , it is inexcusable to urge the Member States of the European Union to transpose the relevant directives and to ratify the international conventions applicable to this case .
It was sad to hear Andalucía being slated over the major disaster of the Prestige ; it is a sad Manichaean game which shows little respect for Andalucía .
It is a shame that it was people from that region who brought the matter up .
Commissioner , what Andalucía demands is that legitimate bunkering and maritime activities in the Bay of Alegeciras , which generate wealth and employment for the area , should go hand in hand with strict respect for environmental protection .
( ES ) Mr President , this accident is certainly not comparable to other incidents involving oil tankers , or even container vessels such as the Napoli , on which the IMB still has to take a decision .
On the other hand , we should be very pleased that the Vice-President is taking part in this debate .
At the moment the debate is focused essentially on environmental aspects .
I think it is important that Mr Barrot has the power to tackle both aspects , the environment and transport , with new instruments .
We settled the diplomatic problems with Gibraltar over safety in the air .
I would like to suggest to Mr Barrot that here too we should try to settle , and indeed improve , the diplomatic aspects with Gibraltar over maritime safety .
Despite problems , I believe that there are already channels for dialogue which can prove very useful .
I also believe that the Spanish and Andalucian authorities have done everything possible in connection with this type of accident in this critical area of the Mediterranean , and of course we are pleased and gratified to see that they immediately asked the European Union to enforce the instruments available to it .
We firmly believe in the importance of sending out a message of hope to citizens as regards the gloomier aspects , and we should therefore encourage you to reinforce those EMSA mechanisms which proved to be useful precautionary , and then protective , measures for the coastline , to press ahead with this third maritime safety package and , in particular , to improve cooperation between ports , which was perhaps not always as good as it might have been , and certainly to present all those aspects relating to improving the quality of marine fuel , a proposal which was agreed recently by the IMO and will certainly improve the outcome or consequences of this type of incident .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I will attempt to reply to a few of the questions .
I should like to say to Mr Galeote that the Commission has not been notified of any specific toxicity of the scrap metal that the New Flame was carrying on board .
We have no grounds for believing that the metal is particularly toxic .
As for the assistance provided through the Community Mechanism for Civil Protection , this was requested by the Spanish authorities immediately after the incident involving the New Flame had occurred , but it has not been requested since .
Finally , with regard to the removal of the wreck , I should like to inform Parliament that salvage operations are under way , sea conditions currently allowing them to be carried out safely .
These removal operations are expected to take approximately three months .
Moreover , the Commission is considering the complaint received from the Andalusian Government .
Any infringements that are found to have taken place will be prosecuted .
Mr Watson also asked me a few questions .
I should like to say to him that the wreck of the New Flame is , indeed , located in the territorial waters of Gibraltar .
The New Flame incident had nothing to do with the bunkering of oil ; the British authorities informed the Commission that oil bunkering activities were regulated under existing law and that they did not pose any particular problems .
Supply vessels are always double-hulled oil tankers and have all the necessary certificates .
Mr Meyer , the vessel traffic monitoring directive - I shall conclude on this point - promotes cooperation in the area of vessel traffic monitoring , while the SafeSeaNet information system allows for the exchange of information .
Mr Queiró , the Commission believes that the provisions of the directive on criminal penalties for maritime pollution may be applicable in the case of the New Flame , as well as , more generally , to bunkering operations that cause pollution at sea .
However , the 2005 directive does not lay down the legislative framework for imposing criminal penalties on persons responsible for maritime pollution .
The practical imposition of penalties in each individual case is not provided for in the directive but under the applicable national law , for instance , following the submission of a complaint or after initiating criminal action .
Penalties must be imposed by the national courts as soon as an offence is found to have been committed .
Mr Hammerstein , the open-sea transfer of oil is a very common practice in maritime transport .
In principle , this does not pose a problem as long as all precautionary measures are taken .
Shipowners have developed a body of best practices for bunkering operations , that is , during the supply of fuel to vessels .
For its part , the International Maritime Organisation is preparing to adopt various measures to prevent pollution during the transfer of oil between tankers .
The Member States and the Commission have actively supported this approach ; we will , however , remain extremely vigilant in this area .
Mr de Grandes Pascual , in 2005 , as part of the third package of legislative measures on maritime safety , the Commission tabled a proposal for a directive laying down a minimum set of common rules on civil liability and insurance .
This proposal was welcomed by the European Parliament , but , unfortunately , no appropriate action has so far been taken in the Council .
This proposal was designed to provide an interim response to the victims of maritime pollution prior to the constantly delayed implementation of the international conventions that are pending .
Such conventions either enter into force only after much delay or are not applicable in all the Member States .
That leads to situations of unequal treatment for maritime transport operators and for accident victims .
I have not replied to all questions , but I should also like to tell you that the Commission is aware that there is ongoing disagreement over the territorial waters of Gibraltar .
It is not our place to get involved in this discussion .
We can only call on the parties concerned to strengthen their cooperation and improve the exchange of information .
The Tripartite Forum should focus on the issue of cooperation in the field of maritime safety .
Ladies and gentlemen , if you would allow me , I should like to take this opportunity to tell you that , with regard to the Third Maritime Package to prevent pollution , Parliament has really faced up to its responsibilities .
Your Committee on Transport has adopted all seven proposals , and I must pay tribute to Parliament , which has provided me with much assistance in this matter .
Nevertheless , it is true that , at the last meeting of the Council of Transport Ministers , I did notice that there was some resistance on the part of a number of Member States , several Member States , towards two proposals : on the one hand , the proposal on civil liability , the liability of shipowners , in connection with which , in particular , we have had to introduce a compulsory insurance scheme that is obviously critically important for the future .
On the other hand , a further proposal , which supplements this scheme , on the liability of the flag State .
The liability of the flag State is essential if we want all European flags to appear on the white list of the Paris Memorandum , demonstrating that they are all quality flags .
However , we are not quite there yet .
I should like to say that , in order to prevent shipwrecks such as that of the New Flame , it is imperative that we have legislation that is , as we have proposed in the Third Maritime Package , comprehensive and capable of effectively eliminating , at any stage , the risk of accidents at sea and pollution .
In this instance , we have made progress , there is no doubt about it .
The Maritime Safety Agency , as I have already demonstrated , has provided assistance .
It has recently strengthened its pollution response vessel network ; however , nothing can take the place of this Third Maritime Package with regard to which I can only hope that , with , I realise , the full backing of Parliament , the Member States are prepared to face up to their responsibilities .
What a dramatic situation we would have on our hands if , tomorrow , an oil spill were to occur in the highly fragile and sensitive waters of the Mediterranean Sea .
For this reason , I should like to thank you again for your full support so that this Third Maritime Package may be effectively implemented and so that we may have effective flag State control and clear accountability on the part of shipowners .
It is absolutely vital if we want to prevent disasters of this kind .
In any event , thank you for raising this issue , which provides us with an opportunity to highlight once again the absolute necessity of maritime safety .
( ES ) Mr President , a point of order .
The Commissioner referred to the waters of Gibraltar .
I do not know whether this was an interpreting mistake or a lapse on the part of the Commissioner .
I would like him to be clear about this because , as he perfectly well knows , the ownership of those waters is the subject of a dispute between the Kingdom of Spain and the United Kingdom .
I would like him to clarify this , please .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I did not wish to take a position on this .
I simply gave the geographical location of the shipwreck as being Algeciras , Gibraltar .
Please do not misunderstand me : I did not wish to settle a dispute that I am , moreover , incapable of settling .
Mr President , the Commissioner was absolutely right .
This is in the territorial waters of Gibraltar , and it should go on the record that neither the incident nor the sinking of the New Flame was in the Bay of Gibraltar or Algeciras , however you call it .
It was off the south-eastern tip of the rock in the Mediterranean Sea , and that should be clear on the record here .
I have received six motions for resolutions tabled pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rule of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 24 April 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( NL ) The matter of the New Flame shipwreck off Gibraltar seems to be centred primarily on the dispute between the United Kingdom and Spain over Gibraltar .
It is most important that diplomatic sabre-rattling should not outweigh the threat of an environmental disaster off the Spanish coast .
That , after all , is the real problem .
Priority must always be given to safeguarding the environment .
Then there is the problem of liability .
For the umpteenth time we have here a vessel which sails under a flag of convenience in order to avoid complying with laws and paying dues and then gets into trouble .
The EU should be able to act to prevent this flouting of international rules .
It has to be crystal-clear who is liable in the event of accidents like this .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.40 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
2006 Annual report of the EIB ( debate )
The next item is the report by Jean-Pierre Audy on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control on the European Investment Bank 's annual report for 2006 .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , President of the European Investment Bank , ladies and gentlemen , my first words will be to thank you , Mr Maystadt , for the excellent relationship you have built up with the MEPs on the Committee on Budgetary Control , which has made a significant contribution to enabling the report we are about to debate to be written .
I would extend these thanks to your team of staff , and especially , Philippe de Fontaine Vive , Vice-President , with whom I was able to work in complete transparency at the Bank 's headquarters in Luxembourg .
You carry out your role , Mr Maystadt , with a great deal of competence , warmth , determination and courage , but also with wisdom and , I would add , with elegance .
The EIB , which was set up by the Treaty of Rome , celebrates its fiftieth anniversary in 2008 .
Its members are the European Union Member States , and their finance ministers form its board of governors .
Its mission is to contribute to the development of the common market , using the capital markets and its own funds .
It is a Community instrument , but within it power is exercised intergovernmentally .
It is a good thing that citizens ' representatives are talking about these issues at a time when citizens themselves are demanding results from the European Union ; they often benefit from the EIB 's services without realising it .
First I would like to congratulate the Bank for its action , its ambitious plan of activities and projects ; I particularly welcome the excellence of the new strategy for 2007-2009 including transparency , the reinforcement of added value and the gradual increase in risk-taking , activities for the benefit of SMEs and local government , the use of new financial instruments and the stepping-up of cooperation with the European Commission .
The important role of the Bank in the neighbourhood policy should also be underlined , and the report calls more specifically for further development of the facility for Euro-Mediterranean investment and partnership , or FEMIP , within the framework of the Euro-Mediterranean policy .
I believe , however , that the time has come to go even further , faster and better , in terms of both control and support for the European Union in financing its investments .
In terms of control mechanisms , I think the time has come to set up genuine control of banking regulation , and I suggest that the EIB itself apply to the Committee of European Banking Supervisors , based in London , to look at the conditions for this task of regulation and in particular decide who could carry it out in the regrettable absence of an official European banking regulator .
Concerning support for the European Union in financing investment , where needs have been estimated at EUR 600 billion for the trans-European transport networks alone , I suggest that a reflection be carried out on the role of the European Union in terms of the development of our territory .
The funding allocated by the Member States and the EU is far from able to meet these needs .
Is it not understandable , Commissioner , that the European Union should have difficulty finding EUR 3.4 billion to finance as strategic a project from an industrial , scientific and military point of view as Galileo , under these circumstances ?
I suggest that , given the quality of the EIB 's human resources , its detachment and its experience of financing major infrastructure , the Commission gives it the task of carrying out a strategic study on the funding of investments , excluding no possible scenarios : subsidies , payment of sums subscribed by the Member States to the EIB 's capital , loans ( including special loans from the Member States as provided for in Article 6 of the EIB 's Statute ) , innovative instruments such as risk sharing , loan guarantee instruments , financial engineering appropriate to long-term projects that are not immediately profitable according to market-based financial criteria , creation of an investment section within the European Union budget , financial consortia between European , national and local authorities , public-private partnerships , etc .
These , Mr President , Mr Maystadt , ladies and gentlemen , are the ideas put forward in this report .
I look forward to hearing the debate that will follow and thank you for your attention .

Member of the Commission . - ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Audy , who has produced and just presented to us an excellent report on the annual report of the European Investment Bank for 2006 .
I think that , as the report reflects , the productive dialogue established between the European Investment Bank and Parliament in recent years is very important , as it benefits democratic transparency , which is very important to both Parliament and to the financial institution .
The EIB contributes significantly to launching and developing many European policies , and we should therefore welcome the quality of this dialogue , which is undoubtedly being strengthened with Philippe Maystadt at the bank 's helm .
The activity of the European Investment Bank is also being strengthened through the new financial framework , with the new financial perspectives for the European Union for the 2007-2013 period .
Obviously we are debating the 2006 report .
The progress of these perspectives in this initial period of 15 or 16 months is not yet covered by the report , but with the new funding instruments launched thanks to these new perspectives , this cooperation will continue to take place and to become more ambitious and effective in many fields : in policies on research and development , regional development , trans-European networks , support for small and medium-sized enterprises , etc .
Also , with regard to the external actions of the European Investment Bank , on the basis of these financial perspectives the new EIB external mandate has already been adopted .
It is not only in the Bank itself , but within the European Investment Bank group that cooperation is also being increased , with the European Investment Fund .
Proof of this , for example , is the Jeremy programme .
In addition , we are satisfied with the tripartite agreement between the European Investment Bank , the EBRD , which is the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development , and the Commission , for actions by each of them in countries bordering the European Union to the east , and also with the development of the new FEMIP , which Mr Audy referred to , which is doing a great deal of work , and these are examples of an increasingly close link between the activities of the Bank and the external activities of the European Union .
Mr Audy 's report highlights , and in my view rightly so , the potential of the European Investment Bank for developing innovative funding instruments that are capable of having an enormous effect in terms of increasing the resources available in the European budget for implementing a whole series of policies .
The Commission is aware of this potential .
Not only have we already made some agreements with the European Investment Bank , which have been approved by the Council and Parliament , to do more with the same budgetary resources in areas such as trans-European networks or research and development policy , but also , in the context of the review of the Community budget that we will propose at the end of 2008 or the beginning of 2009 for debate , we are looking at extending these new funding mechanisms , and the resulting increase in capacity for action through the budgetary resources available , to other priority areas such as energy and climate change .
With regard to the mechanisms for cooperation with the Bank , I would also like to inform you that we are already finalising the negotiations with the Bank on a new memorandum of understanding to cover all of our cooperation relations , and we hope that it will enable these relations to be even more effective .
I cannot give a response to the suggestion from the rapporteur , Mr Audy , whose concern I share , regarding what the right solution is for the European Investment Bank to be supervised as a financial institution .
I do not have the solution , but I think this is a very pertinent question , on which we should all cooperate in order to provide a suitable response .
Finally , Mr President , I would like to reiterate the Commission 's satisfaction with this high level of cooperation between Parliament and the European Investment Bank , and I hope that in the future this will enable all of us - all the European institutions - to contribute to better achieving the Union 's objectives .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( BG ) The report is an example of good cooperation between the European Parliament and this financial institution which has the task to contribute for a balanced and sound development of the Community by using capital market tools and its own resources .
I congratulate the rapporteur on his good presentation of the European Investment Bank , his reasonable suggestions aimed at enhancing cooperation , efficiency and transparency of operations .
The Bank 's report lists ample examples of achievement in terms of the main goals and priorities of the Union such as the geographic allocation of investments , strategic direction and project applications .
Future efforts should focus on several areas such as to encourage private business to implement investment policies , including social responsibility projects in line with the EU social cohesion and territorial balance policy ; to identify internal audit and internal control mechanisms ; to set up offices in the new Member States ; and to establish new financing mechanisms .
I support the amendments made in plenary which deal with more stringent control over capital .

Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Maystadt , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament has made a number of recommendations and I agree with three of them .
I would also like to ask Mr Maystadt to respond to this in his reply .
We are happy that the European Investment Bank operates a zero tolerance policy with regard to fraud and corruption .
The European Parliament would actually like to further reinforce that policy .
We recommend measures , for example , for implementing an exclusion mechanism with regard to companies that are suspected or have been found guilty of corruption .
We support a reinforcement of the policy on whistleblowers and we are in favour of a revision of the existing tendering procedures .
What does Mr Maystadt think of these ?
A second element : many billions of euros are invested in trans-European networks .
As the European Parliament , we should seek to support those projects in particular that have a smaller or negative CO2 footprint .
Finally , with regard to external loan operations , we would like supervision to be exercised to ensure that such activities , particularly on the African continent , are in keeping with the European consensus with regard to development and also the millennium objectives .
As President of the European Investment Bank , how does Mr Maystadt respond to Parliament 's recommendations ?
( NL ) Mr President , we applaud the fact that this report emphasises the EIB 's zero tolerance policy with regard to fraud and corruption and also highlights the increasing number of investigations being conducted by OLAF .
However , experience in contracting loans has shown us that the EIB is not without sin .
Recently , for instance , a loan of EUR 100 billion to a large-scale mining project in Congo came under heavy criticism owing to all kinds of major irregularities , such as a lack of transparency in the negotiation process and in the final award of the contract .
There was a serious conflict of interest .
Since 2000 , the European Investment Bank has already invested more than EUR 700 million in all manner of mining projects in Africa .
What I would like to stress here is that these many millions come from European taxpayers and that our institution 's loan and contract policy must therefore also be subject to the most thorough supervision possible , particularly when funding projects outside Europe .

( DE ) Mr President , President Maystadt , I would like to congratulate Mr Audy , because he made the point very well that trans-European networks have particular significance for us .
I can imagine that , in this respect , the EIB also provides an incentive instrument for ownership unbundling .
We now have the Commission 's proposals before us , that is , to increase the focus on ownership unbundling in the energy and telecommunications sector .
My suggestion would be to concentrate on creating incentives here rather than focusing on making statutory obligations .
My second point is that the export industry is currently having difficulty in maintaining its performance , especially now the euro is strong .
Would it not be possible to focus on special programmes to provide guaranteed support for the export performance of our European businesses ?
President of the European Investment Bank . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first of all to thank you for giving me the chance once again to continue our dialogue with the European Parliament .
I think it is important that an institution like the EIB should regularly have to explain itself to the representatives of EU citizens .
I would particularly like to thank Mr Audy for his report .
I can bear witness to the fact that he has put a great deal of personal effort into writing this report .
He took part in many working meetings both in Brussels and Luxembourg , thereby taking up the constructive dialogue we began with his predecessors .
In his presentation this morning , he highlighted two points .

The first issue is one we have already talked about in previous reports - I remember Mr Schmidt 's report and Mr Lipietz 's report - and it is the issue of whether the European Investment Bank , because it is a bank , should be subject to banking control or supervision .
This is not provided for as the texts currently stand .
There are , of course , audits of the European Investment Bank : the audit by the Court of Auditors , to the extent that the EIB uses EU funds , and also the audit by the audit committee , composed of experts appointed by the governors , who report directly to our governors .
It is true , however , that , if we want to apply the best banking practices to the EIB , it would undoubtedly be desirable for a specialist body to check that these practices are correctly applied to the EIB .
Theoretically , we can think of three possible avenues .
The first is written into the Treaty of Maastricht , in Article 105 ( 6 ) .
This would be the possibility of the European Central Bank exercising this supervisory role .
The Treaty states that the Council , acting unanimously , may confer a prudential supervision role on the European Central Bank .
This is an avenue that exists theoretically but realistically it is doubtful whether the Member States , at the moment at least , would be unanimous in conferring this new role on the European Central Bank .
Another possibility is the one we have embarked on informally , namely calling on a national regulator .
At the moment it is the Luxembourg regulator , the Supervisory Council of the Luxembourg financial sector , which also performs this role in relation to the European Investment Bank , particularly when it comes to checking Basel II is being applied correctly .
A third avenue for exploration would be to strengthen the audit committee provided for in our Statute , and to convert it into a quasi-banking supervisor .
The Reform Treaty provides for the enlargement of the audit committee .
A first step might be to appoint a number of banking supervisors , who would bring to the audit committee the necessary experience to check that the EIB is actually applying best practices in this matter .
The second point highlighted by Mr Audy was the special role he would like to see the European Investment Bank play in infrastructure , particularly the trans-European networks .
As you know , the EIB already plays a relatively important role in this .
Last year , we financed the trans-European networks to the tune of nearly EUR 9 billion .
We use various instruments , including our structured finance facility , which allows us to take more risks than is generally the rule .
For example , we recently did this for a motorway in Greece .
This is a good concrete example of the use of this particular facility to encourage the private sector to take more risks with the operation of a motorway .
With the European Commission very recently , we developed a new guarantee mechanism to cover a particular type of risk , the risk of insufficient traffic during the first few years of operation of an item of infrastructure .
Experience has shown that the first four or five years are often the trickiest .
These are the years when income is not necessarily at the level hoped for .
This causes problems for private operators , so to encourage the private sector to take on the financing of such infrastructure regardless of this problem , in conjunction with the Commission we have developed a new guarantee mechanism .
I would add that the European Investment Bank has taken the initiative of setting up a European expertise centre in public-private partnerships to share our experience in this area with national representatives .
Mr Audy , this is certainly an area in which the EIB is eager to continue its action .
Mr Staes asked a question about the anti-fraud policy .
We have just published our anti-fraud policy following a consultation procedure that required several rounds of talks .
In relation to the specific question he raised , about a debarment system that would prohibit companies guilty of fraud or corruption from continuing to participate in projects we were financing , we announce in this policy that we hope to be able to use the same system that the Commission is attempting to set up .
If we could not - and we should know this by the end of the year - if , for legal reasons , we could not use the same system , then we would set up our own debarment system .
As regards our financing in the energy sector , we have reviewed our policy on financing energy projects in the light of European guidelines on combating climate change .
As a result , we have decided to give priority to investments of the type that will reduce CO2 emissions , and this already shows up in the figures for 2007 , since finance for electricity generation products using fossil fuels accounts for only 25 % of our financing in the energy sector .
In 2007 , the amount committed to renewable energies , for example , far exceeds the amount committed to these more traditional forms of energy generation .
Finally , as regards the millennium development goals , we are obviously trying , as far as possible , to make sure our projects contribute to their achievement .
However , I would draw your attention to the fact that when we intervene outside the European Union , we are acting on the basis of specific mandates given to us by the European Council .
The millennium development goals do not feature as such in the mandates we have received from the European Council .
That is why it is not possible to make as direct a link as you would have liked .
Finally , to Mr Dillen who , if I understood correctly , mentioned a project he said we financed in the Democratic Republic of Congo , I can say that for several years now we have not provided any more finance in the Democratic Republic of Congo .
Our board of directors has in principle approved finance for a mining project in Katanga , but nothing has yet been paid out for this project .
The loan agreement has not yet been signed .
Why is this ?
It is because the new Congolese Government quite rightly wanted to renegotiate the licence conditions to ensure more of the revenue went back to the Congolese state , and we suspended the signing of the contract until a satisfactory agreement had been reached between the promoter and the Congolese Government .
Mr President , those are a few answers I can give to those who spoke , and I would like to thank Parliament once again , and particularly the Committee on Budgetary Control for our excellent collaboration .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , President Maystadt .
We are very grateful to you for your presence here this morning , for your report and especially for the work you do for the European Union as President of the European Investment Bank . Thank you again and all the best !
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , I would in turn like to thank the Commissioner , Mr Almunia , and the President of the European Investment Bank , Mr Maystadt , for these specific answers .
I would also like to thank the rapporteurs from the political groups , who supported the writing of this report .
I would just like to share a few thoughts on the debate we have just had , firstly on the task of regulation .
I believe it is in everyone 's interest that banking regulation of this kind should be set up .
Obviously I do not have the solution .
The idea that it is the European Central Bank that should do it seems to me a good one .
For the Luxembourg regulatory body to play a stronger independent role , a genuine regulatory role , could also be a short-term solution .
Nevertheless , I believe Parliament will be very interested in the opinion of the Committee of European Banking Supervisors if the Bank applies to it as the report suggests .
Finally , regarding the financing of infrastructure , I would like to say that the European Union is clearly at a cross-roads and that financing is not enough now , but that debt should obviously not be used to fund operation , which is sadly what is happening in some Member States .
Debt used skilfully for investment is , however , a key part of economic and social performance in Europe , which is competing with all the other economic regions of the world .
I believe the time has come for a major development policy for the land , partially supported by investment .
There needs to be public investment , because if there is not , we cannot expect there to be private investment .
It is a problem of collective confidence in the future of the European Union and I am delighted that the European Investment Bank can offer its expertise thanks to its experience and the quality of its human resources .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( DE ) Mr President , President Maystadt , Mr Audy , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank the rapporteur most warmly and congratulate him on the good , balanced work he has carried out .
I congratulate the EIB on its successful activities and ambitious business plan .
When it comes to energy and innovation , the EIB is helping the EU to implement its policy .
Without the EIB we would not have got the CIP off to such a good start .
The EIB 's strategy for 2007-2009 provides for reinforcement of the value added , the gradual increase in risk taking , the use of new financial instruments and the stepping-up of cooperation with the Commission .
I heartily endorse this strategy .
The evaluation of the activity by the EIB rapporteur and the suggested next steps are correct .
However , we must not forget that the role of Parliament is limited .
Although the EIB is one of the Community 's institutions , its power is exercised internally according to intergovernmental rules , which means that the Member States are the most influential shareholders .
The European Parliament has been commenting on the EIB 's activity reports regularly since 1999 and this has developed into a close , trusting , successful relationship of cooperation .
I would particularly like to praise the cooperation with President Maystadt , which is exemplary for relationships with other institutions .
2006 discharge ( debate )
rapporteur . - ( DA ) Mr President , I must begin by reminding everyone that we are nearing the end of an incredibly important exercise .
In general terms , if Parliament 's role is analysed in relation to that of the other institutions , it is perhaps possible to say that we have three main tasks .
We are involved in creating legislation for the European countries and their citizens .
We are involved in establishing the budget , i.e. determining what the EU 's funds should be used for .
Finally , the last role is to act as a supervisory body .
It is Parliament that is the citizens ' watchdog , if one can put it that way .
The exercise that we will complete here today is possibly the most important part of this role of supervisory body : it is the part where we meticulously review the Commission and the other institutions in relation to how they manage the funds , and not least , of course , assess how things are working in the Member States , where we know that around 80 % of the EU 's funds are managed .
That said , it is also naturally down to me to praise my fellow Members from the other groups .
It is Parliament as a whole that will vote on the report today .
I believe we have enjoyed excellent cooperation within the Committee on Budgetary Control .
I would particularly like to mention the shadow rapporteurs , who I believe have contributed very constructively to the matter .
This is of course why we have been able to exert such enormous pressure on the Commission and enter into such constructive dialogue with it .
Let me begin by mentioning a couple of positive points . I will certainly move on to the negative aspects , but let me begin by mentioning a couple of positive points in relation to previous years .
There is no doubt that within the agricultural sector we have made good progress in connection with controlling the funds .
The ' integrated financial control system ' - and yes , this is probably not the view of many citizens out there in Europe who are following this speech - means of course that a completely new and much more effective way of controlling the EU 's agricultural funds has been introduced .
The system is extremely effective .
The European Court of Auditors itself has highlighted this many times .
We already know that within a few years essentially all the funds within the agricultural policy will be covered by this very effective system , which definitely deserves praise .
However , in recent years we have had heard strong criticism regarding a number of points connected with the research policy .
In addition , it must be noted at this point that the Commission has taken our criticism very seriously and has implemented an action plan , which has ensured that many of these problems are in the process of being resolved .
The Commission deserves a great deal of praise for this .
Finally , we are naturally very pleased about the initiatives , which have been brought out into the open .
We now have openness concerning the recipients of EU support in relation to both social funds and agricultural expenses .
Additionally , we will now find out the names of the participants of the various working groups in the Council and the Commission , something that this House has fought for for many years .
The Commission has now consented to disclose this information .
It has to be said that this is a very positive development .
However , it is of course clear that this process has concerned areas in which we have had a certain amount of criticism .
Everyone who has been following the process knows that this specifically concerns two areas : the Structural Funds and foreign policy matters , i.e. external matters .
With regard to the Structural Funds , the Court of Auditors concluded very clearly that 12 % of the funds that had been paid out should never have been paid : 12 % , or almost EUR 4 billion .
It is obvious that this is a completely unacceptable situation .
It was the starting point for the exercise that we will conclude today .
We have had several consultations , and together with the committee I have personally enjoyed close dialogue with the Commission .
The fact that as rapporteur I can now finish by granting discharge is solely due to the fact that we have achieved a number of results .
The Commission has actually implemented a considerable number of reforms - it has been shown that 37 very specific points will now be implemented .
This has been adopted by the College of Commissioners .
In some areas , it is a question of introducing both more and tighter controls , while in other areas it is a question of simplifying the controls to make them more effective .
In all areas , very clear deadlines have been introduced .
We have been given some very clear criteria regarding how feedback should be given , so that both we and the public have the opportunity to check that this also actually has a positive effect .
We must remember two things : firstly , of course , the fact that the money that was paid out incorrectly in 2006 - which is the subject of this procedure - is to be recovered .
We believe that this has now been guaranteed .
However , there must also be a guarantee that it will not happen again in future .
This is probably just as important .
With the new procedures that the Commission has put forward , we believe that this goal has been achieved .
It is obvious that fine words alone are not enough .
Although we have now said that we accept the reforms that have been put forward , we will follow up this matter and monitor process very carefully .
Therefore , today I would also like to put forward an amendment proposal , which I understand that the Commission is prepared to support .
I have received an indication from Mr Kallas that it may be an acceptable solution if the Commission were to meet with the Committee on Budgetary Control once a month and give us the opportunity to discuss the progress made in this area .
This would be incredibly beneficial for both parties .
Allow me to say a few words about the second area in which we have experienced major problems .
This concerns matters of foreign policy .
More specifically , it concerns the issue of Iraq .
We know that the EU is providing some funding for the reconstruction of Iraq - there are certainly many good political reasons for doing so .
We have singled out Iraq as an example .
We would like a list of the specific projects in Iraq that are financed either in part or in full by the EU via the UN and the World Bank .
Obtaining such a list has proved to be extremely difficult .
It has taken several months .
The information that we already knew should have been on the list was nevertheless not on the list , and there was a prolonged discussion back and forth until , quite recently , we finally obtained the information that we should have had in the first place .
This is of course why we are now finally in a position where we can actually also give discharge in this area .
The most important question in connection with this is naturally : what about the future ?
Iraq is simply one example .
What about the other countries , of which there are more than 100 , where the EU provides support for various activities ?
The Commission has now committed itself to granting public access to the final beneficiary , i.e. the final recipient of the support , from 2007 onwards , which is something that I acknowledge and believe is entirely necessary .
For all these reasons , I recommend that we grant discharge .
There are a number of criticisms that can be highlighted with regard to the Commission and with regard to the ways that things are done in the Member States .
I would also like to say that we have achieved a result through good dialogue with the Commission .
This means that we can now recommend that approval be granted for the accounts for 2006 .
There are still areas in which we would like to see things being taken further .
We would very much like to have ' national declarations of assurance ' , as is the term here in Parliament , i.e. annual national auditing declarations , signed by the finance minister of the country in question .
We still believe that this would be a very beneficial tool in the fight against deception , fraud and secrecy concerning EU funds in the individual countries .
With this concluding wish , I would like to say thank you for the opportunity to speak in the first round .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , welcome to this debate , attended by the Secretary-General and of course welcome to Mr Kallas .
I cannot welcome anyone from the Council , as it appears that it does not have anything to do with accounts and taking responsibility for the political debate on discharge .
I hope that when the Council has a president , after the Treaty of Lisbon , we will be guaranteed that the Council will also be present at this debate .
I would first like to congratulate my colleague Dan Jørgensen on his excellent report , and highlight from what he said how well things are being done in the European Union , and how they are being done better every year .
He referred on several occasions to an initiative by Commissioner Kallas and the Commission on transparency .
I was rapporteur two months ago for an own-initiative report supporting the transparency policy .
Well , the Commission is indeed making progress on transparency policy , as Parliament has also done .
I would like to point out that the role of Parliament in giving discharge is a political role , and that we are not and nor should we be accountants .
It is a political role , and the question that we have to answer for citizens is : with the money that Parliament has , have we been able to meet the budgetary challenges for the 2006 financial year ?
Challenges such as Parliament preparing for enlargement , to receive new Member States , expanding the information policy , doing our work better , preparing ourselves for the challenge of Lisbon , in that we are going to have to legislate more and in the best possible way .
What is the political verdict on what we have done with these financial commitments ?
It is a positive one .
We have done well .
I would like to highlight a few points from this financial year .
Firstly , on the initiative of President Hans Pöttering , we have initiated a political dialogue between the Presidency and the procedure for discharge , which until now did not appear to be possible .
Now it is possible , and your vice-president was present at the debate , facing up to the questions put to him live and direct by the committee .
Also , on the initiative of the President , the Bureau is going to have a regular procedure of working with the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Budgetary Control , so I thank you .
Many aspects of transparency in Parliament have improved , as you can see in the report .
We have improved the presentation of the roles of our assistants .
What has not been possible this year has been for us to finally create a statute for assistants , which we are asking for .
The truth is that as MEPs it has taken us a long time to have our own statute .
In short , we will have to ask for patience , but we must emphasise that we have not yet achieved this objective .
In 2006 , however , the reference year , 99 % of papers were submitted in the right way , so I think that this issue is also moving in the right direction .
We have outstanding problems , and on these we are more or less trying to do what we can .
Citizens do not understand why Parliament should have three locations , they do not understand it , and they are not going to understand it because it is not easy to understand .
This is another challenge for when the Council has a president : finding a solution .
Parliament has , however , done its duty and reduced the cost of the three locations from EUR 203 million in 2002 to EUR 155 million .
We have cut the bill by 24 % , which is good .
What challenges are we going to tackle , as I mention in this report ?
As I have just said , giving our assistants a definitive statute , as we have ourselves .
There is also the challenge of legislating better .
Parliament is going to play a much greater qualitative role and have a much larger workload with the Lisbon Treaty when it comes .
Let us hope that the Belgian Government , now that we have a Belgian Government , will treat us a little better in terms of buildings policy than it has up to now , as its treatment has been mediocre .
I would like to finish by saying that we have had a prudent year in terms of our budgetary responsibilities , and this is why I am asking you to vote in favour of these accounts for 2006 .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Mr President , I have been the rapporteur for these other institutions as they have been called , seven of them , in other words the Council , the Court of Justice , the Court of Auditors , the European Economic and Social Committee , the Committee of the Regions , the European Data Protection Supervisor and the European Ombudsman .
I have had no serious objections to anything I have looked at .
It has been a matter of normal comments on what can and should be improved .
There have been no revelations which could in any way call into question granting of discharge to any of these seven institutions .
Nevertheless , I would like to take this opportunity to remind everyone that granting discharge , exacting responsibility , is fundamental to democracy .
I have no faith in this chamber 's way of handling this task , as I had precisely the same job of examining these seven institutions two years ago and then , ladies and gentlemen , discovered the most appalling things going on in the Committee of the Regions .
I found that fraud of the most serious nature had been committed there .
I obtained material which you were all able to read in the secret reading room .
There were three separate investigations into this : one by OLAF , our Anti-Fraud Office , one by the Court of Auditors , and the Committee of the Regions itself also conducted an internal investigation .
They had dismissed their internal auditors .
The list of complaints was endless .
I therefore naturally proposed that we should not grant discharge in those circumstances .
I said this in the committee .
The committee still voted to discharge .
I said the same thing here in Parliament two years ago , and you voted to discharge by a large majority .
This shows that when you should be voting to discharge here today on my recommendation , you are not doing so because I say so but purely out of habit .
This assembly is not accepting its responsibility .
It is thinking more of the EU 's reputation .
You are thinking more about deceiving the citizens , the voters .
They must not be allowed to know what is going on .
Therefore , it is with considerable sadness that I say ' yes , this time these other institutions can be granted discharge ' .
I can do so with a clear conscience .
Most of you cannot .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , you despot !
My speech today is directed to all those ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
That is the second time that you have spoken like this .
I reserve the right to take action against you .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) Mr President , I shall begin by discussing discharge regarding the European Development Fund .
Many of you here were perhaps expecting another tall , Nordic young man to be doing this job , namely our colleague Alexander Stubb , but , as some of you will know , Alexander is unable to be here with us today as he has been appointed Finland 's new Minister of Foreign Affairs .
He therefore asked me to take over and present his work and his report here today .
I believe that I am speaking for the majority here when I say that we are sad to lose Alexander , but that it is great news for Alexander and especially great news for Finland .
However , I would like to start by congratulating him on the work he has done here on the European Development Fund .
Work in committee went very well , and it is a united committee which is discussing discharging the development funds today .
The European Development Funds are , of course , one of the means of promoting democracy and economic development in the ACP ( Africa , Caribbean and Pacific ) States .
It is for this reason that I think it is gratifying to be able to see that the money is being used in a correct and responsible manner .
In 2006 they had considerable resources , EUR 3 billion in commitments , and managed to pay out just under 90 % of this .
However , the fact that here today we are pleased to be able to grant , and propose the granting of discharge to the Commission which has managed these development funds - and this is something we really are pleased about - does not mean that there are no challenges or that there are no areas which we need to work on in the future .
I would just like to bring up a few of these .
For example , unlike last year , we can state that the Court of Auditors did not present an entirely clean statement of assurance , but pointed out a number of problems , for example regarding evidence of transactions which could have been better documented and regarding payments from different delegations .
However , I would like to give the Commission credit for having taken these problems seriously and presented concrete , correct and important solutions to these challenges .
Furthermore , in our report we also highlight the problems incurred by the delay in implementing the modern IT system .
This is a matter which we take seriously , and we hope that the Commission is working on it further .
Enough of the more administrative and economic aspects , as there are also a number of politically important issues which I would like to raise .
Firstly , the fact that the work of the European Development Fund could be made considerably easier if it were incorporated in the ordinary budget .
Similarly , we believe that if we had one financial regulation which controlled all current and future development funds , that would also make work easier .
That is enough about the European Development Fund .
I would like to take this opportunity to briefly mention something about discharge of the independent agencies .
I bring this up partly because I have been responsible for this work in the Group of the European People 's Party and European Democrats , but possibly mainly because the rapporteur , as we heard just now , has an unusual attitude , to say the least , and has not exactly taken the line the committee chose to follow .
I think it is very strange that Hans-Peter Martin has not chosen to remove his name from all these reports , considering that it is not his opinion which we will be voting on in plenary here today .
If , nevertheless , I am to say something about the work itself , about some of the important opinions that , despite everything , we have in these reports - and which we have obtained thanks to successful and close cooperation between the Socialist Group , our group , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance - I would just like to highlight the fact that we grant discharge because we think that there are grounds in the Court of Auditors ' statement for approving the management of the finances of these independent agencies .
However , alongside that , there are also problems there , which we hope will be worked on further .
This particularly involves all the institutions - the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament - being better at examining the agencies ' requests .
I hope that everyone will take responsibility for this .
I will return next year , when I will be the rapporteur on this issue and hope to be able to discuss it with the Commission in greater depth .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , fellow Members , I would like to thank Dan Jørgensen and Alexander Stubb , as they matched the intentions of the Committee on Development one to one .
We are very thankful for this because we in the Committee on Development worked very hard on this question .
The European Union - the budgets of the European Union itself , combined with the budgets of the Member States - is by far the largest donor of development aid in the world .
Nevertheless , with what is happening currently , we find that it is still far too little , and that we really ought to do more .
We cannot wait until food and energy shortages in the world blow up in our face and then be surprised that people take to the streets .
The money that we donate - and , as I said , we are already the world 's largest donor - needs to be targeted more precisely so that we know that the money actually reaches those who need it and that it is not dissipated and does not disappear .
Therefore , we have devoted a great deal of energy to checking whether the funds that we deploy are in fact used for the intended purpose .
A key emphasis for Parliament and the Committee is that 20 % of the funds have to be used for basic health care and basic and further education , so as to establish a foundation for the future .
Thus we have made some progress , but the Commission is still a long way from where we would like it to be .
You need to do more work on it ; we will keep at you .
We called on you to reduce backlogs of payments from the past and indeed , arrears from before 2001 have been reduced by 39 % for Europe Aid and by 49 % for the European Development Fund .
These are good figures , but of course they can only ever be an interim stage .
In relation to development policy , we have repeatedly pointed out that it makes no sense at all to maintain two complete systems running in parallel - one for the European Development Fund and one for development aid .
It must be integrated in the budget !
This is a demand that we are making now and that we will make in future negotiations on financial forecasts .
My last point concerns budget assistance .
Increasingly , the Commission is granting countries general budget assistance .
It is possible to do this , but be careful that you do not experience what we experienced with the current Member States in relation to the Structural Funds - that we transfer responsibility because the states are supposed to take responsibility , and then find out that the systems are not functioning and that ' nobody ' was responsible for this .
Hence my advice : please be certain about what you are doing from the very start .
We will be with you all the way , critical but also positive .
Overall , sincere congratulations to the rapporteurs and thank you very much for the cooperation .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - ( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , and with regard to budget management , I would like to begin by expressing our concern at the fact that outstanding budgetary commitments have continued to rise and that this , combined with the replacement of the n + 2 rule by n + 3 , a change which some Member States are due to implement for the period 2007 to 2013 , might worsen the situation , with the result that funds may take longer to reach their ultimate recipients .
What we are dealing with here are policies that directly affect citizens , such as the European Social Fund , and the delays could have disastrous effects in terms of the efficient and successful use of the funds .
As regards structural policies , we agree with the Court of Auditors on the need to improve control systems so as to forestall errors in projects carried out in the area of Structural Funds .
More supervision , more efficient audits and effective monitoring of projects from beginning to end are needed to enable any shortcomings or errors to be remedied in good time .
For this reason , the European Commission should have the logistical capacity and adequate resources to make feedback mechanisms genuinely operational and to keep auditing procedures properly under review .
However , it is essential to use meaningful indicators and targets which should lend themselves to comparison and , as far as possible , aggregation in the short term , so that the analysis of structural policy trends can be carried out in such a way as to avoid what would inevitably be rough and hazy assessments that would not therefore be very conclusive concerning the effective application of those funds .
I consider it important to mention the timeliness of the Commission 's recommendation to Member States that they should make use of the simplifications provided for in the new Structural Funds regulations , for instance by using flat-rate amounts for indirect costs under the European Social Fund .
I should also like to congratulate the European Commission on the investment in the EURES network and to applaud the virtues of holding the European Year of Workers ' Mobility .
They naturally highlighted the mobility-related issues we all recognise and still face .
As for the European agencies that are being analysed by the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , I would just like to thank them briefly for the work they have done and , as we have all seen , we can on the whole give a very positive assessment of their activities .
Nevertheless , I would like to conclude by drawing attention to the need to increase the appropriation for the Dublin Agency , which is now entrusted with analysing anticipated changes in employment and the business world , the aim being to bolster the socio-economic project through the assessment of applications under the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
We all know how important this could be .
It is therefore an area of the utmost sensitivity and importance , which should merit special attention from the European Union , namely by means of this analysis conducted by the Dublin Agency , which may in some way help to anticipate the potential crises that we can all envisage on the horizon in any one of the 27 Member States .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , the Committee on the Environment was pleased with the work done by the Directorate-General for the Environment and the Directorate-General for Health .
I know that is something you do not hear from me very often .
Usually I criticise the Commission , but in this case ' if it ain 't broke , don 't fix it ' .
Those responsible for budgets in both Directorates-General are very cooperative . Thank you very much .
I would also like to thank the rapporteur , Dan Jørgensen .
He worked hard throughout the entire budget discharge procedure , has presented an excellent report and generously took on board all the conclusions of the Committee on the Environment on granting discharge for 2006 .
The Committee on Budgetary Control has thereby acknowledged what the Committee on the Environment adopted unanimously . Thank you very much for that , too .
May I now to say a few words about our agencies .
We in the Committee on the Environment were also pleased with the work and budget management of the four agencies : the European Environment Agency , the European Food Safety Authority , the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control and the European Medicines Agency .
When we advised the Committee on Budgetary Control to grant discharge for the 2006 financial year , it was not done lightly .
Quite to the contrary !
There was frequent exchange of information with members of the management board and with the directors in the committee .
In addition , several delegations from our committee visited the agencies to satisfy themselves as to the activities on the ground .
Therefore it was all the more incomprehensible to us all when the rapporteur in the Committee on Budgetary Control did not want to grant discharge for three of the four agencies , for the most incredible reasons - particularly as , even if they were valid , the agencies themselves were not responsible for those points , for example staff regulations relating to temporary staff of the institution , or the location of the head office of the relevant agency , or even the way the principle of subsidiarity was observed .
Phrases like : ' There has been irresponsible proliferation , ' ' new agencies have been set up on the basis of bizarre political decisions , these new agencies are not subject to control and are often uncontrollable , mostly inefficient and , above all , they give rise to significant burdens on European taxpayers , ' and ' at the same time , an unprecedented range of staff privileges has become established ' - have nothing but shock value .
We are all well aware that there is a deliberate scheme afoot to whip up a scandal about work at European level .
I utterly abhor this scandal-mongering .
Agencies are European administrative units , although they have a unique nature .
They do not just drop out of the sky ; they do not just occur spontaneously to the Commission alone ; they are established by a proper regulatory procedure , either by codecision or in consultation or , depending on the policy field , by regulation , i.e. by legislation .
This means that these agencies are brought into being by the European legislator , which means that we are the ' adventurers ' being referred to .
The budget for the agencies is part of the budget of the European Union itself .
Each financial year , we discharge the director .
I believe there is no section of the administration that is controlled as well as the agencies and I am therefore delighted and thankful that the committee has put a stop to this attempt to create a scandal .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to take a few moments to underline the fact that for the implementation of the budget of the European Agencies for the financial year 2006 , we can support what the Court of Auditors says , since the accounts and transactions are legitimate and regular .
As I said in the Committee on Transport and Tourism , however , I recommend greater compliance with the principles and rules in subsequent years .
In the case of the Maritime Safety Agency , 43 % of payment appropriations were cancelled and a concentration of transactions was recorded towards the end of the financial year .
I also expressed puzzlement about the low utilisation rate for payment appropriations for anti-polluting measures at sea , despite Parliament 's continuing support for these measures .
For the Aviation Safety Agency , the high rate of appropriations carried over , at 40 % of operational expenditure , was also noted , as was the use of carry-overs of non-differentiated appropriations , which is a breach of the budgetary principle of annuality .
The Commission is therefore called upon to review the Agency 's fee structure to bring costs and revenue for certification activities into balance .
Finally , for the Railway Agency , the use of expired contracts and irregular extensions to regular existing contracts means that it cannot be stated that all transactions were legal .
I therefore recommend greater transparency and accuracy in future ; however , in the light of the Court of Auditors ' observations I propose that Parliament grant the discharge to the executive directors of the agencies .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture and Education . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , I would like to state that our goal is to promote cultural diversity in Europe .
Our culture programme reaches citizens where they live , which is our stated goal .
Accordingly , we expect extremely good management from our national cultural agencies , and I would like to add that the revision of financial regulation will improve our ability to target finance and support for small projects that citizens apply for in their own areas .
However , this also means that we have to find the right balance between cutting bureaucracy and preventing fraud which , in turn , means that we need rules that are appropriate .
If citizens who need small sums in order to be able to carry out their cultural projects are not to have to fill out endless application documents , we need to simplify procedures and move to flat-rate financing .
That way , we will find greater acceptance amongst the citizens of Europe for our culture programmes .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs . - ( ES ) Mr President , the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs decided to give an opinion in favour of giving discharge to the Commission in this field and to the five agencies that it is responsible for .
With regard to the Commission 's management , we welcome the substantial increase in the execution of payments and we hope that this trend will continue in 2007 , although we know that this year is going to be the start of a new programming period and our experience shows us that it is more difficult to fulfil this goal and that there is a degree of delay .
The Committee on Civil Liberties welcomes the fact that the Court of Auditors - and I quote - ' has been able to obtain reasonable assurances that the annual accounts for the financial year ended 31 December 2006 are reliable ' for the five agencies that are fall within the competence of the Committee on Civil Liberties .
Having said this , I would like to make some observations on some points that are still not very clear regarding the implementation of budgets .
Firstly , the agency Frontex , which had a low rate of implementation of the allocated funds , but this should not cause us to be pessimistic .
We need to take into account that 2006 was the first year that it was actually in operation and that in the following year it showed that it could spend its whole budget .
The visit by the Committee on Civil Liberties to Warsaw , to the headquarters of Frontex , was very positive .
We therefore hope that in future financial years it will be able to be granted discharge with no reservations , despite the fact that the lack of political vision on the part of the Council and the Commission has made the budgetary life of this agency quite hazardous .
Although perhaps this debate is not the most appropriate forum , I would like to take advantage of it to point out that the proper operation of Frontex depends , to a large extent , on the cooperation of the Member States , given the hybrid nature of the agency .
If the Member States do not make the appropriate resources available , Frontex will not be able to meet its commitments .
Regarding the Eurojust agency , I would simply like to say that there is just one negative note , regarding its high number of transfers between headings , which should be better justified .
We have also criticised some problems with hiring staff at the European Agency for Fundamental Rights , and we regret that the Court of Auditors considers that the situation pointed out in 2005 has still not been resolved regarding a member of staff at the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction who was sent to Brussels on a long-term mission without any clearly defined goal .
Finally I want to mention the case of CEPOL , the European Police College .
There we do have some doubts .
Mr Kallas , we have asked the European Commission to closely monitor the implementation of its budget , as there are considerable suspicions that it is not fully and strictly complying with European legislation on public procurement .
Mr President , with respect to this year 's budget discharge procedure , we should be pleased with the progress made by the Commission towards more efficient utilisation of EU funds , especially in the area of the common agricultural policy .
Also worthy of support is the initiative taken by some Member States to draft and publish national statements that constitute a new element in the process managing Community funds , and the remaining States should also see to this formality as soon as possible .
The Commission 's undertaking to get to the bottom of all cases of violation of the procedures for placing public orders mentioned in the annual report of the Court of Auditors , and to introduce a policy of suspension of payments following the detection of serious transgressions in the system , is also significant .
As an expert in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , I would like to emphasise the continuing lack of budget planning with regard to the gender issue and am once again calling for this aspect to be taken into account as part of budget planning and the funding of Community programmes .
Information on actions favouring gender equality that have received support from the social fund should be reflected in reports on budget implementation in the years to come .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , I would like to begin with the discharge by Parliament and by thanking our rapporteur and all Members who wanted to achieve progress on the secretarial assistance allowance , because this point is crucial , in the public 's opinion , and should also form the focus of our observations .
It is in the interest of all of us as MEPs to find a way out of this dirty corner of corruption .
The European People 's Party has suggested ways by which the secretarial assistance allowance could be managed more efficiently in future .
These proposals were approved by a large majority in the Committee on Budgetary Control , including that the paying agents in the Member States should be notified by Parliament itself and thereby become more professional .
These paying agents would then also administer the contracts for services and ensure that taxes are paid and social security contributions are deducted .
These amendments protect Parliament 's reputation , as does the point that MEPs should no longer be able to employ family members in future .
Under the rules of the EU , this means a very significant conflict of interests .
Therefore , I call upon all Members to avoid further damage to ourselves and to Parliament .
I note with concern that the Socialist Group , along with some of the Liberals , wants to vote against this passage of text .
If they prevail , it will mean that we complete the discharge process without making any progress in this very important aspect , and that would be the absolute worst case scenario for us all , because a cheery ' carry on ' will not get us through the latest report by the Court of Auditors on the secretarial assistance allowance .
Also with regard to the Parliamentary assistants ' allowance , which we agreed on together , we want to keep to the view that it is no cure-all .
I want to recommend that you all read the fine print .
It is all still up in the air , which means that saying at this point that the Parliamentary assistants ' allowance will help us solve every problem is simply a lie - and also a lie to the public .
I would like to say one last thing about the Commission budget .
Commissioner , it was certainly close , and I hope that your colleagues have bought you a drink , because you have earned it .
Thank you very much for the good cooperation !
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , Vice-President of the Commission , I too would like to thank all the rapporteurs and also all my socialist colleagues , and those from other groups as well , who took part in this discharge process and who did so much to ensure it was concluded .
In fact , it is precisely this European Parliament issue that I would like to comment on .
I would like to say that it seems clear to me that the fundamental conclusion we can draw from the internal audit report is that there are serious shortcomings in the way the parliamentary assistance payments system works .
There is no shadow of a doubt that these require the introduction of an Assistants ' Statute and the financial management tasks for payments being handed over to the European Parliament 's administration .
In the next parliamentary term , it is imperative that not only MEPs have a statute , but also that their assistants ' work is regulated and financed through the European institutional framework , leaving no justification for the continued existence of a publicly-funded voluntary pension scheme and making the rules on travel expenses and other general expenses clearer .
The Council needs to vote in favour of this matter and prevent the institution of the European Parliament being held to ransom by trifling perks of position .
In the same way it is vital that Members are guaranteed the best working conditions , while still bearing in mind the need to be governed by rules of total transparency and rigour fully in line with the general rules applicable to society .
I would especially like to call on our colleagues in the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats not to block this reform process .
It is absolutely crucial that we reach a consensus in this Parliament on an Assistants ' Statute and that this statute is clear and governs an issue that has unnecessarily contributed to our institution losing credibility .
It is paramount we achieve this and we will need everyone 's support to do so .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I would like to begin by thanking all the rapporteurs who have contributed to this discharge procedure .
I would like to use the two minutes available to me to discuss the Commission 's discharge report drawn up by Mr Jørgensen .
The Court of Auditors published its report last November and that report was considerably better than in previous years , owing to the fact that this time , the report cited percentages .
This should be continued in future reports .
When the report was published , it was almost as if the Commission had triumphed .
The report had never been so good .
The Court of Auditors approved 44 % of the Commission 's expenditure .
I must say that I did not feel this was the time to sit back contently and say : ' This is the best we have ever done ' .
No , we can do much better .
What is striking is that the Commission actually disregarded Parliament 's recommendations in previous discharge resolutions .
What has been significant for Parliament over the past three years ?
The national declarations .
What does the Commission say ?
We will not respect the national declarations .
This is too much .
Furthermore , this is included in the financial perspective , in an interinstitutional agreement .
Fortunately , the Commission has retraced its footsteps and this will now take place .
There is a second issue , however .
The Commissioners cannot countersign the declarations of the Directors-General .
It puzzles me why that is so .
We can receive the Commissioners in the Committee on Budgetary Control , as offered by the Commission , and regularly hear their views with regard to how much progress has been made , yet the Commissioners are not permitted to sign anything with Parliament .
How can this be explained from a legal perspective ?
I can only say , Mr President , that we hope that next year will be even better .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe will adopt a constructive attitude in all of this , as it has in the past .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , for the ninth time , I have had the opportunity to participate in the process whereby Parliament approves the accounts for the Commission , the Council , Parliament and the other EU bodies .
Once again , this year we have found major irregularities .
The situation was particularly bad in connection with the Commission 's management of the money in the Structural Funds , where nearly EUR 4 billion ( almost DKK 30 million ) was paid out incorrectly .
For reasons of time , I will focus my remarks on this .
Once again this year we are saying that there is something wrong , and once again we are receiving assurances that things will indeed be improved .
We have received such assurances every year and yet the situation continues because the entire support system is so complicated , so unreasonable and so impossible to manage .
In the Committee on Budgetary Control we have raised the pivotal question : for the EU as a whole , what is the effect of the enormous reallocation of money between the Member States ?
After all , there are no visible improvements in the countries that receive support .
Next year they will again be behind and they will receive support once again .
Of the 15 old EU Member States , Greece , Spain , Portugal and Ireland have received support every single year since they became members .
There are 11 Member States , all old Member States , paying for the entire net difference .
Naturally , all new members receive support .
Countries that implement economic reforms and work effectively , and where the citizens are willing to pay high taxes , must pay countries that will not reform their obsolete structures or demand particularly high taxes .
The EU 's support policy is to a large extent doing nothing !
Why carry out reforms when it is possible to send the bill for not doing so to the citizens of other countries ?
The entire reallocation is foolish .
Not only do many billions end up in the wrong hands , but the support philosophy itself is sick because it rewards countries that will not implement reforms and punishes those that are doing just that , countries that the EU needs .
The EU could perform its tasks with 15 % of the current budget !
In addition , we would also be free of all such cases of economic scandal .
Therefore , I personally intend to vote against approval of the Commission 's accounts .
I would like to take this opportunity to thank my colleagues in the Committee on Budgetary Control for the considerable amount of good work that they have done .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I will limit my contribution to the Commission 's discharge and that of Parliament .
With regard to the Commission 's discharge , we are faced with problems that have been sufficiently explained , particularly by the rapporteurs : the fact that the Court of Auditors reported a great many problems in relation to the structural funds , that in fact 12 % should not have been paid out ( EUR 4 billion , which is an enormous amount ) and , with regard to external relations , the fact that , among other things , cooperation with the United Nations is going poorly and awkwardly .
These are the problems that we have discussed .
This was a significant discharge , because it is the last discharge before the elections .
We have another discharge next year , but this will be held during a pre-election phase .
It was therefore a significant discharge and we have had to exact dialogue .
I am delighted that we did this in a highly constructive manner , across the groups .
The fact that we have twice organised a hearing with Commissioners Špidla and Hübner and the fact that we - Mr Jørgensen , Mr Mulder , Mrs Gräßle and I - have been able to exact information from the Commission by means of a joint letter , has led to an excellent result .
I sincerely hope that we can achieve a better result next year .
With regard to Parliament , I would like to concentrate on two major problems .
In relation to the assistants ' statute , we have the internal audit , conducted by the internal auditor .
I must commend him on this ; it is an excellent document .
I still do not understand , Mr President , why you and the Bureau have not published this audit .
After all , this is currently surrounded by secrecy and this is not necessary , because we , as Parliament , have always requested that this audit be carried out and that an inquiry be conducted into how the secretariat allowances are managed .
I now firmly believe that we must implement that statute .
I have submitted a number of other amendments to reinforce Mr Pomés Ruiz 's existing text .
This must take place in dialogue with the Commission , but also in dialogue with the Council in particular , because if , in the near future , we approach the Council with a problem that it fails to follow up on , then we are not where we need to be .
This must therefore be done in dialogue with the Commission and with the Council .
One final item that I would like to mention is that the voluntary pension fund causes me a great deal of concern .
Firstly , the actuarial shortfall is continuing to increase , and secondly , I would also like the list of participants in that voluntary pension fund to finally be published .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the whole Parliament and all my colleagues are pleased about the progress made in using European appropriations more effectively .
We cannot avoid pointing out , however , that there are still some major deficiencies .
The Commission should launch infringement proceedings and penalties against Member States that do not apply , or only partially apply , the regulations on the Structural Funds .
The Member States should provide all information about corrections and financial recoveries , especially for forthcoming financial management .
The Commission should present Parliament with an evaluation of the quality of annual reports received from individual countries , especially broken down by area of intervention and by different policies .
The most important area is that of the Structural Funds , where there is still a significant volume of improper repayments , at 12 % .
The Commission must explain how it will ensure this money will be recovered , especially in cases where projects have not been accepted through the use of tendering procedures .
Faster and more effective suspension procedures should be used against Member States that do not carry out adequate checks .
The thing I want to emphasise , which seems to me the greatest deficiency of this budget , is external actions : there is not enough information on these , though they benefit from a number of European activities .
In particular the Commission should provide greater visibility over projects financed by the European Union for reconstruction in Iraq in 2006 ; for example , it should list the projects , what they are , the anticipated costs , and the agencies involved .
This information has been supplied , rather late , but I still do not think it is satisfactory .
Specifically , I think that for this type of use of funds , we should look at the idea of using the European Agency for Reconstruction , as Parliament has highlighted in the past .
I will quickly come to Parliament 's discharge .
First of all , there is the issue of the three sites , raised by the rapporteur , for which the environmental cost should also be added to the financial cost .
Finally , the internal report on the management of expenditure for assistants : I believe it was wrong to keep it confidential , because this has led to a whole series of articles in the press that are damaging transparency and the proper functioning of Parliament .
For this reason , we ask for this internal audit to be published .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , in the limited time I am allowed to comment on this lengthy report , I would like to make two observations .
First , it contains a great many empty platitudes about the supporting paperwork MEPs should provide to support claims from their parliamentary assistants ' allowance .
In the light of recent events it is painfully clear that the arrangements currently in place are wholly inadequate , as they are subject to gross serial abuse by many Members .
Furthermore , it is equally clear that there is no serious intention to do anything about these abuses , as I understand the system will not change before the new Parliament convenes in autumn 2009 .
Therefore I cannot take the report 's censorious tones at all seriously .
Secondly , I draw Members ' attention to the rather sinister clause 55 of the report , which reveals that , as from 2008 , European political parties may be financed up to 85 % from the European Parliament budget .
It then goes on to point out that this high level of subsidy entails an additional degree of responsibility with regard to their activities .
In other words , the EU finances political parties and also controls their activities .
This is Big Brother writ large and provides even more evidence of the disastrous decline of democracy in Europe generated by this increasingly totalitarian European Union .
As a democrat I abhor it , and to those who support it : shame on you .
Mr President , it is only right to inform the House and the European Investment Bank , whose accounts are under review this morning , that their 200 million euros ' worth of soft loans to the British Broadcasting Corporation - commonly nowadays known as the Brussels Broadcasting Corporation - are now the subject of a criminal investigation by the British police .
The BBC faces a prima facie charge of breaching its Royal Charter , specifically in its failure to provide balanced and objective reporting of current affairs .
The EIB 's claims that the BBC 's editorial policy has not been influenced by these loans is simply beyond belief .
As a result of many years ' research , not least by Lord Pearson - at his considerable expense - it has become obvious that the BBC has , in effect , been bought by the EIB on behalf of the EU .
As a result of that , BBC senior management now seem to regard themselves as above the law .
We shall see shortly whether Scotland Yard police agree .
( DE ) Mr President , I would like first to thank everyone who worked to prepare this important discharge for 2006 and supported our rapporteur .
It is perhaps the most important discharge that we have undertaken during this term .
We see the problems , and we still have time to resolve those problems .
I would like at this point to convey our particular thanks to the European Court of Auditors , the authority of whose reports grows from year to year .
It would just be good if , from time to time , the Court of Auditors could withstand the temptation to populism .
We remember the stud farm associations and the golf clubs , and all that goes with them .
Those were more political assessments than the assessments of a court of auditors .
I would like to thank the European Commission which , in the end , negotiated a tight follow-up with us , also under pressure from a tough-talking rapporteur from this committee .
Commissioner Kallas has already mentioned how we want to proceed in the coming months .
National declarations by the Member States are important .
Council is not here today - we can see that - they are not paying attention to how their taxpayers ' taxes are being used , so we have to do it .
We will make progress in structural policies .
Commissioner Kallas , we will continue to have difficulties in external policy .
We pointed out the first time that this external policy was not sufficiently monitored , even though we are spending billions on it .
In the world of international finance , it is usual for voting rights to be allocated according to the obligations to make contributions .
If the European Union contributes more than 40 % to rebuilding Iraq , for example , I would have liked us to have more than 40 % of the participation rights and codecision rights .
There is still a long way to go , so there is much to be done here .
Today we will be voting on good reports and it is now a matter of giving them good support .
( FI ) Mr President , first of all I wish to thank the rapporteurs and the Chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control for doing an excellent job .
Now before us are 30 reports on discharge pertaining to the year 2006 .
The most important of them is the Commission 's , which relates to 97 % of the EU 's budget .
The rest relate to the EU 's other institutions and separate agencies .
In my opinion , the way the matter of discharge is dealt with by Parliament should be improved .
The Committee on Budgetary Control cannot be a Court of Auditors and still less a firm of accountants .
It is a physical impossibility for it to conduct a detailed examination of the administration and accounts of 30 units .
Parliament has to put its trust in experts and the opinions of official bodies .
Of these , the European Court of Auditors , internal monitoring bodies , and the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) are the most important .
Even the most stringent detailed examination of accounts and administration only results in what is an apparent degree of accuracy , and that does not make the outcome any more reliable .
There is no direct correlation between the way discharge is dealt with and the number of reports produced .
On the contrary , when Parliament grants discharge to a single agency , for example , that might be too strong an assurance that the accounts and administration were meticulously attended to .
If Parliament really wants to strengthen its role in the discharge process it should revise its practices .
Otherwise , the Committee on Budgetary Control will be inundated with work .

( PL ) Mr President , in Mr Jørgensen 's report consideration has quite rightly been given - following the opinion of the Court of Auditors - to the problems of funding the common agricultural policy , and specifically to the fact that some of its beneficiaries have nothing to do with agriculture .
Golf clubs , cricket clubs , horse riding clubs , leisure parks - may they prosper , but not on common agricultural policy funds .
This afternoon in this House we shall be debating the food crisis and the rise in food prices , and surely one of the reasons for this crisis is that EU funds that should be used to to support agriculture are being used to support completely different businesses that can manage perfectly well without this help .
This is why I am fully behind the conclusions contained in Articles 99 and 100 of Mr Jørgensen 's report , which point to the need for changes in the funding of the common agricultural policy to ensure that aid is chanelled only to real farmers - those who use the land for agricultural purposes - and these changes must be introduced as soon as possible .
( NL ) I would like to quote the most learned man of our time , Mr Einstein .
He said : ' The world is a dangerous place to live , not because of those who do evil , but because of those who look on and do nothing ' .
That is the case here in Parliament as well .
We have known for decades that a great deal of tampering has been taking place with regard to assistants ' allowances , travel allowances , allowances for general expenditure , daily allowances , funds for visiting groups and funds for political groups .
I hope that Parliament is finally going to do something about this before the 2009 elections , and that these will not be just empty promises as has been the case over the past few decades .
In anticipation of this , I actually believe that we should postpone the discharge .
I feel it will be unmarketable to the voters if we grant ourselves discharge .
( FI ) Mr President , an excellent job has been done under the leadership of Siim Kallas , Vice-President of the European Commission , to make the European Union 's accounts more open and transparent .
The call to publicise EU single payments deserves special recognition .
In my country , Finland , national subsidies are nevertheless twice the value of EU aid .
Unfortunately , the data on the recipients of EU aid do not tell the whole truth about single payments .
Under pressure from the Committee on Budgetary Control , the Commission has improved the way in which the accounts are inspected and has promised to put more effort into clawing back payments made for the wrong reasons .
Similarly , there is better quality information now available on financing under external actions , thanks to the rapporteurs and shadow rapporteurs .
I hope there will also be a strict approach in the future to monitoring pan-European political parties and compliance with the rules on them , as opposed to what we can sometimes conclude from Parliament 's behaviour .
( DA ) Mr President , we have come a long way in terms of openness and the battle against fraud within the EU .
When I was first elected in 1979 , the group chairmen led the way in taking from the till .
First a chauffer-driven limousine paid for by Parliament , and then a dip into the Members ' funds to get business-class travel for the same journey plus a little extra !
Nowadays , the chairmen are leading the way in the clean-up operation . However , there is a long way to go and we have been dealt a severe knock-back with the majority decision to not make the internal audit report public .
How can we be the guardians of others when we dare not address our own problems ?
The large groups carry a heavy burden of responsibility , as the voting percentage for Parliament next time may fall below 40 % , seriously weakening the legitimacy of the election .
I had hoped that one day I would be able to vote in favour of a set of annual accounts because there was no longer anything to criticise . However , the large groups are again recommending that we rubber-stamp the Commission 's accounts even though we still do not have complete access to them in order to check them .
What would an auditor say to a set of accounts if he did not have access to all the annexes ?
For 14 years in a row , the Court of Auditors have declared that they cannot verify the correctness of the underlying transactions , and therefore unfortunately for the 29th year in a row I must again vote against approval .
However , I would like to thank my fellow Members in the Committee on Budgetary Control and others in the House for their joint initiative over many years aimed at cleaning up the EU .
When I first began , during the budget I met a person who was known as ' Skimmed milk ' .
He received DKK 1.3 billion and was the biggest Danish beneficiary of EU funds .
I could not even obtain a statistical breakdown of what the biggest recipients of the money were receiving for example .
From next year onwards , all recipients of agricultural support will be disclosed on the Internet .
Four years ago the Commission 's working groups were a big secret .
Now we will also be able to see on the internet who the consultants are , thanks to our combined pressure . In addition , we have also enjoyed good support within the Commission from Mr Kallas .
I would like to express my thanks for this .
I will miss those I work with when I leave Parliament on 9 May .
Thank you , ladies and gentlemen !
We have come a long way , but not yet far enough . However , I am certain that you will continue the work .
Mr President , in 1944 Friedrich Hayek made the prescient observation that the delegation of particular technical tasks to separate bodies , while a regular feature , is the first step by which a democracy progressively relinquishes its powers .
Colleagues should ask themselves how much democratic control there is over the various European agencies .
We might get the odd committee visit to them , or express general opinions on what their mandates should be , but , in general , the role of this Parliament is to vote through the necessary supply , annually and unconditionally .
Thus , the European Union is being run by a standing apparat .
To be fair , it is not alone .
Within many of the Member States , my own included , there has been a similar process , whereby elected representatives have given away their powers .
What makes the EU unusual is that these various bodies have only the flimsiest of legal bases .
True , they would have been authorised by the European Constitution .
But that constitution - it seems necessary periodically to remind this House - was rejected at the ballot box .
Therefore , many of these agencies - the Human Rights Agency , the Defence Agency , the External Borders Agency and so on - are at best irregular , and at worst illegal .
If you want to regularise their status , and to have a proper mandate for them , then put the constitution to the people in the referendum you once promised .
Pactio Olisipio censenda est !
( NL ) Mr President , much has already been said today on the subject of Parliament 's discharge .
I would therefore like to limit myself to the observation that I , most certainly as a former assistant , hope that the assistants ' statute , which has already been discussed in such detail , will finally materialise , because if we are honest , the current regulations offer too much room for manoeuvre .
That is the problem .
Many Members manage this correctly , yet there is no guarantee at present .
The rules must therefore be tightened up and Parliament 's departments will have to take more consistent action in cases where the rules are not correctly applied .
This is an area in which our departments have sometimes made errors , including in the past .
Having said that , I would like to focus on granting the Commission discharge and on what , in my opinion , is the main problem , which occurs every year and is the cause of many a headache : to be specific , the difficult position in which we currently find ourselves between European and national level ; a position that is due to the fact that the Commission is fully accountable for European expenditures , whilst 80 % of these are managed by the Member States .
It has already been stated that there have indeed been positive developments , for example in the agricultural sector .
However , the only way we can get ourselves out of this difficult position is via the national management declarations , which are already currently being submitted by four Member States .
In the Jørgensen report , we as Parliament state in plain language that , in this regard , the current annual summaries are just an initial cautious step towards these management declarations .
I am also aware , however , that an amendment of the Interinstitutional Agreement and the Financial Regulation is required in order to implement the national declarations .
In any case , I am content for the moment with the Commission 's promise of last month , that it will also encourage the other Member States to submit national declarations .
I deliberately say ' content for the moment ' , Commissioner , because the proof of the pudding is in the eating and my group will follow up on how the Commission fulfils this promise by means of concrete actions in the coming months .
Moreover , the fact that the Council is not present today indicates that a great deal has yet to be achieved .
We will consider these conclusions , if we are here again next year for the 2007 discharge .
To be continued then !
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
I would like to discuss the European agencies report .
Every year the European Parliament examines the management of the European agencies and relies on the work done by the European Court of Auditors and the European Anti-Fraud Office to do so .
As a result of our joint long , meticulous , analytical and preparatory work we are now in a position to give a decision on the 2006 management of the Community agencies and it is indeed fortunate that with the agreement of the European Court of Auditors we can propose all the agencies for acceptance .
This does not mean that we did not find any faults in the management but that we did not find any faults serious enough to prevent acceptance .
I would also like to point out that the political groupings have already voted in favour , with a wide democratic majority , and I now propose here , in plenary , that we accept the work of the agencies even if the rapporteur is not entirely at one with the report . Thank you for your attention .
( LT ) Mr President , since the beginning of the term of office , I have been analysing the results of the work of the EU agencies on behalf of the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
I would like to point out that the number of agencies has nearly doubled in the current year .
Despite some critical remarks in the speech of the rapporteur regarding the work of these agencies , I find it necessary to mention certain positive changes compared with last year .
There is an increase in transparency and democratic responsibility as a result of the implementation of Parliament 's suggestion to have the agencies ' work assessed by the relevant committees .
Nevertheless , some problems still remain .
In this regard we should determine the position of the agencies ' activities within the EU management system .
As I have already mentioned , the number of agencies has grown considerably and we get the blame for that ; and even Parliament sometimes shares the opinion that it is an indirect way of increasing bureaucracy .
Perhaps , however , it highlights the need to review the EU management system along with that of the European Commission , especially the system of management and administration .
A series of projects are currently being implemented with the aim of improving the system .
It seems that we should consider a more radical reform , which would yield positive results and contribute to achieving more transparency in the work of both the agencies and the Commission .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , there are three matters to which I would like to draw attention in this debate .
Although the Court of Auditors has acknowledged that in general terms the financial report of the European Communities is an honest representation of the financial situation at the end of December 2006 , and that it did not find any flagrant inaccuracies concerning own funds and expenditure incurred , it did find many errors both in sums recorded in accounts ledgers and in reports supplied by the Member States .
One cause for particular concern is that some types of inaccuracy are repeated year on year , despite critical comments from the Court of Auditors and the European Parliament .
Another cause for concern is the continuing rise in outstanding budget commitments still to be paid , especially in respect of the old Member States .
Thirdly , in view of those comments , I would like to record my satisfaction with the overall improvement in expenditure on the common agricultural policy , which has been achieved largely through application of the AJAX system , which significantly limits the risk of improper expenditure .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Ladies and gentlemen , in 2006 the European Union devoted 39 % of its budget , EUR 38.9 billion in all , to structural spending .
The annual European Court of Auditors report established that the European Commission had taken numerous steps concerning the use of structural and cohesion funds as part of its far-reaching supervision .
While financial absorption has manifestly improved , the report draws attention to the fact that in 2006 at least 12 % of allocations to structural projects could not be recovered .
This represents around EUR 4 billion , and there were performance errors with 20 % of the projects .
For years there have been numerous problems with the multi-layer management of the Structural Funds and their shared management .
A cause of the relatively high proportion of the irregularities discovered and incorrect reimbursements is , primarily , the poor efficiency of the Member State control systems and the supervisory systems based on them .
The greatest problem I see is that there is no unified evaluation model used by everyone , no yardstick or benchmarking system , and there is no effective way of measuring the projects .
Although the Structural Funds are an extremely important source that can be allocated for mutual development , we can only attain a reduction in the number of abuses of the common purse if the Member States and the European Commission act jointly and in harmony to cut back on the illegal use of money .
The efficiency of the Member States ' supervisory systems also needs to be improved and standardised .
Moreover , it is essential that the Commission makes its supervision of structural spending more effective , setting up suspension and adjustment procedures and developing a new Member State reporting system , bearing in mind that there are problems with 40 % of the Commission audits .
Given all this , our delegation proposes a discharge . Thank you for your attention .
( ES ) Mr President , I would like to express our satisfaction as , for another year , transparency has been improved in the European Union accounts , despite the fact that , we have to say , the Court of Auditors is still helping us with the more fundamental aspects of the system .
It is , however , true that , through a very constructive dialogue - arduous but very constructive - with the Commission , in which we must especially recognise the efforts made by the Commissioners for Regional Development and Employment , there has been real progress made on aspects of improving monitoring of all aspects related to both employment and the Structural Funds .
We would have liked the same cooperation from the Commissioner on External Relations , who we hope will add to or join in these efforts .
With regard to the Committee of the Regions , we are very happy , because we have really made very significant progress , and while we are continuing to evaluate and monitor affairs we feel that there has really been major progress .
With regard to the Court of Auditors , we would like there to be greater transparency in its declaration of interests , and regarding the Council we agree with making internal auditing more transparent and efficient , but not with increasing bureaucratic obstacles , as the amendment tabled appears to suggest .
Mr President , I have some questions .
Why is it that , in a Parliament committed to openness and transparency , our own authorities keep secret embarrassing reports which reveal the fraudulent practices of Members ?
Why is it that there was no requirement for Members to account for their use of general expenditure ?
How much of that money ends up in private pockets ?
Why do we keep secret the names of the 407 Members who benefit from EUR 27 000 each paid into a voluntary pension fund , amongst them myself ?
Why do we have no controls over those Members who embezzle nearly EUR 14 000 each year by making private payments into that pension fund from the public purse ?
Is there any reason , other than greed , that prevents those to whom we look for guidance - the Bureau and sometimes even the Conference of Presidents - introducing the genuine reforms that are so long overdue ?
This failure brings shame upon us all and upon this House .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to add my voice to those giving a positive opinion of the discharge for 2006 .
Both the Commission and the Commissioners have distinguished themselves by their considerable and constantly rising level of cooperation .
Thanks are very much due to the Court of Auditors .
To put it simply , the Court has done its job well .
We have assessed the achievement of goals in the EU together with the management of resources .
This is also a very positive sign .
I would like to emphasise most strongly that Parliament takes part de facto in the discharge procedure by giving verdicts on applications and through the individual committees that deal with particular areas .
I would like to thank the Chair of the Committee on Budgetary Control , Mr Bösch , for all the work and patience he has put in , as well as the rapporteurs , Mr Jørgensen , Mr Pomés Ruiz and Mr Stubb .


It is exceptionally difficult to avoid irregularities , but it is even more important to find them and prevent them .
We have successfully carried out this function .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
As the shadow rapporteur for the ENVI opinion ( Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety ) on exemption for 2006 , I would like to thank Jutta Haug and the rapporteur for a very solid piece of work .
I feel that the work of the four agencies we dealt with is extremely important , that what they do is without any doubt of great help to the European Parliament and the various EU bodies , and so improves the quality of life of EU citizens .
The European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control plays an important part in opinion formation on disease control and the risk of new and emerging infectious diseases .
I could add my thanks that this year Hungary was first in disease prevention , as we had the smallest number of people infected with diseases against which there had been a vaccination campaign .
The work of the European Environment Agency is indispensable in the gathering and collation of information on environmental protection , and the European Medicines Agency plays a significant role in the protection of public health and animal health .
I feel the agency 's collaboration in the development of new medicines is extremely important .
The European Food Safety Authority offers indispensable support in the areas of animal health and plant protection .
An important point is that all the agencies have redistributed their available annual budget .
As the rapporteur points out , this is because of the complexity of the tasks .
It would be useful to highlight this more in future planning .
I welcome the rapporteur 's proposals on the importance of internal control and the need to strengthen it .
Finally , I would like to draw attention to the importance of the committee material explaining the role of the agencies .
The agencies have a necessary role to play , but transparency and effectiveness dictate the need for clarification of their place in the governance of the Union . Thank you .
( HU ) Mr President , thank you for giving me the floor .
We have arrived at the end of the long , tension-filled process and at today 's long-anticipated vote on the 2006 discharge , which can deservedly be regarded as a red letter day and a milestone in the annals of the European Parliament .
A red letter day , as this is the first time that the European Court of Auditors has confronted us all with the 12 % fault rate for the Structural Funds , which the sensation-hungry tabloid press naturally dished up as four billion missing euros .
The Committee on Budgetary Control , which has responsibility in this matter , carried out the resulting work in full awareness of its political and professional responsibilities , with the assistance of Mr Jørgensen , the Danish rapporteur .
Its aim was not to cause a scandal or stir up a sensation with unforeseeable consequences , but to apply the principles of transparent disclosure and come up with proposals which would offer a guarantee for avoiding such problems in the future And here we found a very good partner in the person of Vice-President Siim Kallas , to whom I would like to give particular thanks , and I am sure that we will in all probability be able to resolve all such issues in the future .
Thank you .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to mention an aspect of importance concerning the discharge , namely the evaluation of actions through sampling .
When I was preparing my working document on the Commission 's management of the CARDS programme on assistance for the Balkans , as part of the discharge , only 2.32 % of operations could be audited by the Court of Auditors in order to evaluate the management methods used by the European Union for external actions in this region of Europe .
One of the effects of the small sample size was that the Court of Auditors was unable to analyse the impact of external action on Montenegro because , out of the 256 actions financed , not one was examined .
Under these circumstances , how can impact really be measured ?
What scientific and financial reliability should be accorded to these evaluation reports ?
Although , from a statistical point of view , small samples can be used to estimate the behaviour of the systems , the samples still need to be representative , which was not the case with the appropriations used to finance actions in Montenegro under the CARDS programme .
Collectively , European taxpayers would gain from an improvement in the Court of Auditor 's methods for analysing samples in order to identify more clearly the effectiveness of appropriations from our budget .

Mr President , I find myself in the very unusual situation of agreeing partly with something that Mr Hannan said just now , which was when he voiced his concern about the proliferation of agencies .
We seem to create agencies more according to the desire of every Member State to have one on its territory , and then spread them like confetti around the Union , than according to a real and genuine need to do so .
If this trend continues , it will indeed lead to governance by agency at the expense , frankly , of the Commission , which is our executive and which is accountable to Parliament , and much more directly than the agencies , even if we do have more means than Mr Hannan admitted to control them .
Where I depart from him of course is when he goes over the top , as he usually does , and claims that these agencies have been created illegally .
That is , of course , absolute nonsense .
They were all created on the basis of the current Treaties , with a proper and due legal base .
Whether it was wise to do so is another question , and we should certainly be very careful before we create any new agencies in the future .
( EL ) Mr President , the European Parliament is a political body and I think we ought to consider the issues we are debating in a political manner .
The measure which ought to link our activities , in my view , tells us two things .
Let me take two examples from our discussions .
The first is the matter of independent authorities or agencies .
Of course , there is the question of major expansion of all these agencies , but it is impossible to say that the decentralisation of the independent agencies is not particularly useful .
As there is a problem with great expansion , we will say no to all the independent agencies ?
Naturally this would not be possible .
The second relates to the infamous issue of our colleagues ' salaries .
This certainly is a problem , and we said so in committee .
There is a vast difference , however , between saying that there is a problem and not giving exemption to Parliament for an entire year , and also between making very populist remarks , such as that we are all responsible and that claiming that there is no transparency .
How can there be no transparency ?
We , the members of the committee , have seen the report .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I should like to thank the honourable Members , the rapporteur and the members of the Committee on Budgetary Control .
The discussion on discharge has been very intensive this year , and the Commission has made several commitments to follow up Parliament 's observations and recommendations .
We will continue this intensive process , starting in May , when there will be a discussion in the Committee on Budgetary Control about our plans for next year .
This is an intensive process , and I would like to assure Parliament that we take our commitments very seriously and are going ahead with the proposals and ideas we have in common on increasing accountability , on cooperation with Member States and on increasing the responsibility of Member States in shared management issues .
That is our common line , and we will work seriously on all those action plans and proposals .
There are different types of agencies .
Firstly , there are executive agencies , which are clearly the responsibility of the Commission , and for which you give discharge to the Commission .
We have some executive agencies , but have decided to have a moratorium on the establishment of new executive agencies .
What are the concerns surrounding traditional agencies ?
The problem of governance is a serious one , and there are several weak points as regards how to administer and handle those agencies .
We should probably hold serious discussions on governance issues , but we should also not underestimate the political observations on their work - what they are doing and what the real benefits are - and Parliament has a very important role to play in evaluating and assessing how successful they are .
Neither should we underestimate the positive aspects of both decentralisation and of having European bodies spread across Europe .
That is not such a bad idea , if everybody considers his or her own country .
I should like to thank you once again for all your contributions , remarks , debates and discussions .
We will continue with our commitments and action plans .
rapporteur . - ( DA ) Mr President , I would like to thank Commissioner Kallas .
It is clear that we have been through a process where the waves have been a little choppy at times .
There has been conflict between ourselves in Parliament and the Commission . However , it is a conflict that we have managed to transform into a dialogue .
It has led to some good results and some good pledges from the Commission , and also to some very concrete action plans with specific deadlines and specific success criteria .
We must persist during times when some Members from the more EU-sceptic groups say : ' it is just words , and words that have been said before ' .
This is not true !
It is certainly not just about words , but about specific actions , which the Commission is now promising to implement .
Some measures have already been implemented .
In addition , some very specific deadlines have also been established , which we will be able to monitor .
A key element is that we will now have a commissioner who will meet with the committee once a month in order to follow this process .
This really is a great stride forward .
That said , by way of conclusion I would like to remind people why these problems arise .
One of the reasons is that a considerable proportion of the funds is administered under shared management , i.e. 80 % of the EU 's funds are managed by the Member States .
It is the responsibility of the Commission to follow the Treaty and it is a cross that it must bear .
Therefore , we strongly criticise the Commission . However , in reality , much of the problem lies with the Member States .
This is the reason why here in Parliament we are such staunch supporters of the idea of annual national audit declarations , signed at the appropriate political level , i.e. by the finance minister .
This is happening already in a number of countries : Denmark , the Netherlands , the United Kingdom and Sweden .
If we could achieve something similar in all EU countries , we would find that these auditing obligations would be taken more seriously in the individual countries .
I think that we would actually gain a really good tool for eliminating those areas where things are not working in the individual countries .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , sometimes we cannot see the wood for the trees .
In this discharge procedure we have to say what is going wrong , and sometimes we forget how many things are going well , how many extremely competent staff we have in the Commission and in this House , in Parliament , including the ushers , so many services , the translators , the interpreters , who provide an excellent service .
We forget how we are able to stretch the budget that we have in order to fulfil our objectives , how Parliament and the Commission have made more and more progress on the transparency policy .
There is still a challenge , a very important challenge for Parliament , which is the communication and information policy .
It was one of the objectives that Parliament had for 2006 , and I am not happy with how it has developed .
We have elections in a year 's time , and we need to know how to get there , which means improving our information procedures and continuing to be transparent , as we are being .
Transparency , and I was rapporteur for this report , is compatible with having documents that are not public , as occurs in the Member States , for journalists , in businesses and in families .
It is good for our work if there are levels of drafting criteria that have not passed through the sieve of public approval , and must therefore logically be the secret of those of us who are working on the matter .
I am entirely satisfied with the access that I have had to all of the information , and I think that the report that I am presenting on Parliament 's accounts is a responsible report .
I say that Parliament 's accounts should be discharged , because Parliament , if you will allow me to say so , operates very well , and much better than some national parliaments , in a much more transparent way and with staff who work more hours than may be worked in similar parliaments .
This is not to say , therefore , that it is perfect : we need to keep working .
We still have a long way to go , but in this political year , we have a positive picture of how we have used the money that our citizens have given us ; we have used it well , transparently and coherently .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Jutta Haug described my critical comments in the explanatory statement and in the main text as abhorrent and as scandal-mongering .
I would like to read out a few quotations : ' The Heads of State and Government are inventing one agency after another .
The agencies are eating up our money .
There are no proper checks as to whether the agencies are really necessary .
There is an extensive area free of control where nobody is really accountable .
No planning is apparent .
One agency after another is created , in order to be paid for consent to difficult topics by an undertaking for an interesting agency . '
These are all quotations from Herbert Bösch .
They are much more critical than what I wrote .
Aha !
When I write it , it is called ' scandal-mongering ' , but Herbert Bösch , or course , is a member of the party and fits in with it .
Yes , I have experienced this before .
This is what I mean when I talk about the ' doublespeak ' that rules here .
This is the hypocrisy of the ' special ' class , that people say ' it is dreadful to mention a scandal explicitly in an official Parliamentary paper ' but then make critical comments publicly .
This is one of the fundamental problems in this Parliament .
Naturally , people may have different opinions on whether or not to grant discharge , but that is not what these passages , which I read out at the beginning , were about - not at all .
Rather , they were about basic considerations where , when it comes down to it , there is a real opportunity to show their true colours , people once again cover up what is going on here .
That is the truly great problem for democracy in Europe , that the system here is not self-regulating , that it merely involves mutual backslapping .
Mr President , I would also like to ask to be allowed to make a personal statement under Article 145 at the end of the debate .
rapporteur . - ( SV ) I would like to take this opportunity to provide a little constructive criticism to the Commission and to the decentralised agencies , as I still think that the rapporteur , Hans-Peter Martin , has not managed to do so .
As the rapporteur responsible for this question next year , I would like to focus on three main issues .
They are also raised in the reports .
The first is evaluating the opportunities of grouping together the administrative functions of a majority of the smaller agencies , and so releasing resources and expertise in complying with the complicated regulatory framework surrounding the agencies .
Many of these decentralised agencies have problems complying with overriding budgetary principles , for example , or the Financial Regulation , procurement legislation , etc .
This is a recurring opinion here , and one which I hope the Commission will take further .
We also propose that the independent agencies , like other institutions , have their staff appropriations reduced by a percentage equivalent to posts which it is believed will not be filled .
I believe that this too could free up considerable resources .
Last but not least , we propose that the assigned revenue which agencies pay in to the Commission each year and which is returned be deducted against the proposal in the budget on which the European Parliament is reaching a decision .
These are the three issues on which I would like to enter into an ongoing dialogue with the Commission and the decentralised agencies during this period , until I take over the discharge process .
Finally , I would also like to say something about the Court of Auditors ' special report on the control , inspection and sanction systems relating to the rules on conservation of Community fisheries resources .
It is , after all , part and parcel with discharge of the Commission which we are addressing today , and the Court of Auditors delivers a devastating criticism , which must lead to wide-ranging reform of the common fisheries policy .
Three conclusions which I have drawn , and which can also be found in the report we will be voting on , are first and foremost that it is unacceptable for Member States , year after year , to set quotas at a higher level than recommended by researchers for sustainable fisheries , secondly that the Commission and the Member States must be tougher when it comes to combating breaches of or fraud against the quota system and , thirdly , that we must draw up a new fisheries policy which strengthens the incentives and reasons for professional fishermen to protect stocks .
These are three additional thoughts which I would like you to take seriously in the report we are voting on today .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) You cut me off , Mr President , when I called you a despot .
I would like to justify why I do that .
I have been waiting for this answer since March 2007 , in relation to a very , very important matter regarding an error by this Parliament which is serious for me personally and for my political work - when I was assigned to a group against which I have always fought , because I hold them to be Nazis in disguise - and I made a lengthy personal submission to you .
In the meantime , I have lodged a complaint with the Ombudsman .
When it comes to one-minute speeches , Mr President , you have all your constructions off pat , and when it is supposed to be my turn , you do not allow me to take my turn , so I call you a despot .
I also call you a despotic President because you arbitrarily singled out certain Members in the so-called incidents on 12 December , not those who were members of the party you still belonged to at the time , but apparently those who caught your eye .
I also call you a despot because you keep on cutting me off while I am speaking and say ' no , you will not give me that answer ' .
It is surprising that you are letting me finish speaking now .
Furthermore , I call you a despotic president because , on the basis of this additional enabling interpretation , and I am not the only one who believes this is untenable , procedures can in fact take place here that truly have no place in a proper Parliament , at least not the way I learned about it in school .
However , for me , that is a very long time ago - if you read my curriculum vitae - to make me choose such an expression . A great deal must have taken place for that to happen .
I am , however , convinced that you allow this despotic approach precisely because in fact it was not a matter of seeking clarification on the question of the secretarial assistance allowance .
You allowed me to be put in the pillory due to ludicrous errors of form that could happen to anybody - yes anybody , and I am sure they happen to every Member of this House .
However , they obscure the fact that , according to internal investigations , at least EUR 80 million would have to be claimed back from Members of Parliament if there were equal treatment and proportionality of funds .
These do not exist and therefore I maintain that indeed , in my opinion , you - as the political representative of 14 % of Austrian voters - are , unfortunately , a despotic president who is inflicting unnecessary damage on this Parliament and the important underlying idea of Europe .
I long to see a true , fair , democratic Parliament , where it would be neither necessary nor desirable to use such an expression .
Mr Martin , we are a free Parliament .
Therefore , as is my duty , I allowed you to speak , in accordance with Rule 145 .
I do not wish to pass judgement on your explanation , merely to observe that I applied the Rules of Procedure fairly in order to give you the opportunity to say what you have said .
On my own behalf , I would say that I try to be just and objective - and that I achieve that - in my dealings with all Members of Parliament .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.35 a.m. and resumed at 12.00 p.m. )

1 .
Governance and partnership at national , regional and project basis in the field of regional policy ( Rule 117 ) ( vote )
2 .
Governance and partnership at national , regional and project basis in the field of regional policy ( Rule 118 ) ( vote )
3 .
Regional and cohesion policy aspects of the Lisbon Treaty ( vote )
4 .
Cross-border cooperation to combat terrorism and cross-border crime (
5 .
Statute of the European Ombudsman (
Before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( FI ) Mr President , could you please propose to Parliament the following procedure , on which the coordinators on the Committee on Constitutional Affairs were unanimous at their meeting of 31 March .
The vote now to take place should only relate to a draft decision , with the vote on a motion for a resolution postponed until the Commission has delivered its opinion and the Council has given its approval .
The President of Parliament should officially submit the text of the draft decision agreed by Parliament in the vote to the Commission and Council to examine , pursuant to Article 195 of the EC Treaty .
Finally , he should request the Committee on Constitutional Affairs to make the necessary contact with the Council and the Commission and make a proposal to Parliament in good time on how to proceed in the matter .
( Parliament approved the proposal on the voting procedure )
6 .
Organ donation and transplantation : Policy actions at EU level (
- Before the vote :
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although the use of human organs for transplantation has increased steadily over recent decades , the number of individuals who need transplants exceeds the number of organs available .
Over 50 000 patients are on waiting lists in Europe , and 10 people , awaiting organs die every day .
It is up to us to send a strong message to the Commission , and , above all , to Member States and our governments .
The time has come to take action as European citizens .
We need to mobilise , coordinate , raise awareness among those around us and become donors ourselves .
( Applause )
- Before the vote on paragraph 38 :
Mr President , very briefly , this is a short amendment to make Amendment 2 to paragraph 38 stronger in its meaning with respect to the rights of the donor .
The amendment is to add , after ' donate an organ ' , the words ' is the exclusive right of the donor and ' .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
7 .
Volunteering (
8 .
2006 Annual report of the EIB (
9 .
2006 discharge : EU general budget , section III - Commission (
- Before the vote on Amendment 4 :
rapporteur . - Mr President , there is an oral compromise amendment to replace Amendments 4 and 2 .
It reads as follows : ' Welcomes the commitment by the Commission to give a monthly report in the Committee in charge on the implementation of the 2006 discharge follow-up , where every month one Commissioner in charge will present the development in his of her area of responsibility , covering national declarations and annual summaries , external actions and implementation of the action plan to strengthen the Community 's supervisory role under shared management of structural actions ; ' .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
10 .
2006 discharge : EU general budget , section I - European Parliament (
- Before the vote :
( ES ) Mr President , I have a small proposal for you and for all presidents who chair votes .
We have many roll-call votes , and I do not think that the Rules of Procedure require the President to read the figures .
Everyone can read the screen .
It is sufficient for you to say ' adopted ' or ' rejected ' .
If you could agree to this , we would save time .
If everyone agrees , so does the President .
- Before the vote on paragraph 65 :
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , there has actually been an error with the numbers , and what we are going to vote on first , by means of a separate vote , is paragraph 65 , except for indent 4 , and we will then have a roll-call vote on indent 4 .
There has been a change of numbers , it is that simple .
That is right , Mr Pomés , therefore let us proceed with the vote on paragraph 65 , except for indent 4 .
- Before the vote on Amendment 9 :
( SV ) Mr President , under paragraph 65 we had no vote on indent 5 .
We voted separately on number four , but not on number five .
Mr Andersson , there are different language versions , and what we have voted on , what you are alluding to , was already included .
So that there are no doubts , we are now going to vote solely on what Mr Andersson was saying , that is ' no relatives of Members be employed ' .
- Before the vote on paragraph 72 :
( DE ) Mr President , even if it is too late to say so , I think that the Member 's objection may have been misunderstood .
He wanted a vote on Paragraph 65 , fifth indent .
You had a vote on whether family members may be employed .
Paragraph 65 , fifth indent does not regulate that , but whether payments can be suspended in the event that there is suspicion of malpractice .
We did not vote on that , or you announced something incorrectly .
Just so that we clear that up , so that everyone knows what is happening .
Mr Alvaro , the problem is that , in the different language versions , this phrase was structured in a different way .
This is what has created problems .
We have therefore voted saying exactly what we were voting for , so that there are no doubts .
Do you understand , Mr Alvaro ?
( DE ) Mr President , I would like to point out that those who prepared the voting lists were aware of the problem , so that the marks that you have in the voting list already take into account the different linguistic problems .
That is to say , it was totally clear how the groups were voting . It is not the case that nobody knew what was being voted upon .
We tried to correct this in the Tabling Office , and it was corrected .
In any case the vote was clear , so there is no problem at all .
11 .
2006 discharge : EU general budget , section II - Council (
12 .
2006 discharge : EU general budget , section IV - Court of Justice (
13 .
2006 discharge : EU general budget , section V - Court of Auditors (
14 .
2006 discharge : EU general budget , section VI - European Economic and Social Committee (
15 .
2006 discharge : EU general budget , section VII - Committee of the Regions (
16 .
2006 discharge : EU general budget , section VIII - European Ombudsman (
17 .
2006 discharge : EU general budget , section IX - European Data Protection Supervisor (
18 .
2006 discharge : European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions (
- Before the vote :
Chairman of the Committee on Budgetary Control . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to point out to the chamber that the resolutions on discharge of the agencies will be adopted without explanatory statements .
As Chairman , I have deleted the explanatory statement , in accordance with our Rules of Procedure , under Rule 48 , because the rapporteur 's explanatory statement bore no relation to the text passed by the committee .
Just for your information .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would not have done this to you if Herbert Bösch had not spoken .
It is simply not true .
You can read it for yourself in the relevant resolutions : At first , it was proposed to censor only a small part .
I objected , based precisely on the Rules of Procedure , whereupon Mr Bösch - I believe completely arbitrarily and wrongfully - deleted the entire explanatory statement , which related to points of criticism which , by the way , have been expressed in exactly the same words by his group in public .
This is a double standard , when to say it oneself is acceptable , but it is not permissible for another to say it .
19 .
2006 discharge : European Training Foundation (
20 .
2006 discharge : European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training (
21 .
2006 discharge : Translation Centre for the bodies of the European Union (
22 .
2006 discharge : European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control (
23 .
2006 discharge : European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction (
24 .
2006 discharge : European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights ( formerly European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia ) (
25 .
2006 discharge : European Agency for Reconstruction (
26 .
2006 discharge : European Environment Agency (
27 .
2006 discharge : European Agency for Safety and Health at Work (
- After the vote :
( DE ) Mr President , I would just like the honourable Members to know that we have now blocked and voted against the European Labelling Directive ten times - and we will do it ten more times .
We have in fact always voted with the Hans-Peter Martin label , but Hans-Peter Martin is not in it .
28 .
2006 discharge : European Medicines Agency (
29 .
2006 discharge : European Food Safety Authority (
30 .
2006 discharge : European Maritime Safety Agency (
31 .
2006 discharge : European Aviation Safety Agency (
32 .
2006 discharge : European Railway Agency (
33 .
2006 discharge : European Network and Information Security Agency (
34 .
2006 discharge : European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union (
35 .
2006 discharge : Eurojust (
Voting time
We shall now proceed to the vote .
( For the outcome of the vote and other details : see Minutes )
Welcome
I am pleased , on behalf of Parliament , to welcome the delegation from Indonesia that is here for the 5th Interparliamentary Meeting between our Parliament and the Parliament of Indonesia .
We have been informed that the meeting held this morning was very useful and productive .
There is a whole series of matters that are of common interest to both parties , and I would also like to highlight the interest shown in our work by our colleagues from the Indonesian Parliament .
We thank you most heartily and wish you a very pleasant stay among us .
( Applause )
1 .
2006 discharge : European Police College (
2 .
2006 discharge : Sixth , Seventh , Eighth and Ninth European Development Funds (
3 .
2006 discharge : European GNSS Supervisory Authority (
- Before the vote on Amendment 1 :

Mr President , on a point of order , I just wondered if anybody in this building knew what ' GNSS ' stood for .
In any case , Mr Heaton-Harris , you can be sure that from today onwards we will all know what this acronym stands for .
That concludes the vote .
Voting time ( continuation )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( PL ) Mr President , new forms of crime and specialised criminal groups of an international nature present an enormous challenge to prosecuting agencies in the Member States .
Effective prosecution of offenders and the fight against the most alarming manifestations of lawbreaking are not possible without the creation of appropriate tools that the police can use to enforce the law .
In the case of a problem such as cross-border crime , the rapid exchange of information between services in individual countries is essential if offenders are to be identified and actions coordinated . DNA databases and digital fingerprint records are a very important tool in the fight against crime .
They enable an offender to be identified regardless of where the crime was committed .
The Dührkop Dührkop report on the stepping up of cooperation between prosecution agencies in combating terrorism and cross-border crime is a valuable initiative that reinforces the action in favour of greater security for US citizens that was initiated in 2005 by the Prüm Treaty .
Mr President , as we know , this report calls for an extension of the Prüm Treaty into the fight against cross-border terrorism .
We all agree on the need to combat terrorism .
That goes without saying .
We all agree on the need for cross-border cooperation .
However , the Prüm Treaty is about the enforced sharing of data , regardless of concerns over the protection and security of that data .
Judging by the newspaper stories on the integrity of police forces in certain Member States , we should all be concerned about that sharing of data .
The actual content of the report would in fact significantly breach the civil liberties of citizens right across the EU , because the collection and passing-on of DNA data to other EU Member States becomes obligatory for the first time .
We are sleepwalking into a ' Big Brother ' Europe , while our politicians stand idly by .
It was for this reason that we voted against this report .
( PL ) Mr President , the role of the Ombudsman is increasing , especially in the context of the solutions and challenges of the Treaty of Lisbon and the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
We want to build a Europe for citizens , a Europe that is close to its citizens , a Europe that will be a model of observance of human rights and respect , so contact procedures and also procedures for cooperation between citizens and the Ombudsman institution should be made easier .
The time taken for matters to be examined at Ombudsman level should be reduced to the bare minimum .
I would also like to draw attention to the principles of cooperation between national Ombudsmen and the European Ombudsman on the principle of subsidiarity .
A division of roles and tasks will improve the efficiency of both of these institutions .
( SK ) I voted for the report by my fellow Member Mr Adamou on organ donation and transplantation .
We need to tackle the problem of the shortage of organs for transplants in Europe , which is the chief factor affecting transplantation programme .
There are some 60 000 patients in need of transplants on waiting lists across Europe .
Mortality rates while waiting for a heart , liver or lung transplant usually range from 15 % to 30 % .
According to a 2006 Eurobarometer poll , 56 % of Europeans wish to donate their organs for transplantation purposes after their death .
People should be encouraged to speak about organ donation and to communicate their wishes to their relatives .
The training of medical experts should also be improved .
Statistics show that up to 81 % of citizens of the European Union Member States support the use of a donor card , which makes it easier to identify the donor . In spite of that only 12 % of Europeans have this card at present .
I support the Commission 's initiative to launch the European Donor Card .
( PL ) Mr President , human life and health constitute the highest value for those responsible for health services in the Member States .
All steps aimed at protecting them should meet with the express approval of the European Parliament .
Transplantology is one of the most rapidly growing branches of medicine .
Thousands of people are given the chance to return to life , the chance , as it were , of a second life .
The number of transplants carried out in the European Union in relation to the number of people awaiting them is still inadequate , and many patients awaiting a transplant die before an operation can be performed because of a lack of organs .
Action aimed at increasing the number of transplants performed is particularly important .
One of the key methods of doing this is to promote transplantology among the public and to encourage potential donors to express their consent to their organs being taken after death .
It is also important to set up and monitor an extensive system to control transplants carried out , in order to combat the unpleasant illegal trade in organs , which is not just the province of the poor regions of the world .
In my view , the Adamou report is an important signal for Member States who are stressing the gravity of the problem .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the report , as this is an exceptionally important , albeit difficult problem .
The declaration of one 's willingness to have one 's organs transferred after death for transplantation into others is a gift of life ; it is saving the lives of other people ; it is something of exceptional worth to mankind .

It should be pointed out that there is a link between the shortage of organs and the illegal trade in them .
An organ deficiency sometimes prompts people to break the law and acquire organs illegally in order to save a life .
This is an ethical and moral problem as well as a legal one .
High requirements in terms of quality and safety in the fields of donation and the taking , testing , storage and transport of organs are not subject to discussion , as they constitute the basis for the success of a transplant .
Finally , we must bear in mind that an effective information policy at EU level must be conducted in order to increase our citizens ' awareness of this subject .
The problem in question should be a fundamental challenge for the Member States .
Finally , the problem we are discussing today demands appropriate debate , further research , as well as solutions of a moral and ethical nature .
( CS ) I would like to thank my fellow Members for supporting the European People 's Party proposals concerning Europol and research .
We are disappointed that Europol under-estimated the importance of monitoring international human organ trafficking .
Even in Europe children vanish because of trade in organs , and not only in China but in Moldova , too , human organs are bought and subsequently sold at a high price to Europeans on the black market .
This is of course why Europol must monitor the situation .
We cannot prevent international transplant tourism without better coordination of the transplantation programmes across the Union .
To achieve this , we must first of all agree on a common approach regarding informed consent for organ donation .
I personally believe that experiments in the area of human embryo transfers are unethical and irresponsible .
On the other hand , clinical research on adult stem cell produces excellent results in tissue transplantation , for example for heart patients , and this procedure does not violate respect for the uniqueness of human beings .
Our report sends a strong signal to the Commission , which will soon proposal for a binding text .
Mr President , in addressing the subject of the report on organ donation , I wish to pay tribute to my former assistant , James Sullivan , who , as many of you will know , died tragically on 10 February .
In our office on 8 February , James and Aoife , another assistant , talked about presumed consent and agreed that should anything happen to either of them - both young people - they would donate their organs .
We were not to know that tragically that night James would fall , and that on the Sunday the life-support machine would be switched off .
It is a tribute to James that there are people across the European Union who now live because of his generosity .
For his parents , Edna and Tom , in Cork in Ireland , who mourn his passing and who will never recover from his loss , the only hope they can hold on to is that James is no longer with us but that , owing to his generosity , others have lived .
Obviously , this is a very personal report for our office , and I support it fully .
( PL ) Mr President , the donation and transplantation of organs is one of the fundamental problems requiring consideration and consensus both within the European Union and outside it .
On the one hand we have tens of thousands of people awaiting transplants .
On the other we have a serious medical , legal and ethical / moral problem .
We are all agreed that an effective transplantation system needs to be developed .
A transplantation system cannot become an economic category and lead to organs being treated as goods on an internal market .
If this were to happen , criminal groups would spring up that would take advantage of poverty and distress and thus deepen the exploitation of human beings , especially in regions affected by large-scale unemployment , deprivation and hunger .
Mr Heaton-Harris , regarding the meaning of ' GNSS ' , we now have two options : one is ' Galileo Navigation Satellite System ' and the other is ' Global Navigation Satellite System ' .
Which one do you prefer , Mr Heaton-Harris ?
Mr President , do you know , I have never had any sort of power in this place before !
I think I would like to opt for ' Great British ' - but no , we will go for ' global ' .
I am pretty sure it is ' global ' .
I was going to mention that in my Agency explanation of vote .
I shall now talk on the Commission 's discharge for just one minute .
As I have done every time since I entered this place , I voted against the discharge for the European Commission .
I recognise that a lot of work has been going on within the Commission to try and sort out its own accounts .
However , the work has been going on in systems , it has not been going on within the culture that operates within the European Commission . There is still to this day a culture of ' let 's keep our heads down and not report wrongdoings ' in the European Commission .
Occasionally we all meet people working within the Commission who are able to tell us off-the-record things that should not be happening there , but will not go on the record and report it to the heads of their DGs .
I know this place does not like turning down discharges .
It is a great shame because there is no political consequence .
We had a legal opinion on that seven years ago .
As I say , I voted against and I shall continue to do so in my time in this place .
Mr President , I voted for the 2006 discharge of the European Parliament , but against the marathon resolution which accompanied it , because it contains comments and questions that either state the obvious ( paragraph 58 ) , or do not uphold values which I consider important ( paragraph 65 ) .
To think that the majority of this Parliament has just voted that members cannot employ their spouse , but can employ their lover , mistress or toy boy .
Personally I have none of these , but I would still like to point out how absurd it is .
In my intervention earlier , I tried to correct the inaccurate claims about the voluntary pension fund , as did the fund chairman throughout the procedure .
Sadly this was to no avail .
In paragraph 71 , the authors criticise the fact that the fund did not update its actuarial calculations to the end of December 2007 by 15 March 2008 .
Apart from the fact that it is absurd for a report on 2006 to demand the presentation of accounts for 2007 , I can reassure the authors .
The update for 2007 has been done , but it will first be presented to the board of directors of the fund , which is a Luxembourg non-profit organisation .
Mr President , can I just add that to err is human ; to persist is of the devil .
Since I am not devilish , I voted against .
( RO ) In the Pomés Ruiz report Section I - European Parliament , I voted in favour of the amendment forbidding European Parliament members to employ family members .
I believe this is correct text and I welcome the fact that the European Parliament plenary adopted this text .
The reasons are very simple : in some European Union Member States , including the country I come from , Romania , there is a debate regarding the credibility of parliamentary institutions and even of parliaments .
I think this is the correct position especially since , and I will give an example , including in the country I come from , Romania , the head of state himself has often had the political objective to make the institution of the Parliament and parliamentary action less credible , starting with errors or vulnerabilities related to the activity of the Member of Parliament .
This is the reason why , I repeat , I welcome the adoption of this text that could lead , together with other actions , to an increase in the prestige and credibility of Parliamentary institutions in the Member States and at a European level .
I voted against Parliament 's discharge in the light of many of the press reports that have stemmed from an internal audit report drawn up by Parliament 's services .
This report has yet to be published and put out into the public domain .
It says that there are some problems with what Members do with their different allowances in this place .
I think , as Members , we should all be as open and transparent as we possibly can .
The best way to have dealt with the report would have been to put it in the public domain , because then people would have realised that it is not millions of pounds that are at issue , but a very small amount of money - still worth chasing and policing , and giving the Members that abuse the system a great deal of hassle and taking them to the courts over , but not as bad as the general public now think this whole place is .
So I voted against , because I think we should publish this report .
I hope that Parliament 's services , when advising the President of Parliament on any future reports , go for maximum transparency and publish as much as possible in the future .
Mr President , I could have given an explanation of vote on every agency , but in fact you made my point for me in the voting session .
There are now so many agencies that not all of us know what they are and what they do .
In fact , I am surprised that anybody in the House , apart from those who sat on the appropriate committee , knew what the GNSS Supervisory Authority does , or even what its budget was .
I have great concerns that some of these agencies that we have voted to discharge the accounts for do not actually have any legal basis until the Lisbon Treaty is passed by all Member States .
I wonder where the legal basis of the European Agency for Fundamental Rights comes from , for example .
So we are now passing accounts for agencies that do not have a legal basis in this place , and no one particularly cares .
I find that quite upsetting .
I think the European taxpayer would find it quite bemusing , and I happily vote against these agencies , because I think they are anti-democratic .
I think that , if we are going to take responsibility for things , it should be done on the floor of this place and not by hiving off powers to quangos that we do not police properly .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , clearly I have become an unknown face since I have no longer been making explanations of vote in all the sittings , because I asked if I could explain the reason for my vote on the report by Marian Harkin , and the official made a note of it but I have not been called .
Perhaps he did not know who I was .
Mr President , you are the best of all the vice-presidents and I would like to thank you for this because you are allowing me to convey the fact that I am very much in favour of the report by Marian Harkin , which underlines the importance of volunteering in the European Union .
You know that the elderly , pensioners , have a lot of free time available and many of them use it for the benefit of their neighbours , for the benefit of other citizens , both in Europe and elsewhere .
I am delighted that the Commission is being called upon to add the Seniors in Action Programme to the Youth in Action Programme , as I have been saying in the Chambers of this Parliament for many years , so I am delighted to say that finally much good is being done for the voluntary and seniors sector in the European Parliament .
Thank you very much , Mr Fatuzzo .
Do you want your comment that I am the best vice-president to be recorded in the Minutes ?
Well , if you insist , we will record it in the Minutes .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( SV ) We voted in favour of the report , as it is of the utmost importance to strengthen and improve the efficiency of cooperation between Member States in combating terrorism and cross-border crime .
Parliament 's report improves the wording on citizens ' rights with a high level of data protection compared with the German initiative .
This is good .
Unfortunately , however , the report contains wordings on the processing of specific data concerning racial or ethnic origin , etc , and on the powers of foreign officials regarding arrest and questioning during joint operations .
We worked very hard in the committee to have this removed from the report , but were unfortunately unsuccessful .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by Mrs Dührkop Dührkop , who approved , subject to amendments , the initiative of the Federal Republic of Germany with a view to the adoption of a Council Decision on the implementation of the decision on the stepping up of cross-border cooperation , particularly in combating terrorism and cross-border crime .
I would like to congratulate Germany on its initiative , which consists of ensuring that Member States observe the common technical specifications in connection with all requests and answers related to searches and comparisons of DNA profiles , dactyloscopic data ( fingerprint images , palm prints , etc . ) and vehicle registration data .
I support the report 's statement that special categories of data concerning racial or ethnic origin , political opinion , religious or philosophical belief , party or trade union membership , sexual orientation or health should be processed only if absolutely necessary and in proportion to the purpose of the specific case and in compliance with specific safeguards .
in writing . - Conservatives have voted against this report as it extends the principles of the Prüm initiative into further areas which can be better handled by intergovernmental co-operation rather than harmonisation .
The report calls for uniform legal practices at a European level which go wholly against the UK 's established legal systems .
Also the report calls for practices such as the obligatory passing of DNA data to other Member States , regardless of whether the person is convicted or suspected of a crime , and hot pursuit from foreign police forces , who would have the power to set up surveillance operations , arrest and question individuals , which is a breach of civil liberties .
in writing . - ( SV ) The Moderate Party today voted in favour of Mrs Dührkop Dührkop 's ( PSE-ES ) report on the stepping up of cross-border cooperation , particularly in combating terrorism and cross-border crime .
We support the contents of the report in the main .
However , we cannot support the rapporteur 's Amendment 3 .
Our grounds for this are that we strongly distance ourselves from all forms of registration and processing of data on racial and ethnic origin .
Even if the purpose of the recital is to restrict the use of the data in question , we cannot support the text as it nevertheless opens up the possibility of registering and processing such data .
in writing . - ( SV ) Police and judicial cooperation falls within the third pillar and is thus exclusively intergovernmental .
The June List is in favour of increased cooperation between Member States to combat terrorism and other serious cross-border crime .
Decisions in this area should therefore not be taken by the European Parliament or any other supragovernmental body .
Minimum rules on the individual 's access to legal assistance and data protection are laid down in each Member State .
Fundamental and extensive protection is already in place in this respect through the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , which has been signed by all Member States .
A functioning exchange of DNA already exists through Interpol .
It is also important to highlight the privacy aspect which the use of DNA demands .
On this point we are therefore in line with the report regarding requests for the DNA of people who have been acquitted or discharged .
The report , however , goes too far in many respects when it discusses the introduction of framework decisions in many areas such as procedural guarantees and the adoption of a general legal instrument to cover the entire area of police and judicial cooperation .
It even discusses setting up joint task forces .
A country 's military resources are strictly a national matter , and must not be regulated at EU level .
The June List has therefore chosen to vote no to the report .
The report is part of the process of transposing the Prüm Treaty into the Community acquis .
This Treaty is an integral part of the securitarianism that has been brought in under cover of the ' fight against terrorism ' , with the aim of strengthening cross-border cooperation at EU level in the field of ' combating terrorism ' , cross-border crime and immigration .
Despite containing some amendments that improve the initial proposal , the report does not move away from or denounce the creation of a worrying police cooperation framework ( including ' the establishing of joint rapid intervention groups ' , enabling police forces from one Member State to operate in the territory of another ) , the creation of a ' Personal database ' ( including information on DNA , or , if ' necessary ' , on citizens ' political opinions ) and easier access to these for information services , all of which constitutes real violations of the rights , freedoms and guarantees of the citizens of the various Member States .
As a matter of fact , the dangers inherent in such a process have even been highlighted by the ' European Data Protection Supervisor ' itself , which underlines the fact that instruments of this ilk are being implemented ( and have been for some time ) without duly safeguarding the protection of citizens ' personal data .
It is for this reason that we voted against this report .
in writing . - ( SV ) I definitely consider that combating terrorism and cross-border crime is one of the things the EU should cooperate on .
However , I consider that the report contains very many wordings that I cannot support , so I chose to vote against it .
in writing . - ( FR ) Faced with rising crime and threats to its security , the European Union must set itself two key objectives .
The first objective consists of stepping up the fight against terrorism , which transcends borders and knows no limits in terms of violence and the threat it represents .
The second objective remains the protection of fundamental rights on which Europe is built .
The adoption by all Member States of the Prüm Treaty proposed in 2007 by Germany forms part of the much needed improvement of police cooperation within the EU .
The exchange of DNA profiles and valuable information , such as fingerprints and vehicle number-plates , between different national systems has already helped to solve numerous investigations .
From the fight against abductions to international terrorism , not to mention the organisation of transnational events , these measures are essential .
However , European policy must combat crime , rather than build a system that will undermine the rule of law and destabilise democracy .
The accessibility and use of personal data must be governed by European laws , which we can only hope will be adopted swiftly .
This report is a good illustration of the importance of the balance between data use and protection .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the report on cross-border cooperation , combating terrorism and cross-border crime , as this is an immensely important problem that has existed since statehood came into being .
So far , criminals acting in border areas have taken advantage of the unwillingness of states to exchange confidential information , including personal information , and of the right to privacy .
In addition , besides organised criminals and those acting on their own initiative , another important problem has arisen in recent times , and that is international terrorism .
Now , under the auspices of the European Union , in line with the principle of subsidiarity and with advanced and secure telecommunications , we can finally fight crime effectively and prevent terrorist acts .
Thanks to the exchange of such information as DNA profiles , dactyloscopic data and national vehicle registration data , and thanks to broader police and court cooperation , we can ensure that criminals and terrorists do not feel safe in any of the EU Member States , or indeed outside them .
I believe that this is one of the priorities that the EU should engage in without delay .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report by Bárbara Dührkop Dührkop on the initiative of the Federal Republic of Germany with a view to the adoption of a Council Decision on the implementation of Decision 2007 / ... / JHA on the stepping up of cross border cooperation , particularly in combating terrorism and cross-border crime .
The new forms of crime , which have emerged following both the opening up of borders and the enlargement of the EU , demand greater cooperation between Member States in order to control crime and illegal immigration .
It is important that this cooperation is not limited to the seven countries that signed the Prüm Treaty but that , as suggested by the first amendment in the report , a uniform set of procedural guarantees at EU level is laid down .
I believe it is of fundamental importance that the European Union equip itself with a level of data protection which is high , harmonised and therefore able to guarantee law enforcement and the effective protection of citizens .
in writing . - ( CS ) The report by Mrs Bárbara Dührkop Dührkop on cross-border cooperation in combating terrorism and cross-border crime is very important for two reasons : firstly because it is necessary to combat effectively the above-mentioned phenomena , and secondly because of the issue of protection of civil rights and liberties .
Consequently , these issues should be handled in a very sensitive manner .
We need to reconsider Amendment 3 to the draft Council decision , which states that special categories of data concerning racial or ethnic origin , political opinion , religious or philosophical belief , party or trade union membership , sexual orientation or health should be processed only if absolutely necessary and in proportion to the purpose of the specific case and in compliance with specific safeguards .
I see this as potentially seriously flawed .
Who will decide what is necessary and in proportion and how will they reach that decision ?
Will it be some kind of ' Big Brother ' ?
Or an anonymous police officer for whom protection of human rights may be a very minor issue ?
How is health or sexual orientation relevant to combating terrorism ?
These are some of the reasons why I recommend that we reject the draft resolution as it stands : we need a much more precise text as a foundation .
I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by Mrs Jäätteenmäki on a proposal for a decision of the European Parliament amending its decision on the regulations and general conditions governing the performance of the Ombudsman 's duties .
The Ombudsman has also asked for these aspects to be developed .
I welcome the report 's proposals to adapt the Statute of the Ombudsman in order to eliminate any possible uncertainty concerning the capacity of the Ombudsman to conduct thorough and impartial inquiries in alleged cases of maladministration .
Provided that professional secrecy applies , I welcome the obligation for officials to testify .
I also support the fact that access to classified information or documents , in particular to sensitive documents , should be subject to observance by the Ombudsman of rules strictly equivalent to those in force in the institution or body in question .
I congratulate the rapporteur for stressing that the Ombudsman and his staff are required not to divulge any sensitive information or documents falling within the scope of Community legislation on the protection of personal data .
The application of these rules will have to be monitored , which will not be easy .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted in favour of this report which improves on the European Commission 's proposals , although it is not yet clear what will be accepted .
However , as the rapporteur sees it , voting will be concluded when it is known what will be accepted .
By letter of 11 July 2006 addressed to President Pöttering , Mr Diamandouros , the European Ombudsman , requested the European Parliament to initiate the procedure for modification of the Statute of the Ombudsman concerning several provisions he considers not to be the most adequate , namely : the power to intervene in cases before the Court of Justice of the European Union : access to documents of the Institution ; the testimonials of officials ; the information on possible criminal activities ; cooperation with international institutions in the field of Human Rights / Fundamental Rights .
Some of those issues were already dealt with by Parliament in 2001 , at the initiative of the then Ombudsman Mr Söderman .
Parliament then adopted a resolution on 6 September 2001 on the basis of a report by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , which put forward several amendments quite similar to the proposals now advanced .
On that occasion an agreement with the Council , supported by the Commission , seemed within reach , but the negotiations were not concluded due to the expiry of the mandate of Mr Soderman .
in writing . - I supported the Jäätteenmäki report on the performance of the Ombudsman 's duties and in particular welcome the changes to the Institutions ' duty to provide the Ombudsman with information required in his work .
in writing . - I share Ms Anneli Jäätteenmäki 's calls for a revision of the Statute of the European Ombudsman .
The measures proposed within the report will increase the transparency of the EU and should be welcomed .
I voted in support of the report 's recommendations .
I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by Mr Adamou welcoming the Commission Communication ' Organ Donation and Transplantation : Policy Actions at EU level ' , and proposing an integrated approach to ensure the quality and safety of organs , to increase organ availability and to combat organ trafficking .
I welcome the areas of action identified , namely : improving quality and safety , increasing organ availability and making transplantation systems more efficient and accessible , in addition to a mechanism to strengthen cooperation between Member States and the adoption of a Community legal instrument setting quality and safety requirements for organ donation , procurement , testing , preservation , transport and allocation across the EU and the resources needed to meet these requirements .
in writing . - ( SV ) We support the report , as international cooperation to use important organs for transplantation is a good thing .
We seek to promote the added value which can be gained from further coordination , but we do not , however , support harmonisation .
Therefore , we do not consider that the report should be taken as a pretext for setting up a separate EU coordination body , but instead wish to highlight the cooperative forms which already exist , and which are mentioned in the report .
Nor do we support the proposal for a European donor card .
Decisions on the consent rules which are to apply to donation and transplantation should remain the preserve of the Member States , as these are largely based on moral values which are often locally and / or culturally bound .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report by Mr Adamou on organ donation and transplantation : policy actions at EU level , as I believe that increasing public awareness on organ donation and transplantation , maintaining the non-commercial nature of donations and fighting global organ trafficking are important measures to ensure the quality and safety of donations in Europe .
Given the increasing need for organ transplants , the growing transplant waiting lists and the consequent rise in the number of deaths due to a shortage of donated organs , promoting best transplantation policies in the EU is vital for saving more lives and offering European citizens a better quality of life .
Therapeutic use of human organs involving the substitution of a non-functional organ for another one coming from a donor can , if successful , restore a full and healthy life for many years to people who would otherwise often require intensive care .
Although the use of human organs for transplantation has steadily increased in EU countries in recent decades , the number of people requiring a transplant is greater than the number of organs available for transplant .
Official studies state that nearly 40 000 people are currently on waiting lists in Western Europe .
Mortality rate while waiting for a heart , liver or lung transplant usually ranges from 15 to 30 % .
Donor testing is important in minimising the risks to the recipient .
As mentioned in the report , it is essential to screen donors and establish the presence or absence of risk of disease transmission , which involves a set of examinations .
However , there is currently no consensus between Member States on these tests .
Hence the importance of this report to encourage greater cooperation .
in writing . - ( FR ) I would like to use this vote to underline the permanent discrepancy that exists between the words and actions of the European Union in certain areas .
It is one thing to ask Member States to combat organ trafficking and to arm itself with an arsenal of criminal-law deterrents , but what are we supposed to think now that the Commission and several of these same Member States recognise Kosovo and its leaders , some of whom are personally involved in the trafficking of organs removed from Serbian prisoners executed for this purpose , if we are to believe Mrs del Ponte , former President of the International Criminal Tribunal for the Former Yugoslavia ?
What are we supposed to think when no Member State takes sanctions against China , or raises any protest , while witness accounts and investigations all point to the fact that executions are being planned there according to organ requirements , sometimes of foreign patients ?
What will happen to these rich Europeans who get around the organ shortage by engaging in the morbid tourism that encourages these practices ?
Mr Adamou 's report is strangely ambiguous on these issues .
Pious hope on the inside , deafening silence on the outside .
We have seen it all before where certain countries are concerned .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of this report .
Organ donation saves lives ; it is a gift of oneself which is the ultimate act of solidarity .
Unfortunately , there is a continuing organ shortage and in Europe almost 10 people on transplant waiting lists die each day .
The EU must help bring national transplant organisations together .
Increased cooperation would offer guarantees to patients who donate or receive organs outside their own Member State .
Some new Member States whose healthcare systems are less richly endowed could benefit from this .
The organ shortage is all too often linked with organ trafficking .
We are seeing the emergence of forms of ' transplant tourism ' which exploit poverty outside the EU 's borders .
This ' trade ' in human beings risks undermining the confidence of citizens and aggravating the shortage of voluntary organ and tissue donations .
The principle of free donation is also fundamental , although compensation for the costs of organ removal should be paid to living donors .
Finally , we should encourage biotechnology research that will provide researchers with a means of growing organs from existing tissues , either from the patients themselves or from other tissue donors .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Adamou report which deals with an issue of vital importance to all of Europe and encourages cooperation between Member States on matters relating to organ transplantation .
My own country , Scotland , has one of the lowest organ donation rates in the EU and the Scottish Government is working with health departments in the other nations of the UK to improve this situation .
I strongly believe in cooperation across the EU which will complement the transplant systems operating in each country and will encourage the highest standards in quality and safety requirements .
Such cooperation can improve transplant services across Europe , ensuring improved access to donated organs on a non-commercial basis .
We welcome the positions taken by the rapporteur regarding the development of organ donation and transplantation in the EU ; the ban on any form of financial transaction between donor and recipient , and on the commercialisation of transplants ; and the struggle against transplant tourism in countries where trading in organs takes place and the recognition that the trade in organs is linked with social inequalities .
Transplants need to be developed ; they save lives and transform the quality of life of many who are chronically ill , such as kidney patients .
If transplants are to be developed , a strong humanitarian awareness of organ donation needs to be encouraged , and this requires a specific social environment .
It is therefore good that the resolution in question recognises that the trade in organs in itself undermines organ donation and stops transplants from happening more frequently .
For awareness of organ donation to flourish circumstances apparently dictate that EU policy , and the commercialisation of health , welfare , and human needs must be opposed .
For the sake of maximising the profits of multinationals , this policy plunges millions of Europeans , even in our own country , below the poverty threshold , into unemployment and underemployment .
They are forced to sell all they have so that their loved ones can get better .
in writing . - I echo Adamos Adamou 's calls for policy action at EU level in the area of organ donation and transplantation .
Last year around 2 400 people in the UK benefited from an organ transplant , but more than 1 000 people die every year waiting for a suitable donated organ .
Consequently , Member States must take measures to improve their donor pool , through sharing best practice and increasing awareness of the very serious issue we face regarding organ donation .
European governments and institutions must also do more to prevent the shameful trafficking of human organs .
The report calls for measures that are essential to discourage transplant tourism and the more general problems we face on this issue , and I therefore voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) Organ donation in the European Union will face three major challenges in the coming years .
Firstly , there are insufficient organs available in the EU .
Every day , this shortage causes the death of almost 10 patients on transplant waiting lists .
Secondly , the risks linked with organ transplantation continue to be a major concern .
The transmission of diseases such as HIV , some strains of hepatitis or even cancer , remains a reality that affects European citizens .
Finally , EU Member States must tackle the question of organ trafficking , properly and in a coordinated fashion .
Although this is still relatively rare within the Community , it still gives rise to political and , more importantly , ethical concerns .
The recommendations contained in the report by Mr Adamou are a step in the right direction : an exchange of best practice , increased cooperation , more organ sharing between Member States , better public awareness and the need to preserve the voluntary and non-commercial nature of organ donation .
These proposals , if adopted , will significantly and swiftly help to improve the conditions related to organ donation and transplantation .
in writing . - ( SK ) Safe , successful and accessible organ donation and transplantation are vital issues in today 's Europe .
More than 60 000 patients are waiting for a heart , liver , lung or kidney transplant .
Mortality rates while waiting for a transplant usually range from 15 % to 30 % .
Today I voted in favour of the report by my fellow Member Mr Adamou .
I welcome the initiative to establish a legal framework , which would introduce a common methodology and criteria for donor and organ transplant suitability .
I believe that consensus between the Member States is the main condition for increasing the safety and quality of the complete transplantation process , from pre-transplant evaluation and the choice of a suitable donor to the timely operation and complex post-operation monitoring of patients .
As a physician I would also like to stress the importance of close cooperation and exchange of best practices and information between health professionals in Member States .
Alleviating the shortage of organs is a serious challenge for Europe .
I fully supported the rapporteur 's call for the establishment of an efficient European system for identifying persons that could become organ donors upon their death .
Such a system should provide for efficient communication and information methods , making the organs of those who are willing to donate them truly accessible .
Another important step towards increasing donor accessibility should be ensuring better information for the public .
I am sure that if this sensitive debate is held at a national level , it will help to raise public awareness .
in writing . - ( DE ) Hundreds of thousands of people in Europe are living their lives on a waiting list , waiting for a second chance at life .
It would certainly be helpful to improve the common structures and cooperation by way of a European Organ Donor Card , a joint organ donor pool and a transplant hotline .
Austria , like certain other countries , is exemplary in this respect because every Austrian who does not , while they are still alive , register their objection to the use of their organs after death automatically becomes an organ donor .
For those countries where this is not the case , there will need to be a change of awareness , for the spectacular shortage of organ donation is closely linked to a lack of awareness amongst people in the street , but also amongst health professionals .
Only when we address this problem , improve structures and undertake promotional measures can we increase the number of organ donations and transplants , and also bring a halt to the illegal trade in organs .
I voted in favour of the report on organ donation and transplantation : Policy actions at EU level , presented by m Mr Adamou .
As we all know , organ transplants can save lives and improve the day-to-day existence of many of our fellow citizens .
However , the EU is currently suffering from a chronic shortage of organs : today 40 000 patients are waiting for a transplant and it is estimated that 10 of them die each day .
We have tackled this problem in particular by considering measures such as the introduction of a European donor card , stepping up cooperation between Member States , raising public awareness , establishing a transplant ' hotline ' and promoting biotechnology research which may in future allow organs to be grown rather than donated .
However , the need to make up for this organ shortage should not lead us to sacrifice our values .
I am delighted with the fact that this text insists on voluntary , unpaid and wherever possible anonymous donation , inviting Member States to fight more effectively against organ trafficking and transplant tourism .
in writing . - ( FR ) On 23 April , we will ratify a report on organ donation and transplantation and the actions to be taken to increase the number of organs available .

This is a subject of the utmost importance : 10 people die each day in Europe due to the organ shortage ; more than 15 000 European patients are on waiting lists ; the average waiting time for a kidney - the most frequently transplanted organ - is more than 24 months in Belgium .
These are difficult statistics to accept .
I backed the initiative to launch a European donor card .
Considering the urgent nature of organ removal , once a potential donor is identified it would be extremely useful if we had a standard European card that could be read and understood by everyone .
This initiative is also backed by the vast majority of Belgian citizens , the large majority of whom are in favour of organ donation .
This , combined with the ' presumed consent ' system and proper coordination between transplant centres , explains why our country leads the way in successful transplants .
Our one regret is that we were not more ambitious in recommending that the presumed consent system be adopted across Europe .
in writing . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the report by Mr Adamou on ' Organ donation and transplantation : Policy actions at EU level , on organ donation and transplantation : Policy actions at EU level ' for therapeutic purposes , which emphasises the importance of healthcare for citizens at EU and global level .
Consequently I believe that continuing efforts on research are necessary , in order to keep developing new treatment possibilities and better technical and organisational procedures for transplants , by coordinating projects and programmes , including between Member States .
I also believe it is of fundamental importance to promote the culture of organ donation by conducting awareness campaigns so that the increase in donations continues , and that this should include a reminder to citizens that they are four times more likely to receive an organ than to have to donate one .
Finally , I would underline the absolute importance of combating organ trafficking both within and outside the EU , by recognising that this unlawful action is always synonymous with poverty and desperation .
in writing . - The need for greater cooperation across Member States is essential if we are to help EU citizens who require an organ transplant .
in writing . - ( PL ) I supported the Adamou report on organ donation and transplantation , as I believe that organ transplantation is a major step forward in the service that science offers to man .
Many people owe their lives to a transplanted organ and gain a better quality of life .
An increase in social awareness is needed , with an associated increase in the number of disinterested donors .
I feel that the key factor in fighting organ deficiency is to create an effective system that identifies people who could , after their death , become organ donors when all the requirements in force in the Member States regarding expression of consent have been fulfilled .
Social awareness and public opinion play an enormous role , so another important factor must be continuing education .
I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by Mrs Harkin on the role of volunteering in contributing to economic and social cohesion .
I admire her excellent research into volunteering as a major force nurturing civil society and strengthening solidarity - one of the core values of the EU .
This recognition of the usefulness of volunteering in both the public and private sphere is essential to its development and to finding the balance between economic , social and the environmental aspects ; i.e. the sustainable development that is at the heart of the European approach .
I regret that the report does not tackle the issue of the value of volunteering without also dealing with the type of voluntary activity that could be classed as paid volunteering since the rapporteur has defined volunteering as being unpaid .
This report is an important step towards the vital recognition of Non-Profit Institutions ( NPIs ) .
in writing . - ( PL ) Mr President , voluntary work makes a priceless contribution to building a civil society and full democracy by involving citizens in activities at local and regional level .
The potential to develop such activities is of particular importance in countries where an active civil society runs up against persecution from elites who are exercising power .
I supported Mrs Harkin 's report because I agree that the European Commission should promote cross-border projects in the sphere of voluntary work where our nearest neighbour , Belarus , is concerned .
For Belarusians in particular this would be a specific expression of support for their efforts in fighting the Lukashenko regime .
in writing . - ( PT ) There can be no doubt that what is known as ' volunteering ' fulfils a very important social role as a contribution to finding answers to citizens ' problems and needs , namely by promoting effective solidarity and mutual assistance .
For this reason we disagree with the idea of ' volunteering ' as a matter of ' significant savings for public services ' .
On the contrary , we consider that the more States improve the public services offered and guaranteed to their citizens , the more important the role of volunteering will be .
As is mentioned , it is vital to ensure that ' voluntary activity is additional to public services and not a replacement of them ' .
' Volunteering ' cannot be used as a pretext or a means of encouraging States to neglect their responsibilities , specifically their social duties , by handing them over to pseudo-charitable organisations .
It is with this backdrop in mind that we are fighting for the need for effective and adequate support for non-profit organisations , among many others , the cooperative movement , local bodies and companies , residents ' committees and sports , recreational , cultural , youth or children 's associations .
Lastly , we underscore the fact that voluntary activity also depends on workers having free time , hence the need to avoid over-exploitation through working hours , low salaries or precariousness .
in writing . - ( PL ) A democratic system cannot function effectively without a civil society .
I heartily welcome all initiatives that favour the building of social bonds and participative democracy , and I do not doubt that voluntary work is one such initiative .
I am also aware of how involvement and working for the benefit of others have a further effect in shaping positive attitudes to life .
The contribution made by the voluntary sector to promoting intercultural dialogue and social integration and to rebuilding social trust and reintegrating those previously excluded from society is also invaluable .
I would also like to draw your attention to what , in my opinion , is the very significant economic aspect of voluntary work .
Volunteering is an excellent opportunity to acquire new abilities and skills , thus improving one 's chances in the employment market and enabling a smooth transition to be made from study to occupational activities , which is invaluable to young people in particular .
Moreover , as the report 's author remarks , voluntary work plays a significant part in shaping gross domestic product , which should not be overlooked .
I hope that the proposals contained in the report will persuade the European Commission and Member States to come up with further solutions that assist in promoting and institutionally reinforcing the voluntary sector .
in writing . - I voted in favour of the Harkin report recognising the immense contribution of the voluntary sector in promoting social and economic cohesion .
The report expressly calls for authorities at the Member State , regional and local levels to recognise the value of volunteering , and to work in partnership with voluntary organisations .
Such cooperation is , I believe , vital and in this context I welcome my own government 's recent moves to increase substantially resources available to the voluntary sector across Scotland .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted in favour of the resolution regarding the contribution of volunteering to the European social cohesion , but I would like to make some specifications of a financial-budgetary nature .
In the Youth in Action Programme , the European Union has launched the European Voluntary Service .
It gives young people the possibility to undergo training courses in various professions or to work with non-governmental organizations in another Member State .
The operators of this service are companies and NGOs accredited by the European Commission in each Member State .
But the problem is the budget of the European Voluntary Service .
This is an amount that does not exceed 42 million euros every year , an amount that should finance the travel costs of a few tens of thousands of European volunteers , as well as the minimum related expenses .
The interest of young people is very high and there are many organizations that want to implement this programme .
In Romania only , a new Member State , there are over 60 organizations accredited for the exchange of volunteers and over 5,000 applications for this training course .
Although it has proven a highly attractive programme , unfortunately , the European Voluntary Service continues to be financed inadequately .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of this report highlighting the role of volunteering in contributing to economic and social cohesion in the EU .
There are more than 100 million European citizens engaged in voluntary activity , corresponding on average to an economic contribution of 5 % of GDP .
Volunteering leads to the direct involvement of citizens in local development and plays an important role in the acquisition of skills , and improving the employability of volunteers , enabling them to gain a very wide range of skills and competences .
I support this report which emphasises the fact that Member States and regional and local authorities should recognise the value of volunteering in promoting social and economic cohesion and should develop strategies to encourage volunteering .
The Commission should work towards putting in place a system for all Community funds whereby volunteer activity can be recognised as a contribution to co-financed projects .
The Commission , the Member States and regional and local authorities should promote volunteering through education at all levels so that it is seen as a normal contribution to community life .
in writing . - I welcome Ms Marian Harkin 's report on the role of volunteering in contributing to social and economic cohesion .
The contribution volunteering makes to society is invaluable .
Indeed , the fact that 100 million citizens across our 27 Member States are already engaged in voluntary activity is an encouraging figure that should be built upon .
I voted in favour of the report 's recommendations .
in writing . - ( DE ) Unpaid work by voluntary helpers is vital for the public good .
It would be impossible to deal with disasters like flooding or major fires , in particular , without unpaid , unsalaried workers .
We must realise that , without voluntary labour , a great deal would simply not function and also could not be financed by the state .
In many voluntary organisations , the number of active members is continually falling .
The reasons for this include a shorter period of community service in lieu of military service , families relocating and pressure at work or school .
For example , as a result of staff shortages voluntary fire service members are not being allowed to leave their workplace , even if the country reimburses their employer for their wages .
Companies need a strong message that they also benefit from voluntary labour and we must make best-practice comparisons as to how voluntary activity can continue to be made attractive , so that we can achieve our goals .
in writing . - ( SK ) Voluntary work does not receive the support and attention it deserves in the European Union .
This is why I voted in favour of the report by the rapporteur , Mrs Marian Harkin , on the role of volunteering in contributing to economic and social cohesion .
I agree with the rapporteur that the European institutions must set up a flexible and non-bureaucratic support system .
Voluntary work must not be underestimated since it represents an important part of democratic life in Europe and involves more than 100 million Europeans of different ages , faiths and nationalities .
It reflects the huge determination of individuals and strengthens the bond between citizens and the EU .
Volunteering has a long-standing tradition in the countries of Western Europe and in the US .
In contrast , non-governmental and non-profit-making organisations in post-communist countries introduced voluntary activities only after the democracies had been installed .
The World Organisation of the Scout Movement was completely banned by the totalitarian communist regime .
At present , its activities are attracting more and more enthusiasts into its ranks : people of different ages and from different parts of the EU .
Today we cannot imagine an event without the presence of church and charity organisations , without the presence of the Red Cross .
Volunteers also help to invigorate and mobilise citizens from disadvantaged communities , for example in the European Volunteer Centre and in the European Youth Forum , as regards the principle of civil society , through development and by reviving and promoting traditions , originality and diversity of the regions .
I see volunteering as a form of renewable energy and consequently support the rapporteur 's recommendation that 2011 be declared the European Year of Volunteering .
I can vouch for the social value of volunteering and I support its development and the recognition of its worth in our societies .
I should like to make clear that the reality of volunteering may still be somewhat blurred in the statistical data , in definitions and in their usage .
The clarifications included in the report seem important to me and the measures suggested for shedding light on the existing data on this type of activity are necessary as this is an unpaid activity , which thus needs to be clearly differentiated from the activities of non-governmental organisations .
The added value of these voluntary activities is very important for our societies , and it is therefore legitimate to recognise and distinguish it .
However , we should not take advantage of its altruistic nature to replace the efforts that societies , responsible authorities or the private sector should make to boost the opportunities offered at Community level .
The various Community funds are designed to stimulate the European economy and foster , socio-economic cohesion and growth and sustainable development of European societies .
Voluntary activity is a bonus that we , as citizens , offer others .
We should encourage it and recognise it , but never view it as an extra that we can take advantage of or use as an excuse for doing less towards offering and creating a constantly improving quality of life in European societies .
in writing . - Volunteering in the EU requires greater recognition .
The Harkin report sets out ways in which the Commission and Member States can help volunteering .
I hope that the Commission will give its backing to 2011 being the European Year for Volunteering .
I would like next year - 2009 - in Scotland to be the Scottish Year for Volunteers .
in writing . - ( SK ) Firstly , there is the problem of the financing for non-governmental organisations from Community funds .
Small organisations that carry out very useful activities at local and regional level need special help to draw up applications .
The paperwork that must be completed is almost the size of the Bratislava phone book .
Bureaucracy has become so complicated that it stifles volunteers ' enthusiasm .
We have to protect Community programmes from being abused but caution and prevention must not make them less accessible to citizens .
Secondly , based on my personal experience as a member of the board of the Forum for Life , I can testify that volunteering contributes to social cohesion by creating human capital , regardless of the volunteer 's age .
In the Forum for Life young people learn responsibility and generosity and gain experience in building interpersonal relationships .
Human capital is volunteering 's greatest contribution to social cohesion .
Therefore , the Member States and the regions are asked to apply this unsurpassed form of investment in our future .
Thirdly , volunteering must receive sufficient recognition .
The men and women who devote their time to voluntary work while coping with changes in the labour market and in the importance of intergenerational solidarity in families and society must receive official recognition .
In the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , I am the rapporteur for the report on this problem , which means that we will be able to continue this debate in the autumn .
in writing . - ( PT ) Bearing in mind that it is a public institution managing considerable financial sums , the EIB should make detailed information available on projects and actions funded .
The EIB currently provides some general information on projects funded , including the country receiving the funds .
Nevertheless , such information is insufficient .
We therefore regret the rejection of an amendment tabled by our group , asking the EIB to extend its strive for transparency to disclosing the financial beneficiaries of global loans lent through financial intermediaries .
Furthermore , and among other important aspects , we disagree with the EIB having the objective of completing the single market by financing infrastructures aimed at liberalising markets - as is the case with energy - or that the emphasis should be placed on financing ' public-private partnerships ' following a policy of using public funds to finance major private capital .
On the contrary , the EIB should use its financial resources as an instrument to effectively achieve ' economic and social cohesion ' by promoting actions to reduce regional disparities , encourage real convergence and stimulate growth and employment , particularly in the EU 's least economically developed regions , as well as towards an effective cooperation policy .
The EIB is called on to give more vigorous support to the financing of private capital , reinforce competition , promote the privatisation of energy , transport and planning infrastructure , and to fund large projects in partnership with private entities .
This infrastructure is useful for capital , and it involves simultaneous privatisation , which is tantamount to speculation .
The EIB is geared to the rules of competition and the free market ; instead of meeting the needs of the people , it secures new profits .
The monopolies drain Community and national funding , exploited infrastructure and major projects , as well as resources given to them by the EIB .
The monopolies thus reduce the already small amount of private capital they use by taking on projects that are detrimental to the community as a whole .
Tax revenue and the reduction of allowances and subsidies to tenants , pensioners , farmers and the working classes as a whole have been channelled into funding the monopolies .
Wind generators which destroy the environment , as in the Aegean Islands , sharply increased tolls on major public roads , private and public sector collaborations and so on - all are for the sake of profit made from contracting with individuals , and , of course , they are backed by state guarantees .
Similar projects with no social control are also promoted in third countries to secure greater profits for businesses in the name of growth - the growth of capital , naturally .
I voted for discharge in respect of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2006 and the report by Mr Jørgensen , which recommends granting discharge to the Commission .
The report points out that 80 % of Community expenditure is administered by the Member States under ' shared management ' and that each Member State must be able to take responsibility for the management of EU funds received by it .
Currently , this is accounted for either through a single national management declaration or in the form of several declarations within a national framework .
There is an urgent need for an agreement between the Commission and the Member States on the reporting procedures for shared management in future , since it is deplorable that for structural measures , internal policies and external actions payments are still affected by high material errors at the level of implementing organisations .
I regret the Commission 's tacit acceptance of the collective irresponsibility of the majority of the Member States concerning financial management of the EU .
Finally , I support the idea of a European property authority .
in writing . - ( NL ) The Committee on Budgetary Control would like to grant the European Commission discharge for its financial management over the 2006 budget year .
I do not support that decision , as I feel that postponing the discharge decision until autumn would be a better idea .
The European Commission is trying to rectify the large number of errors in relation to the structural funds .
In addition , the European Parliament would also like to follow up on the proposed items for action in a working group .
It remains to be seen , however , whether the actions will have the desired effect .
After all , the number of errors in relation to the structural funds has been too high for many years now .
The practicalities with regard to the structural funds are unmanageable : errors arise as a result of excessive and widely varying rules for recipients of subsidies .
The rules are an element of the legislation that applies until 2013 .
More focused and stringent auditing must address the problems at this point .
By postponing discharge , Parliament would consider the results more thoroughly and would keep up the pressure .
In addition , Parliament can encourage the Member States to make more of an effort in relation to the national management declarations , in which the Minister is responsible for investing EU funds into the Member State .
Finally , I am calling for a suitable solution to be found with regard to the position of assistants , so that there are no problems with regard to their social obligations and tax payments .
in writing . - The Court of Auditors has been unable to approve the EU 's books for the 13th year running .
Although some progress has been made , this must continue to be tackled urgently and vigorously .
Conservative MEPs are determined to keep pushing the Commission towards substantive reforms that we have long been calling for .
There should be zero tolerance of waste , fraud and mismanagement .
The Commission has political responsibility and we will subject the budgetary control process to rigorous scrutiny .
But it is not only the Commission that has responsibility for accounting .
Around 80 per cent of EU money is actually spent in the Member States .
Parliament 's report on the Commission 's budget highlights the need for greater controls and coordination at a national level .
Member States need to take responsibility for these funds through national management declarations .
Fortunately , progress is being made here but , up to now , too little to ensure a favourable Statement of Assurance .
It is for this fundamental reason that Conservatives will once again be voting against the 2006 discharge for the European Commission and other institutions .
Among other important aspects , we emphasise that :
It is noteworthy that ' doubts ' have once again been raised as to the use of Community funds in the scope of the EU 's ' external action ' .
Doubts regarding final recipients , the amounts actually spent , the projects funded , basically , to what end the sums were actually put ( we could add : in Iraq , in Afghanistan or in Kosovo , to name but a few examples ) .
Curiously , the majority of the EP , normally so impressive in demanding measures , is being cautious in this case .
Why should this be ?
Furthermore , once again , outstanding budgetary commitments related to structural policies and the Cohesion Fund continue to increase , reaching EUR 131.6 billion .
It is worth remembering that , in accordance with the ' n + 2 rule ' , this amount will ' expire ' if it is not used by the end of 2008 .
It is also worth noting that the Court of Auditors has pointed out that under the common agricultural policy , the Single Payment Scheme has given rise to a significant increase in the number of hectares and beneficiaries receiving direct aid .
Among these , the Court has identified railway companies , horse riding / breeding clubs and golf / leisure clubs , as well as city councils , and has recognised that entitlements have been allocated to landowners who have never carried out any agricultural activity ...
in writing . - I support Mr Jørgensen 's report on discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Union general budget for the financial year 2006 , Section III - Commission .
Cooperation between Parliament and the Commission on such issues , especially regarding the implementation of the Structural Funds action plan , is to be welcomed .
I therefore voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - I am dissatisfied that the Commission has not given a very exacting account of where money has gone and what it was spent on , particularly in the field of external actions .
At a time when the EU is seeking to expand its areas of external , action it is unacceptable that accounting should be dealt with in such a casual manner .
in writing . - ( PL ) On 22 April 2008 an important discussion was held in connection with the vote on the budget discharge for 2006 .
Despite a string of critical conclusions relating to the evaluation of budget execution for 2006 , a positive application was submitted to Parliament for the discharge to be issued .
I would like to comment on several important problems .
Firstly , EU bureaucracy is too well developed , and so we must carry out a suitable review in agencies and similar institutions around the Commission 's Directorates-General .
Secondly , the procedures for and the entire system of public orders need to be simplified to enable EU funds to be utilised .
Thirdly , beneficiaries are looking for a greater number of smaller projects and projects that are easier for the average citizen to access .
Fourthly , the progress made in the way EU funds are being utilised in the area of the common agricultural policy is worth noting .
Meanwhile , there should be an investigation into the reason why there is a low level of take-up for the ERDF and ESF cohesion funds in the new Member States .
Fifthly , some Member States have entered certificates audited by national control agencies relating to the management of EU funds .
This form of financial management in the EU should be extended to take in other countries of the Community .
Finally , it is worth emphasising that 2006 is the last year of the Berlin Agenda ( 2000-2006 financial perspective ) , so this should be a budget year that features a good take-up of EU money .
in writing . - ( DE ) I voted against the discharge of the Commission 's accounts because , in many areas , budget funds were not used frugally and efficiently in 2006 .
This applies particularly to money from the Structural Funds , the corruption in many areas that was exposed in 2007 , and contracts for building security .
I have submitted several written questions with regard to the latter , which have not been answered satisfactorily by the Commission .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for discharge to the President of the European Parliament in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 , and the report by Mr Pomés Ruiz recommending that Parliament vote for discharge .
I welcome the idea that the new assistants ' statute should enter into force at the same time as the Members ' Statute .
Concerning the parliamentary assistance allowance , I believe that the contractual freedom of MEPs has to be maintained , which is a condition of their independence , under the supervision of national authorities in accordance with the principle of subsidiarity .
Therefore , I am opposed to any measure limiting the freedom of Members to recruit their assistants , provided of course that work is actually carried out and paid accordingly .
Concerning the voluntary pension fund , which is a supplementary pension scheme financed jointly by the MEP and the employer , I agree with the publication of the names of beneficiaries and with the fact that the reform of this pension scheme should take place alongside the reform of the Members ' Statute .
Finally , I support the evaluation of staff needs to decide how many officials will be needed to assist MEPs following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
in writing . - ( FR ) The 30 or so reports voted on today concerning the discharge of the management of Community finances by the various EU institutions and agencies show that there is budgetary control .
It also shows that it is precisely this control that helps highlight the failings , waste and abuses in the management of structural funds and external aid , or at least some of them .
However , these reports also show that in spite of everything , Parliament has chosen to approve the management of European finances .
This is not a critical exercise ; it is a political show of support for the Brussels machine of which it is part .
Admittedly , it is concerned by the shortcomings highlighted by the audit report on the parliamentary assistants ' allowance .
It is also significant to note that the transparency which Parliament is so quick to demand from everyone else - the Council , Commission , Member States and agencies - clearly does not apply to it .
This report , which could seriously undermine the reputation of this house , is not available to the public , and not even to all MEPs .
Taking corrective measures after the event is not enough to dismiss these serious charges , and keeping them secret will not make them disappear .
in writing . - ( PT ) The discharge for the European Parliament 's 2006 budget is tainted by suspicion , and all Members have been unacceptably tarred with this brush , because of the decision to classify as ' confidential ' the internal audit report for 2006 , which allegedly refers to irregularities in the use of the parliamentary assistance allowance .
A decision of this kind places all elected Members of the EP under suspicion , which we cannot accept .
Consequently , our parliamentary group put forward an amendment insisting that ' the internal auditor 's report be immediately made available to all Members of Parliament and to the public ' .
Unfortunately this proposal was rejected by the majority in Parliament .
As regards multilingualism , it is worrying that use of the EU 's official languages is increasingly assessed from the ' economic ' angle - that is to say , by taking its costs into consideration - and that new provisions periodically arise aimed at restricting their use , which jeopardises the right of the various speakers to speak and listen in their mother tongue in meetings or on official visits in the scope of the European Parliament 's activity .
We further regret the fact that Parliament did not approve the amendment tabled by our Parliamentary group calling for the use of open-source software in the EP .
in writing . - ( FI ) I could not vote in favour of point 65 in report by Mr Pomés Ruiz , because it does not define the notion of relatives more precisely .
If the text had spoken of prohibiting a ' family member ' from being employed , point 65 would , I think , have been more defensible and acceptable .
in writing . - ( PL ) The rapporteur , Mr Pomés Ruiz , has written a good report .
I am pleased that the President of the European Parliament has accepted the principle of political dialogue in the context of the discharge procedure .
I am also glad to see the offer made by the Secretary-General to hold regular meetings with the Committee on Budgetary Control on the implementation of Parliament 's budget , outside the framework of the annual discharge procedure .
in writing . - I voted against the motion for a resolution on this report , because I believe it is the height of hypocrisy for Members to vote to ban family members from legitimate employment on the one hand , and then refuse to open up details of the taxpayer-funded private pension scheme which they themselves benefit from on the other .
This includes , of course , the issue of whether Members repay their own contributions that are taken out of the general expenditure allowance paid to Members , as allegedly we believe many do not .
At best this is not transparent , at worst it is blatant hypocrisy .
in writing . - I am sorry to say that I voted against this report .
I could not support the reference to the Lisbon Treaty in paragraph 10 , which takes account of the new budget procedure arising from the Treaty of Lisbon .
in writing . - It is disappointing that Members did not vote for more openness and the clear publication of the internal auditors ' report .
in writing . - All the amendments that the EPLP supported in plenary today on the discharge of the European Parliament 's 2006 budget were aimed at increasing transparency in matters where Parliament is responsible for administering public money .
Amendment 16 : Following the disclosure of some of the details contained in the report by members of the Committee on Budgetary Control , the EPLP believes that , providing that ongoing investigations are not compromised , the publication of this report is in the public interest .
Amendment 4 : The EPLP believes that this amendment reinforces the need for action to follow up on actions taken following the internal auditor 's report .
Amendment 7 : The EPLP voted in favour of this amendment , as it is important that the Budgetary Control Committee has a right to scrutiny over the plans for both of these statutes .
Amendment 11 : The EPLP believes that , as the voluntary pension fund is partly paid through public funds , the list of members should be made public .
in writing . - I voted against this simply because I do not want the EU telling me who I can and who I cannot employ or engage .
I voted for discharge in respect of the implementation of the Council budget for the financial year 2006 , based on the report by Mr Lundgren recommending that the European Parliament should grant discharge to the Secretary-General of the Council .
I regret that , unlike other institutions , the Council does not publish an annual activity report , citing the Gentlemen 's Agreement of 1970 .
However , it seems essential to do so in order for the Council be more accountable to European citizens .
Under this Gentlemen 's Agreement , the Council undertakes to make no amendments to the estimate of expenditure of the European Parliament .
This undertaking is only binding in so far as this estimate of expenditure does not conflict with Community provisions , in particular with regard to the Staff Regulations of Officials and Conditions of Employment of Other Servants , and to the seat of the institutions .
In terms of the area of Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) , I support the call for maximum transparency and to make sure that , in accordance with point 42 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 , no operating CFSP expenditure should appear in the Council 's budget .
Nevertheless , I believe that the Council should have a discretionary budget for the CFSP .
in writing . - ( PT ) The word ' transparency ' is bandied about a great deal and many demands are placed on ( some ) Member States in this area at budgetary and economic policy level .
Nevertheless , the Council , the EU 's supranational decision-making body made up of representatives of the various Member State governments - which will see its powers increased if the ' Lisbon ' Treaty is adopted - would appear to be immune from such ' demands ' as it has not submitted its annual activity report .
' Do what I say , not what I do ' ...
This could be the Council 's working motto for the 2006 discharge process .
Although the European Parliament report voted on today does not take a tougher , critical line on the Council 's stance , it does at least call for this decision to be reconsidered , as well as for more information , namely regarding the amounts used under the Common Foreign and Security Policy ( CFSP ) .
It calls for an indication of the exact nature of expenses , item by item , and an ex-post assessment of European Security and Defence Policy ' missions ' and of the actions of EU Special Representatives - clarification , to our mind , of the amounts used in the EU 's interference and militarisation policy .
I voted for discharge in respect of the implementation of the Court of Justice ( ECJ ) budget for the financial year 2006 , based on the report by Mr Lundgren recommending that Parliament should grant discharge to the Court of Justice 's Registrar .
I am delighted with the adoption by the ECJ of a code of conduct applying to Members and former Members of the Court of Justice , the Court of First Instance and the Civil Service Tribunal , including an obligation to submit a declaration of financial interests , although it is regrettable that this information is not published on the ECJ 's website .
I note that the building issues ( problem with the appointment of an independent expert for the extension of the main building ; the signing of a lease-purchase contract between the Grand Duchy of Luxembourg and the ECJ setting out the provisions necessary to supplement the framework contract of 2001 and providing for the sale to the ECJ of the land on which the complex is situated for the symbolic price of EUR 1 when the ECJ becomes the owner of the buildings ; lack of appropriate competition ) confirm the need to create a European authority to handle all building-related matters for our institutions .
I voted for discharge in respect of the implementation of the Court of Auditors budget for the financial year 2006 , based on the report by Mr Lundgren recommending that the European Parliament should grant discharge to the Court of Auditors ' Secretary-General .
I congratulate them on the quality of the accounts , which were audited with a favourable opinion by an external firm and by the internal auditor .
In terms of declarations of Members ' financial interests , like my fellow Members , I note that in compliance with the ECA 's Code of Conduct , ECA Members communicate a declaration of their financial interests and other assets ( including shares , convertible bonds and investment certificates as well as land and real estate , together with their spouses ' professional activities ) .
I agree with my colleagues that Members of all EU institutions should be required to submit a declaration of financial interests , which should be accessible on the Internet via a public register .
However , a distinction must be made between enrichment , which should measure amounts , and the question of conflicts of interest , which should show the nature of assets held directly or indirectly and the personal relationships involved .
in writing . - ( PT ) This explanation of vote merely serves to illustrate that one of the aspects analysed in the 2006 Court of Auditors ' discharge was the shortage of staff , given the volume of work this EU institution has to deal with .
It had already been noted in previous years that this Court lacked a sufficient number of officials to be able to operate fully and carry out its control functions .
Although some headway has been made in this area , the shortages remain to this day .
The European Parliament 's report itself reveals that this is partly due to the gap between the salary offered and the high cost of living in Luxembourg , where the Court of Auditors is located .
It is our firm belief that the effects of ' price stability ' policy , that is to say wage restraint , are being felt here too : more exploitation .
I voted for discharge in respect of the implementation of the European Economic and Social Committee ( EESC ) budget for the financial year 2006 , based on the report by Mr Lundgren recommending that Parliament should grant discharge to the EESC 's Secretary-General .
Like many Members , I welcome the signature in December 2007 of a new Administrative Cooperation Agreement between the EESC and the Committee of the Regions ( CoR ) for the period 2008 to 2014 , aware that such cooperation will be financially advantageous for the European taxpayer .
In terms of controls , in its annual activity report , the EESC considered the number of ex post controls performed in 2006 insufficient .
This situation seems to have improved , however .
It is crucial that the controls carried out are rigorous .
We should be pleased at the personal assurance given by the EESC 's Secretary-General regarding the efficiency and regularity of ex ante and ex post controls .
At the same time , like many Members , I congratulate the EESC for setting up an audit committee made up of three EESC Members , whose tasks include the verification of the independence of the Internal Audit unit and the assessment of actions taken in response to the recommendations contained in the audit reports .
I voted for discharge in respect of the implementation of the Committee of the Regions budget for the financial year 2006 , based on the report by Mr Lundgren recommending that Parliament should grant discharge to the Committee of the Regions ' Secretary-General .
Like many Members , I welcome the signature in December 2007 of a new Administrative Cooperation Agreement between the EESC and the CoR for the period 2008 to 2014 , aware that such cooperation will be financially advantageous for European taxpayers .
The new Agreement keeps the most important areas ( infrastructures , IT and telecommunications as well as translation , including the production of documents ) within the Joint Services ' remit , while a limited number of services are de-coupled ( internal services , socio-medical service , the library and prepress ) .
I am delighted at the outcome of the unfortunate business of travel expenses for members of the CoR and salary transfers for some officials .
Finally , I am delighted at the increased independence and resources of the financial verification service .
I voted for discharge to the European Ombudsman in respect of the implementation of the budget for the financial year 2006 , based on the report by Mr Lundgren .
Like many Members , I am surprised that over the period 2003 to 2006 , the Ombudsman 's commitment appropriations have steadily increased from EUR 4 438 653 to EUR 7 682 538 ( + 73 % ) and posts from 31 to 57 units ( + 84 % ) , while complaints increased by 57 % and new inquiries opened from 253 to 258 ( + 2 % ) .
At the operational level , I welcome the signing of the new framework cooperation agreement with Parliament for the provision of administrative services , and the appointment of the Ombudsman 's first Secretary-General on 1 August 2006 .
It seems that the efficiency of controls could be improved in certain areas .
I am also surprised by the recruitment difficulties mentioned in the Ombudsman 's 2006 annual report , especially in relation to qualified lawyers , due to the two successive waves of enlargement ( 2004 and 2007 ) , to staff turnover and to the difficulty in attracting and retaining candidates in Strasbourg with temporary contracts .
I voted for discharge to the European Data Protection Supervisor ( EDPS ) in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 , based on the report by Mr Lundgren recommending that Parliament should grant discharge .
Like many Members , I welcome the initiative taken by the EDPS and the Assistant EDPS to publish an annual declaration of their financial interests , in a form similar to that of Members of the European Parliament .
It is fortunate that the administrative cooperation agreement between the Secretaries-General of the Commission , Parliament and the Council , signed on 7 December 2006 together with the EDPS , was renewed for a further period of 3 years with effect from 16 January 2007 .
Finally , we should note that the processes of ex post prior checking and issuing final opinions by the EDPS have well advanced and that the EDPS has decided to set up an internal control structure appropriate to its activities and requirements .
I voted for discharge in respect of the implementation of the budget of the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions for the financial year 2006 , based on the report by Mr Martin recommending that Parliament should grant the Director discharge .
The discharge process should be simplified and rationalised for satellite agencies , which have increased in number ( from 8 in 2000 to 20 in 2006 ) and now represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the call for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of every existing agency and that it should have no qualms about closing an agency in case of a negative evaluation of its added value .
Similarly , improvements are urgently needed to agencies ' internal audit procedures , and I welcome the possibility of an inter-agency disciplinary board .
I am surprised that the Court of Auditors once again found high carry-over rates in the implementation of the Foundation 's budget ( 43 % for administrative expenditure and 45 % for operating activities ) and at the doubts raised by the Court over the Foundation 's compliance with the budget annuality rule .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of discharge for the Director of the European Training Foundation in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close an agency if the analysis concludes that it is not useful .
The internal audit procedures of the agencies also need urgent improvement and I support the possibility of having a common disciplinary board for all the agencies .
I am surprised that the Court of Auditors did not mention that the Director of the Foundation 's declaration of assurance was subject to reservations .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of discharge for the Director of the European Centre for the Development of Vocational Training ( CEDEFOP ) in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close an agency if the analysis concludes that it is not useful .
The Internal audit procedures of the agencies also need urgent improvement and I support the possibility of having a common disciplinary board for all the agencies .
I welcome the creation of a framework for cooperation between CEDEFOP and the European Foundation for the Improvement of Living and Working Conditions with a view to ensuring that available research funding is used in areas of common interest .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of discharge for the Director of the Translation Centre for the bodies of the European Union in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close an agency if the analysis concludes that it is not useful .
The internal audit procedures of the agencies also need urgent improvement and I support the possibility of having a common disciplinary board for all the agencies .
It is surprising to note the accumulated budget surplus of the Translation Centre of EUR 16.9 million in 2006 and that in 2007 , the Centre should reimburse around EUR 9.3 million to its clients .
This accumulation of surplus appears to show that the method that the Centre uses for pricing its translations is not precise enough .
in writing . - ( SK ) Europe needs multilingualism in order to survive .
The first European Community Directive in 1958 refers to multilingualism .
The Union does not use just one or several languages of its own choosing , which the majority of its citizens might not understand .
Translations of legislative , political and administrative documents enable the Union to fulfil its legal obligations .
Multilingualism contributes to improving the transparency , legitimacy and efficiency of the Union .
The restrictions caused by the multilingual regime have positive a influence on documents , which are more concise and produced within a given time frame .
On behalf of the Slovak language ( and those who use it ) , I am calling for the measures needed to solve the problem of the lack of jobs for translators in the EU institutions to be included in the budget for 2009 .
I ask the European Parliament to translate without delay , and to continue translating , all legislative , political and administrative documents from this term into Slovak and into all the other official languages of the Union , so that the citizens can monitor the political activities of all the institutions , the most important being the verbatim reports of proceedings of the parliamentary debates .
I am putting it on record that I am making a written declaration in favour of the preservation of the multilingual regime , and I call on the Slovak translators and interpreters to contribute , via their linguistic knowledge , to multilingualism in Europe .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of discharge for the Director of the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control in respect of the implementation of its budget for the Financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close an agency if the analysis concludes that it is not useful .
The internal audit procedures of the agencies also need urgent improvement and I support the possibility of having a common disciplinary board for all the agencies .
There should be concern that , once again , legal commitments have been entered into by the Centre in the absence of prior budgetary commitments , which is contrary to financial regulations .
The Centre must take the necessary measures , including in terms of financial management , to improve the commitment and payment procedures .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for discharge for the Director of the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close an agency if the analysis concludes that it is not useful .
The internal audit procedures of the agencies also need urgent improvement and I support the possibility of having a common disciplinary board for all the agencies .
Overall , MEPs welcome the efforts made by the Monitoring Centre to improve the implementation of its budget even though its level of carried over appropriations remains high .
I welcome the Monitoring Centre 's desire to carry out an evaluation of its operations in 2007 and the fact that a management plan is expected for 2008 and 2009 .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of discharge for the Director of the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights ( formerly the European Monitoring Centre on Racism and Xenophobia ) in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close an agency if the analysis concludes that it is not useful .
The internal audit procedures of the agencies also need urgent improvement and I support the possibility of having a common disciplinary board for all the agencies .
The annual reports and accounts on the Agency 's 2006 and 2007 work programme contain relatively little information on the budget implementation , financial information , risks , evaluation and auditing of the Agency , which needs to improve the quality of its information and publish its annual activity report on its website .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of discharge for the Director of the European Agency for Reconstruction in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close an agency if the analysis concludes that it is not useful .
The internal audit procedures of the agencies also need urgent improvement and I support the possibility of having a common disciplinary board for all the agencies .
I welcome the Agency 's role in developing and consolidating stability in the Balkans region and in the sound management of the CARDS programme .
The Agency has entirely fulfilled its mandate and it can now wind down its activities ; this is planned for the end of 2008 in order to entrust the management of assistance to Serbia , Kosovo , Montenegro and the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) to the Commission delegations in those countries .
in writing . - ( PT ) This agency was set up after NATO 's attack on the former Yugoslavia and manages the EU 's main ' assistance ' programmes in the Balkans .
Its objectives are clear and include , as could only be expected , ' help ' in ' reform ' processes leading to the creation of institutions and a ' Rule of Law ' in the EU 's own image and according to the EU 's ambitions , namely through the establishing of a ' market economy ' , i.e. , a capitalist one .
Perhaps the EP , is wrapped up in the enlargement of NATO and the EU , ' is convinced that , at the point where the Commission takes over the management of the new Instrument for Pre-Accession Assistance , ( ... ) , it should finally present to the Council a new mandate for the Agency , which should , as decided , finish its work in the Balkans by the end of 2008 and be converted into a truly European agency for external actions ' .
It further clarifies that ' a new mandate for this successful agency would be the most efficient way of carrying out the new tasks in external actions ' ( ... ) ' in areas where traditional development assistance cannot be implemented ' .
In other words , the unacceptable transformation of this agency into yet another instrument supporting the EU 's policy of interference in other regions of the world .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of discharge for the Director of the European Environment Agency in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close an agency if the analysis concludes that it is not useful .
The internal audit procedures of the agencies also need urgent improvement and I support the possibility of having a common disciplinary board for all the agencies .
It is surprising that a considerable amount of budget appropriations for operating activities was reported by the European Environment Agency to have been carried over to the financial year 2007 ; this supposes a failure to comply with the budgetary principle of annuality .
There should also be criticism of certain malfunctions in the Agency 's control system , which has not clearly separated the functions of authorising officer and accounting .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of discharge for the Director of the European Agency for Safety and Health at Work in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close an agency if the analysis concludes that it is not useful .
The internal audit procedures of the agencies also need urgent improvement and I support the possibility of having a common disciplinary board for all the agencies .
I congratulate the Agency on its work in disseminating prevention methods in the field of health and safety at work in the EU .
I nevertheless regret the fact that it does not communicate sufficiently with the social authorities of the Member States , which are specialised in health and safety at work .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of discharge for the Director of the European Medicines Agency in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close an agency if the analysis concludes that it is not useful .
The internal audit procedures of the agencies also need urgent improvement and I support the possibility of having a common disciplinary board for all the agencies .
I cannot understand the concerns of the board of the European Medicines Agency that the new tasks being allocated to it are not sufficiently funded .
Indeed , the Agency 's financial situation appears to be flourishing , with a low level of use of funds ( less than 60 % ) and considerable accounting surpluses associated with accumulations , and at the same time a subsidy from the Community and fees paid by the undertakings to maintain Community marketing authorisations for medicines ( in other words revenue of EUR 119 million in 2006 plus a Community subsidy of EUR 31 million ) .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of discharge for the Director of the European Food Safety Authority in respect of the implementation of the budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close an agency if the analysis concludes that it is not useful .
The internal audit procedures of the agencies also need urgent improvement and I support the possibility of having a common disciplinary board for all the agencies .
I find it curious that there has been under-implementation of the Authority 's expenditure , which is apparently mainly due to the problems associated with the policy of recruiting highly-qualified scientific staff in Parma ( only two thirds of the 250 posts provided by the Authority could be filled by the end of 2006 ) as well as incoherence in the accounts .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of discharge for the Director of the European Maritime Safety Agency in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close an agency if the analysis concludes that it is not useful .
The internal audit procedures of the agencies also need urgent improvement and I support the possibility of having a common disciplinary board for all the agencies .
With regards to the Agency , I regret that the utilisation rate for payment appropriations for anti-polluting measures at sea is too low ( 67.7 % ) , while Parliament has largely supported this type of measure in the context of the budgetary procedure .
Finally , there should be concern regarding the fact that the number of budgetary transfers is too high , there is unsatisfactory recruitment planning and an incorrect presentation of the budget .
in writing . - ( PT ) The number of agencies and other Community bodies has multiplied in recent years - from the Treaty of Nice up to what is now known as the draft ' Lisbon ' Treaty .
Based on the most varied objectives , their goal , for the most part , is to serve as a catalyst for reinforcing the increasingly supranational nature of the European Union 's institutions and policies .
On the whole , they are set up to ' coordinate ' or ' help ' Member States in different areas , and the number of these agencies and bodies has gradually increased : with regard to the discharge process , there were 8 in the year 2000 and more than 20 in 2006 !
Although not exhaustive , here are a few examples : the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders of the Member States of the European Union ( Frontex ) , the European Railway Agency , the European Environment Agency , the European Agency for Reconstruction ( Balkans ) , the European Food Safety Authority , the European Maritime Safety Agency , the European Aviation Safety Agency , ...
As regards the discharge for these agencies , the Court of Auditors has made a general observation on their failure to observe in their activities measures laid down in the Financial Regulation , the Staff Regulations and the rules on public procurement , to name but a few examples .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of discharge for the Director of the European Aviation Safety Agency in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close an agency if the analysis concludes that it is not useful .
The internal audit procedures of the agencies also need urgent improvement and I support the possibility of having a common disciplinary board for all the agencies .
We need to review the fees structure of the European Aviation Safety Agency in order to bring costs and revenue for certification activities into balance ( revenue of EUR 35 million against costs of EUR 48 million ) .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of discharge for the Director of the European Railway Agency in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close an agency if the analysis concludes that it is not useful .
The internal audit procedures of the agencies also need urgent improvement and I support the possibility of having a common disciplinary board for all the agencies .
With regards to the functioning of the European Railway Agency , it is regrettable to note very significant carryover of funds ( 85 % for operating expenditure ) and we should welcome the fact that the Agency has decided to implement the 24 internal control standards set by the Commission for 2008 as well as its decision to recruit a procurement officer to speed up this function and make it reliable , along with an internal auditor .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of discharge for the Executive Director of the European Network and Information Security Agency in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and to close agencies that are not useful .
Regarding the European Network and Information Security Agency , I would like to say that I do not share the opinion of the European Parliament , which rejects the Commission 's proposal to transfer the responsibilities of the Agency to a new European Telecom Marketing Authority , whose tasks from 2010 would consist of ensuring that the national regulators work as an efficient team on the basis of common guiding principles , delivering opinions and assisting in preparing the single market measures of the Commission for the telecoms sector .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of discharge for the Director of the European Agency for the Management of Operational Cooperation at the External Borders ( FRONTEX ) in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close an agency if the analysis concludes that it is not useful .
The internal audit procedures of the agencies also need urgent improvement and I support the possibility of having a common disciplinary board for all the agencies .
Regarding FRONTEX , it is not right that the Agency only obtained full financial autonomy from 1 October 2006 and that before that date , all administrative expenditure required the authorisation of the Commission in Brussels .
I congratulate the Agency on its work , despite insufficient resources , and I hope that these will significantly increase in the future .
in writing . - ( PT ) Among other possible pertinent considerations on the discharge of this Agency 's budget , one should point out the considerable sums left over at the end of 2006 , and what is more , that two amending budgets were approved in that same year , the objective being to increase its budget .
After these amending budgets , this Agency 's budget increased to EUR 19.2 million .
Yet at the end of 2006 , and based on the Agency 's own accounts , it held EUR 14.3 million in cash !
Some irregularities regarding staff management were also observed , namely concerning recruitment criteria and procedures which were not in line with the general provisions of the Staff Regulations of officials of the EU institutions ( as a matter of fact this is a recurrent situation in the budget discharge of various community agencies , in which several criticisms have been raised concerning non-compliance with the Staff Regulations ) .
Such is the political desire to make progress with the communitarisation of " border management ” at EU level and to set up Frontex - which we obviously oppose - that financial resources have been provided over and above the proven capacity .
Which leads me to say that in 2006 it was definitely a case of putting the cart before the horse ...
in writing . - ( DE ) We have struggled to get the wastage and misuse of money under control ever since the EU began .
It is time for the fight against corruption at the top level to begin at long last , such that demands are actually made for monies wrongfully paid out to be paid back , and we have to make the most of opportunities to save money .
This would include , for example , limiting ourselves to one location for Parliament , as well as more sensible use of funds by EU agencies .
We are authorising a duplication of some things , like the Agency for Fundamental Rights , while at the same time , worthwhile agencies such as Frontex are being starved out .
This cannot be allowed to continue .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of discharge for the Administrative Director of EUROJUST in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by my Austrian colleague Mr Hans-Peter Martin , which recommends to Parliament to give discharge .
The discharge procedure should be simplified and streamlined for the decentralised agencies , which are growing in number ( from 8 in 2000 , to 20 in 2006 ) and represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the request for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close an agency if the analysis concludes that it is not useful .
The internal audit procedures of the agencies also need urgent improvement and I support the possibility of having a common disciplinary board for all the agencies .
Regarding EUROJUST , I am surprised by the problems associated with failure to comply with the principle of segregation of powers for the tasks of the authorising officer and financial verifier , and that cooperation with the European Anti-Fraud Office ( OLAF ) is still so deficient .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for discharge to the Director of the European Police College ( CEPOL ) in respect of the implementation of its budget for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report by Mr Martin recommending that Parliament should grant discharge .
The discharge process should be simplified and rationalised for satellite agencies , which have increased in number ( from 8 in 2000 to 20 in 2006 ) and now represent a total budget of around EUR 1 billion .
I support the call for the Commission to present a study every five years on the added value of each agency and not to hesitate to close agencies that are not useful .
Similarly , improvements are urgently needed to agencies ' internal audit procedures , and I welcome the possibility of having an inter-agency disciplinary board .
While taking into account the reasons given by the College , in particular that it was difficult for this new Community body to meet the principles of the Financial Regulation straight away and that control systems have since been put in place , it would seem normal that , by June 2008 at the latest , this body should fully comply with the provisions of the Financial Regulation .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for discharge to the Commission in respect of the implementation of the budget for the 6th , 7th , 8th and 9th European Development Funds ( EDFs ) for the financial year 2006 on the basis of the report recommending that Parliament should grant discharge by Mr Fjellner , who in fact took over the very good work by Mr Stubb , who has been appointed a minister in the Finnish Government .

Like many Members , I regret that the EDF was not budgetised under the financial perspective 2007 to 2013 and such budgetisation should be a priority objective for the multiannual financial framework after 2013 . In the meantime , the procedures for management of the EDF should be simplified , in particular by making it possible to close previous EDFs as early as possible and by standardising their financial rules .
With the start of a 10th EDF in 2008 , there are no less than four EDFs for the Commission to manage simultaneously .
Finally , I am surprised at the sum of EUR 10.3 billion of ' outstanding commitments ' which is 25 % of the total funds committed , and it is imperative that the Commission should reduce these funds still more drastically , especially old and dormant commitments .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.25 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Rising food prices in the European Union and developing countries ( debate )
The next item is the statements of the Council and the Commission on the rising food prices in the EU and developing countries .
member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the dramatic rise in food prices since the start of the year has triggered a worldwide awareness of the global food crisis .
In a few hours ' time , a meeting is scheduled to start in London which will bring together the main parties involved in food aid .
At the beginning of May , an international conference will be held on the subject of ' Towards a green revolution in Africa ' .
All political players , operators and experts in this sector have now been mobilised .
For several years now the world has seen a steady increase in food prices .
Since 2000 , the dollar price of wheat has tripled , and rice and maize prices have doubled .
The start of 2008 brought a further 20 % increase , which has , in our industrialised countries , resulted in worries over purchasing power and in developing countries in the risk of famine for entire populations .
When you live on less than a dollar a day and you spend most of your income on food , these increases are quite simply untenable .
This is at the root of the food protests that have taken place in recent weeks all over the world : in Haiti , Mexico , Egypt , Morocco , Cameroon , Senegal , Ivory Coast , Guinea , Mauritania , Ethiopia , Uzbekistan , Yemen , the Philippines , Thailand and Indonesia .
Studies show that the era of cheap food on the international market is over .
We will not see food prices returning to their former levels , and volatility could increase if measures are not taken swiftly .
The current climate of rocketing food prices is a serious threat in terms of political , financial and social destabilisation in many countries around the world , so we must react quickly .
It goes far beyond the capacity of the European Commission , or even of the European Union .
The entire international community must act .
Looking at the possible solutions , we have identified two key options .
Firstly , we need to save lives and respond to the social crises created by the soaring prices , sometimes exacerbated by the national political situation .
Secondly , we evidently need a medium and long term strategy .
I believe that we need to act on both fronts .
Clearly the biggest mistake would be to offer a humanitarian response to a structural problem such as food security in the form of food aid .
Doubtless this would ease some people 's consciences in the short term , but emergency food aid is not enough to tackle a structural problem .
In the short term therefore , it is clearly necessary , along with national responses aimed at ensuring better control of food prices , to meet the needs of the most vulnerable populations who are in real humanitarian distress .
This is why we must mobilise additional emergency humanitarian aid to increase the capacity of ECHO to deliver emergency food aid .
However , this is no ordinary food crisis .
This is a purchasing power crisis , which hits the most destitute who can no longer afford to buy food .
Therefore , our response must also be based on other forms of food aid , designed , for example , to offset the negative effects on infant malnutrition and to support the purchasing power of the most vulnerable households .
We must also promote the rapid growth of local agricultural supply , thus giving local farmers access to agricultural inputs , seeds and fertilisers .
In view of the scale of the crisis and its probable duration , it is absolutely crucial that the European Union also engages in a medium-term approach , supporting social protection policies in the countries most at risk , particularly in Africa .
In the medium and long term , the only valid response is that we do everything we can to ensure agricultural supply .
Production must increase globally to keep pace with international demand , although this must not be left to the main exporting countries .
The European Union has already taken concrete measures in this regard .
Set-aside has been frozen , milk quotas have been increased and customs duty on cereals has been abolished .
Africa must play its part , with our support , and instigate a green revolution so that it can reduce its overall dependency on the international market .
African agriculture is currently the least productive in the world , but it offers enormous potential for development , provided that policies in favour of domestic smallholdings are maintained and priority is given to investments , to boosting productivity and to facilitating access for farmers to national and regional markets .
The Commission is already making this approach a key priority .
We were the first to highlight the importance of agriculture in development policies , long before other international players did so .
We have reviewed our own programmes based on those of the African Union , proposing to align European aid for agriculture and rural development with the African Union 's agricultural development programme unveiled in June 2007 .
During the programming of the 10th European Development Fund , we made sure that the rural development sector as a whole would see a twofold increase in aid - EUR 650 million for the 9th EDF , EUR 1 250 billion for the 10th EDF .
This has not been easy , since , as you know , it is up to the development partners to choose the sectors in which aid is to be concentrated .
This is a significant increase , a 100 % rise in absolute terms , although it does not translate as a percentage increase in the amount set aside for agriculture and rural development .
The amount of money available has doubled , but the percentage of the European Development Fund remains more or less the same .
In this context , we note with satisfaction the renewed interest of the donor community in the agricultural sector , which has been ignored over the last 25 years .
The Commission as a whole , and I in particular , as Commissioner responsible for Development and Humanitarian Aid , are only too aware of the political importance of the current crisis .
I had the chance to speak to the Secretary-General of the United Nations about this at the last meeting of the Africa MDG Steering Group in New York last month .
I also discussed it with the Chairman of the African Union Commission , Mr Ping .
It was during this meeting that I used the expression ' humanitarian tsunami ' , because I felt that it was necessary to shock political leaders into action , rather than simply talking and making promises .
The causes of the crisis are varied and complex , although we must take care not to get lost in the finer details .
There is increased demand , particularly in Asia , due to the improved living standards of many people who can now afford to eat more and to eat better .
There is also the increase in oil prices , which has a direct impact on the cost of transport and fertilisers .
Add to this the problems on the supply side caused by the impact of climate change , and we have some of the ingredients for the current crisis right there .
What is the Commission doing ?
It is working on a long term strategy , which as I said earlier is crucial .
However , it will be two years before we see the results on the ground .
Increasing agricultural production is not simply a question of turning on a tap , so we are also looking at the short term and at emergency aid .
Last March , we decided on a further EUR 160 million in food aid ; we have just decided to release an additional EUR 57 million , budgeted for 2008 but which will be made available much earlier in the year .
We will be mobilising EUR 60 million of fresh money , which will either come from a rejigging of Heading 4 , or from a request made to Parliament to mobilise the emergency reserve .
Finally , I would like to point out that the Commission will continue to monitor this situation very closely and is ready , as needs develop , to consider additional funding if necessary .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) First of all I would like to apologise to Members for my late arrival .
I have just been at a meeting with the Conference of Committee Chairman and I am grateful to you for having arranged the debate so as to enable me to speak now .
The European Union is very concerned about the increase in the prices of agricultural produce , which is becoming a problem not just in the European Union but elsewhere in the world as well .
We are aware of the seriousness and scale of the potential consequences , in particular for the poorest countries of the world .
Where do the reasons for this lie ?
On the supply side , the price rise is mainly due to a shortfall in yields , partly as a result of the impact of climate change , particularly in the case of cereals , and higher production costs .
On the other hand , world population growth and the rapid development of a number of major countries , such as China , India and Brazil , is increasing demand .
Increased purchasing power and higher living standards in these countries are leading to changes in dietary habits .
The increase in demand for meat and dairy products is having an indirect effect on prices for feed grain .
Some , or rather many , people are also citing as a reason the expanding biofuels market and the concomitant demand for agricultural products for non-food purposes .
It is precisely for this reason that we in the European Union are making efforts , through the working groups established specifically for that purpose , to draw up clear sustainability criteria , which will facilitate the sustainable production of biofuels with a minimum impact on factors such as food prices .
Since , on both the supply and demand sides , the reasons cited for higher food prices are structural in nature , prices and price increases can be expected , in the long term as well , to remain at a level higher than that to which we have become accustomed in the past decade .
Globally , the rise in food prices is having a particularly harmful impact on countries where agricultural produce and food account for a significant proportion of imports .
This issue is particularly acute in countries with low and medium gross domestic products and less competitive structures in terms of the production of and trade in food .
In order to ensure basic food supplies , it is necessary , among other things , to encourage agricultural production in poorer countries .
At the same time , wealthier countries should be encouraged to allocate funds for development aid to the poorest countries and to become more actively involved in humanitarian organisations .
The European Union is seeking to curb rising food prices in various ways .
The purpose of the recent reforms of the common agricultural policy was to make European agriculture more sustainable and market-oriented .
The European Union has already adopted the set-aside requirement for 2008 and thereby increased the volume of arable land given over to food production in the European Union .
The final abolition of this obligation and the withdrawal of energy crop premiums were also proposed as part of the review of the common agricultural policy .
Efforts to promote research paving the way for the production of second-generation biofuels are also important .
By-products , such as straw , parings and waste in general , would be used in their production .
In addition , as part of the World Trade Organisation negotiations , the EU is willing to remove export subsidies by 2013 .
In any event , the issue of the instability of agricultural markets is becoming one of the main challenges facing European Union agriculture and agricultural policy .
In view of the scale of the possible consequences , the European Union Agriculture and Fisheries Council discussed the issue of high prices at its meeting in April .
It is most likely that it will discuss this further at future meetings and ministers will also address the problem in other Council formations .
International organisations such as the Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) , the International Fund for Agricultural Development , the World Food Programme , and other agencies , are also making active efforts to curb the rise in food prices .
The Slovenian Presidency will take part in the international Conference on World Food Security and the Challenges of Climate Change and Bioenergy to be held at the beginning of June in Rome under the auspices of the FAO .
In conclusion , the rise in food prices is a global problem and therefore needs to be addressed with due consideration and with intensified efforts in all related areas .
Our aim is to restore market price stability .
( Applause )
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I welcome your report .
You are absolutely right , particularly when it comes to Africa .
The PPE-DE Group is extremely concerned by the food shortage which affects numerous poor countries around the world , but also by the significant increase in the cost of the consumer 's shopping basket in Europe .
We do not hear enough about this .
First of all , the food crisis calls for emergency measures to help starving populations .
In this respect , I welcome the release of funds to the World Food Programme .
However , these measures , as positive as they are , will only bring temporary relief to the problem .
In reality , it is the world 's agriculture which must undergo root-and-branch structural reform .
The food crisis is a chance to have an in-depth discussion the desired position of food and agriculture in the world economy and in the European economy .
Today , Europe is aware that , more than ever , it needs agriculture to guarantee its food security .
To meet the increased demand of emerging economies , we need to encourage the agricultural development of those countries .
The major challenge for poor countries is food self-sufficiency , so we must help them establish agriculture which is economically viable .
The freeze on production in Europe is no longer appropriate , as you pointed out .
In terms of the number of days of consumption , the EU 's cereal reserve has halved since 2005 , and in a crisis would only last a month .
Imports would not be enough , since many third countries tend to keep their production for the domestic market .
They are right to do so .
Commodities have become the subject of speculation .
A tonne of wheat might be resold several times before it gets to the mill .
Many people think that agrofuels are to blame for the current food crisis .
This is far from being the case .
They represent only 2 % of current agricultural production in Europe .
What I would like to say is that I do not want to defend the lobby in favour of agrochemicals , but we should not give up straightaway .
We should hang on to this 2 % , so that Europe is also involved in the development of agrochemicals for the future .
We need to turn to plant varieties that are resistant to the new challenges presented by climate change and the increasing shortage of water resources .
To do this , we must invest in agricultural research and reflect realistically and responsibly , and I mean properly reflect , on the issue of GM crops .
Let us open our eyes .
The Health Check of the Common Agricultural Policy is the ideal time to launch a real debate on Europe 's agricultural and food policy .
Remember the old US policy ?
Two sacrosanct policies that no one could touch , defence and food security ; that is what Congress told us .
We should stop advocating simplistic and purely economic solutions which do not provide long-term solutions to the current crisis .
Let us also recognise that the answer to the food problem can only be global .
Europe must find solutions in collaboration with international organisations such as the World Bank , the IMF and , of course , the WTO .
We must find a way of limiting the harmful effects of financial speculation while populations are hit by famine .
Some countries have significant reserves which they continue to restrict to export .
Speculators are gambling with the lives of entire populations .
We must do everything to quash these phenomena and to facilitate trade .
Finally , there needs to be an inquiry into why the price increase is so high , when agricultural commodities only represent a very small percentage of the total price of processed food .
Responsibilities are not yet clearly defined , and it would seem that not everyone is doing badly out of the food crisis .
Commissioner , we have to take things in hand , we have to carry out the various studies needed so that no one can profit at the expense of the world 's poorest or Europe 's most disadvantaged citizens .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my group requested this debate because we believe that action is urgently required .
Commissioner Michel made some pertinent and good remarks about what the Commission can do straight away .
However , we also requested this debate because we want to discuss the basic principles behind the way food prices are developing , and the consequences of this .
There are many explanatory factors .
The world 's population is increasing , the amount of land available for cultivation is limited , the standard of living - and with it the ability to purchase and consume food - is rising in many parts of the world .
In itself , that is a positive development .
Consumption of meat in China , for example , is increasing rapidly .
However , this decreases the amount available worldwide .
The increase in energy prices and political goals - including our political goals in relation to climate , for example the fact that production of biofuels is becoming more attractive - all bring the results that Mr Daul has just described .
These are all explanatory models that we are all familiar with .
However , there is one point I would like to deal with that I feel is not mentioned frequently enough .
My fellow Members will go into the various points that I have just described in more detail in their remarks , but I want to introduce one point into our deliberations that we do not talk about at all and which I believe is essential in the crisis , and that is that the major mutual funds that have taken possession of all levels of economic life and move hundreds of billions of dollars around the world every day - these mutual funds , the hedge funds , have taken control of the food sector .
I do not mean to criticise the people who have been trading internationally in commodities for the last 140 years .
That is completely normal , but what is happening now is no longer normal , and that is that enormous sums are being wagered on increases in food prices and huge gambling is going on .
This means that the banks in Europe are advising their clients : ' make the most of increasing food prices so that you can make a profit on your investments ' .
By implication , this means ' create a food shortage so that prices will rise and you can make a profit ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , that is nothing less than watching ' casino capitalism ' , which is a concern for us at all levels , drawing up its chair at the tables of the world 's poor .
That is the real moral scandal behind this crisis and that is why we want to discuss it in this forum .
More than ever , this crisis provides good grounds for the necessity for international control of the financial markets .
I can live with enormous profits being made within a few seconds in any area , in gold trading , if you like , but not when it comes to feeding large proportions of the world 's population .
That is immorality taken to the extreme and that should not be underestimated in this debate .
At this point we must discuss the immediate consequences this has for us .
What repercussions does it have for the reform of the agricultural commodity market policy here in Europe ?
What role does our own export subsidy policy play ?
Are we , with our exporters , contributing to food shortages because agriculture in the affected regions of this world cannot develop sufficiently on its own ?
What is our answer to the question of greater availability of bioenergy ?
Must this automatically be accompanied by shortages and limited production of food ?
Or will there , in the next generation , be technological developments in the area of biochemistry - and Mr Daul is right here - that could bring us to the point where we no longer needed to use only land that has been used until now to produce food ?
We must consider all these questions , but they must not distract us from one thing , and that is that we cannot allow a financial system that is coming apart at the seams to exacerbate hunger in this world , just so that a few capitalists can make even greater profits .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Michel spoke for the Commission but in the place of the Council .
He has considerable experience of both institutions , fortunately , which is to our benefit .
Mr President , the past year has seen startling hikes in the cost of basic foods , such that 100 million people are being pushed into poverty and hundreds of thousands put at risk of starvation .
So grave is the threat that it will cancel out all progress towards the goal of halving world poverty by 2015 .
Europe 's rise in living standards has been rapid , so rapid that even my generation remembers , on our continent , gardens where little grew except the appetites of young children .
We must not stand idly by in our privileged position as disaster unfolds .
We must give more money to the World Food Programme now , so that it can feed the destitute , and my group welcomes the Commissioner 's commitments in this regard .
Many lay the blame on biofuels .
Indeed , the United Nations special rapporteur has called agrofuels a ' crime against humanity ' .
Yet the reasons for the recent food price rises are many and varied , and so must be the international community 's response .
World population growth , poor growing conditions linked to climate change , loss of agricultural land to industrial use , immoral commodities speculation and changing eating habits have all contributed to the current crisis .
Meat consumption in China , for example , has risen from 20 kg per capita in 1980 to 50 kg per capita in 2007 , and if every kilogram of beef requires 2 000 square feet of land and 13 000 litres of water , while the same nutritional content can be found from soya at 1 % of the land and water use , we begin to see the complexity of the problem .
Far and away the worst offender is market distortion , which traps poor farmers in a cycle of poverty and gives them little incentive to increase food production .
The high standards of sustainability for sourcing and manufacture , written into the European Union 's biofuels proposals , effectively insure Europe against non-sustainable use .
So , rather than using biofuels as a scapegoat , we must move to end agricultural protectionism and export restrictions ; we must move to enhance agricultural development in the poorest countries and to ensure the success of the Doha Development Round to encourage free , fair and sustainable farm trade at global level .
It is the common agricultural policy , not European biofuels , that are the root cause of this problem , and it is CAP reform , not dropping biofuels targets , that will solve it .
We must also use our collective weight to ensure that climate change and sustainability criteria are integrated with trade policy .
The truth is we can afford to feed the world and , as Dominique Strauss-Kahn has said , ' global cooperation can deliver the macroeconomic framework and the incentives needed to address the problem ' .
My group believes that with the right political will and the right international cooperation , globalisation can be the solution , not the problem .
It is up to the European Union to lead the way .

on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , just to say I am not going to go over the reasons why we are where we are ; the reason the world is suffering or going to suffer from huge food shortages has been well documented here by many people .
But it is in many ways going to challenge us in trying to eradicate world hunger by 2015 .
I think that an enormous challenge lies ahead of us here at the moment .
This is a global problem and it is going to need a global response .
We have tackled other problems , and we have tried to tackle other problems like global warming at that level .
I believe that the only way we can tackle this problem is through a global response .
As has already been said , there are many reasons - increased population - and , yes , I think it is important that we increase aid immediately .
But we have got to look at a more long-term solution , to try and find out exactly why the food market has ended up like this .
As I said , many reasons have already been outlined , but I think we have to look for a long-term solution , and I believe that in this Chamber we have the political will .
The one group we should encourage to do more about this is the United Nations .
It should convene a conference on the situation at the moment , and we should support it in any way we can .
That is the only way to try and do this , because people are saying the cause is perhaps hedge funds , or people speculating , or drought or whatever the case may be , but I think we are going to have to pool all our resources and all our political will globally to try and tackle this problem in the years ahead , because it is a very serious problem , especially for poor people living around the world .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the years and decades that now lie behind us , we had a disastrously low price for agricultural products and it was essential , and urgent , for it to increase worldwide .
This is a very good development because the price level was below the production costs for organic / rural agriculture , and that has destroyed the livelihoods of hundreds of millions of farmers , not only in the third world but also here in the European Union .
If , as Mr Schulz says , this is being fuelled by speculation , then that has something to do with the fact that now , after the European Union did away with export subsidies and allowed premiums to run down , we have something more like an intervention mechanism , where food and feedstuff are linked to the price of oil , because we are starting to make petrol from food and feedstuff .
This promotes speculation because , all around the world , the possibility and necessity of transporting feedstuff is increasing .
The European Union is the world 's largest importer of food and feedstuff , which means that we have no surpluses and that the mechanism by which we convert the imports - which amount to 50 million tonnes of grain units , bought almost below the poverty threshold from third world countries - into food , which is then dumped and exported at a cost of billions and undersold on regional markets in third world countries , has ultimately destroyed rural agriculture and regional subsistence farming .
Therefore , we must see this as an opportunity .
This does not mean that I believe that agrifuels are the panacea , because the energy balance is negative and because that gives rise to speculation , but we must try to convert material which is actually available , as waste , into energy .
To put it more bluntly , we must make gold from shit rather than thinking that we are competing with food for humans .
It is not possible for everyone in the world to have full gas tanks and full plates based only on the plants that grow .
It might be possible in Europe , because we are rich enough to purchase these products and these crop harvests for ourselves , but the rest of the world would go hungry .
In closing I would like to add one further thought : We have 850 million people who are starving , and these 850 million people were already starving when the price level was disastrously low .
What has now happened is that the purchasing power of the middle classes in third world countries has decreased so that these people are finding it difficult to buy other consumer goods .
This thwarts the strategy of the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund .
Now people are calling for more money , but the 850 million starving people were already in need of that money .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , food is a right and should not therefore be subject solely to market rules or financial speculation .
We are witnessing a crisis and protests that recall our riots for bread , people being killed because they are hungry .
The causes are many and they have already been mentioned : the rise in the price of oil , subsidies for the production of biofuels , bad weather , the increase in meat consumption , futures speculation on foods .
What are our responsibilities ?
Mr Ziegler sums up the problem when he says that globalisation is monopolising the Earth 's riches .
The multinationals are responsible for structural violence ; they have built a world of inequality and horror .
We need to end all this , he says .
Will we listen to him ?
In addition to the WTO rules , the European Union has opted for a common agricultural policy of subsidies that , although it once seemed inadequate , now appears rather destructive of international equilibrium .
The application of quotas to our cereal production , along with set-aside measures , is also responsible for the situation we are facing today .
Let us watch out for the easy appeal of a pro-GMO lobby that promises to rid the world of famine , but which is an ephemeral shortcut that instead would cause enormous damage .
British law has been described as madness because , although perhaps less polluting , it certainly does include biofuel quotas that do not prevent the destruction of natural habitats .

Among the possible actions , I would support Mr Ziegler 's suggestion of a five-year moratorium on the production of biofuels .
We need to keep the promise we made to halve the number of people who die of hunger by 2015 , and Louis Michel is right : increasing finance for the World Food Programme , even if it is our duty , is not the solution , and we welcome the emergency package and USD 10 million contributed for Haiti .
On the finance that has already been announced for African agriculture , I am delighted to hear Louis Michel , if I have understood him correctly , say that it will go to smaller producers and therefore to help subsistence farming , which contributes to overcoming the crisis particularly for the poorest , and not to multinationals dedicated to exporting , which would actually make countries even poorer and more dependent on imports .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , the EU has decided that we can now grow fuel and is telling countries in the developing world that , instead of growing food , they should grow fuel so that the EU can continue to run its limousines .
Since I became an MEP , it is hard to remember any issue which has provoked such a deluge of letters as the subject of biofuels .
I have received over a hundred requests to vote against the Commission 's renewable energy target .
I have not needed much persuading because as a UKIP MEP I vote against any imposition of EU targets on my country anyway .
However , on this occasion , I am happy to vote against it because the dash to biofuels , an essential part of the Commission 's strategy , is a key factor in the surge in food prices around the world .
British Government adviser Professor John Beddington has said that there are real problems with the unsustainability of biofuels .
He is right .
We have become so obsessed with global warming that we have overlooked the real elephant in the room - the global food crisis .
For farmers in places like Africa there is now less land available for growing food because many people are growing fuel instead .
It is also leading to the destruction of rainforests with devastating effects .
So less land for food equals less food but an increase in the supply of people , which inevitably means an increase in food prices .
Across the world , and in Europe in particular , food prices have been rising far more quickly than inflation .
The EU prides itself on taking the lead in environmental matters .
Will it therefore take the lead in recognising that biofuels are not the answer ?
Biofuels are pushing up prices in shopping baskets around the world .
We in the West will groan , grin and bear it ; in the developing world , it is a matter of life or death .
The EU has never been a friend to the developing world .
Giant factory ships have emptied the west African seas of fish .
Dumping of subsidised agricultural surplus has devastated the profit margins of many of their farmers and now , while their populations are increasing , their land , rather than providing food for their own people , is being used to keep our cars on the road .
Already there have been violent food riots across the world as desperate hungry people attack grain silos and supermarkets .
In some countries troops are on the streets to protect what is left of the food .
The risk of armed conflict between and within states is greatly increased by the EU 's policies - so much for the EU keeping the peace .
What is more useful to a villager in Africa ? A full petrol tank or a full stomach ?
Please listen to common sense and reverse your policy on biofuels immediately .
( SK ) Rising food prices are caused by the present volatility of the agricultural markets , which are naturally unstable in any case .
The main task of the agricultural policies has therefore always been , and still is , to eliminate this instability .
We should remember the biblical story of the seven fat cows and seven thin cows : thousands of years ago society was already capable of organising agricultural markets and thereby preventing fluctuations of these markets and giving Egypt the conditions for prosperity , while other societies suffered famine and wars because of the lack of food .
Over the course of its history , mankind has to a large extent developed in line with each society 's ability to accept the priority of agricultural policies .
However , the current struggles we are witnessing in the WTO , focusing on military and control policies or on national commercial and economic interests , unfortunately confirm that the today 's agricultural policies have entirely different priorities .
Ensuring the stability of the agricultural markets must therefore become a priority for the WTO if any national policies , including our common agricultural policy , are to make sense .
Otherwise , ladies and gentlemen , we are flogging a dead horse and will continue doing so until a global food crisis makes us adopt radical measures , which will of course be to the detriment of farmers and the public but to the benefit of speculators .
Therefore , the most important thing is to have enough courage to grab the bull by its horns .
Mr President , I think this is one of the most important debates we have had in this Parliament in my time here .
However , I would ask everyone to suspend their hang-ups , misconceptions and perhaps their conceptions , because kicking around the CAP - beating ourselves up about where we are at - will not solve this problem .
Nobody thought we would be here - none of the experts in the Commission predicted that food security would be a problem , none of the great political leaders ever spoke about it - but suddenly Europeans are paying more for food and they are terrified .
Well , maybe it is a good day that we are at this stage because maybe , in this knowledge , we will take real account of the needs of the world 's poorest of the poor , who are paying through the nose for food at the moment .
I should like to make a few suggestions , starting at European level , which might frighten some who have already spoken .
While commodity prices are increasing , can I just ask you to reflect that so , too , are the costs of production .
Farmers use fuel and energy to grow food and their costs are going up .
Farmers will only increase production if they make a profit , and we have a real problem here .
Look at fertiliser prices and the trends in that direction .
Climate change - we have actually pulled back on food production in Europe because of it .
We cannot have it both ways .
But let me go to the developing world .
I have on other occasions - not on this platform but elsewhere - said that Africa needs a common agricultural policy .
That is how Europe developed its food production base - that is how we fed ourselves - and we need to acknowledge , as has been done in this House today , that we have underinvested in agricultural research , in development and in the advisory service .
I repeat my point : it is a good day if high food prices in Europe make us realise that we need to invest in the very basics of civilisation , which is food production , and we need firstly to look after the developing world .
So , while I come here anxious about the state we are in , I come here too in hope that finally we might actually do something and take seriously the question of global food security .
But do not kick the CAP !
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a number of objective factors contribute to or cause the rise in prices .
There is also speculation , as Mr Schulz has explained in detail .
Does all this mean that we are helpless , that all we can do is sit and watch ?
I do not believe so .
The Commissioner and representatives of the Council Presidency have mentioned certain points .
I would now ask you , Commissioner , together with your Commission colleagues , to draw up a comprehensive plan over the coming weeks as to what answers we can provide , as citizens - both globally and in Europe - want an answer to the question of what we can do and what we cannot do .
One point is the development of thriving , sustainable agriculture .
This is a vital aspect .
I do not want to repeat what has already been said , simply to make a brief additional comment : We were recently in Kosovo , where there are many areas of land where we as the European Union are , however , not doing anything to enable the simple people there to develop appropriate agriculture .
We must do more in our own region therefore - in the Balkans , Ukraine and in other countries - to promote the development of sustainable agriculture .
Secondly : we cannot simply say ' well , prices are rising , and that is all there is to it ' because we know who is worst affected .
We know that the poorer people are , the greater the proportion of their income they have to spend on food , and that they are more seriously affected .
Therefore we must give clear signals on distribution and social welfare awareness so that when there are wage increases , and especially pension increases , these support in particular lower income groups here in Europe .
Of course , we must also support those on low incomes throughout the world .
We must also point out that although there is social unrest , the response to famine and shortages is , of course , much better in democratic countries .
The development of democracy , in all our countries but particularly in the third world , is an important aspect of counteracting these privations .
Fourthly - as has already been mentioned - the effects of speculation .
Does this mean then , that we cannot do anything ?
Could Europe , perhaps within the framework of the UNDP , the World Bank , etc. not be proactive so that , by appropriately warehousing and releasing stores , we could at least partially lessen the effects of speculation ?
We cannot say ' oh well , that is just how speculation works , ' but we must see what we can do in this area .
Perhaps the same applies to oil and gas ; there is work to be done there too .
As far as our energy policy goals are concerned , we should not throw the baby out with the bathwater .
It is absolutely true that there are exaggerated expectations , particularly as regards the first couple of technologies that were developed .
However , this is exactly where we must conduct more energy research , leading towards a second or third technology - I agree wholeheartedly - and especially the use of biomass and other raw materials that do not have the harmful displacement effect that is currently the case .
Here , too , the Commission must join with us in reflecting on this , and not abandon the goals but rather adapt them .
Finally I will restate my clear , firm message : let us help the poorest of the poor - worldwide , but also in Europe - to access healthier food despite this difficult situation .
That is our important social-democratic goal .
( FR ) Mr President , other speakers here today have debated the subject at length , but it is better to repeat ourselves than to contradict each other .
When you have a dollar a day to live on and it costs 75 cents to feed yourself , and then this increases by 40 % , you have nowhere to go .
You cannot redistribute your costs , so you reduce your food ration , you stop sending your children to school because it costs money and your main priority is to feed them , and then you get all the attendant social problems that come with this .
What we are seeing is the human problem on an individual scale .
The causes have mostly been covered .
I think we should refrain from having an ideological interpretation of these causes , because there is not just one interpretation .
Obviously biofuels might be one cause but , as Mr Daul said , this represents 2 % of production , 1 % of surface area , so we should stop overstating this .
Climate change is not necessarily harmful everywhere , even though the consequences are disastrous in some countries .
As for the change in eating habits , I believe that the fact that some of the world 's population are eating better is rather good news .
As for speculation , yes of course we should find a way to stop western capitalists from making money that should be going to rice growers in Vietnam .
The money issue will be resolved .
We will of course find the EUR 315 million to be added to the EUR 2.9 billion of the World Food Programme .
However , the real solution , as the Commissioner said in his report , the solution lies with production issues .
We must improve agriculture , improve productivity , especially in Africa , which of course requires investment into hybrid research , and we should stop demonising GMOs , which can be part of the solution .
We need to invest in training .
It was Mr Dumont who said ' give a man a fish and you feed him for a day ; teach a man to fish and you feed him for a lifetime ' .
I think that applies here too .
Above all , we need to invest in infrastructure , because improving agriculture means improving irrigation , improving transport , making it possible for produce to sent from point A to be sold at point B , and we need to improve storage and the cold chain , if we want to export this produce .
Everyone needs to act , not just humanitarian resources .
All aid measures - the IMF , World Bank , ADB , etc . - must be mobilised in order to put agriculture back at the heart of development strategy .
It is also an opportunity for us to rethink food security in humanitarian aid .
Let us be humble enough to admit that years of humanitarian aid have not reduced dependency .
We need to ask questions about humanitarian aid to ease our consciences .
This is not the time for ideological interpretation .
Let us examine the external causes , population density , natural disasters , the loss of human life through HIV and AIDS and , more importantly , the links between poor governance and the humanitarian consequences .
( PL ) Mr President , it is not so long ago that the European Union 's main concern was the overproduction of food , and our debates were mainly concentrated on how to produce less .
Separating subsidies off from production , eliminating export premiums and maintaining production quotas all helped to restrict the potential of European agriculture .
Reality verified this policy .
The first signs of a food crisis have appeared more rapidly than anyone could have expected .
Foodstuffs are becoming more expensive , we have less and less food of our own , and imports are becoming increasingly expensive and increasingly less secure .
These are in large measure the consequences of that policy , which is based on persuading agriculture to produce less .
We must radically alter our approach to agricultural policy .
We must recognise that agriculture is one of the pillars of European security .
Alongside physical security and energy security , food security is a fundamental security pillar that is important for both peoples and states and for every individual .
Let us stop playing around with agriculture .
Let us recognise it as a pillar of our security , and let us follow that up by supporting it so that Europe 's food security is assured , and so that food is accessible to all .

Mr President , agrofuels are not the main driver of this crisis , but boosting inefficient first-generation agrofuel production at such a moment is not a good policy choice , so 10 % mandatory agrofuel is a bad policy choice .
We should remind ourselves where it comes from .
This was the trade-off between pressure from the automobile industry to move the Commission to be less ambitious on car efficiency and to buy or to compensate this less ambitious policy with the higher target on agrofuels .
This is perpetuating a myth , which is that , in a world in which millions of Chinese and Indian young people also dream of having a car , we are suggesting that you can continue to build huge limousines and fuel them with agrofuels .
This is factually not possible on a planet which has limited resources , so I urge the Commission to reconsider this .
Be more ambitious on car efficiency .
We need to go from a unidimensional agrofuel policy to a holistic policy for energy from biomass , and concentrate biomass where it is most efficient , which is in electricity and heat production .
By the way , that is cheaper than using agrofuels which are inefficient .
( EL ) Mr President , according to the UN a veritable tidal wave of high prices is threatening more than 40 countries and over 100 million people with famine .
Members of the Commission and the Council , it is also bumping up inflation for the poor in the EU much more quickly than overall inflation .
For this reason you must move on from discoveries to coordinated public intervention .
We are not a theoretical institution here , whose responsibility is merely analysis .
Coordinated action is needed , and at a European level .
The UN Security Council must also be urgently convened .
You must stop constantly undervaluing the CAP .
You should change your policy on biofuels as well as help to ensure that food prices cease to be subject to the uncontrolled market and the pursuit of profit .
( NL ) Mr President , today the headline of the French newspaper Le Monde read : ' You cannot buy much more for 1 euro ' .
Increasing food prices , inflation and increasing oil prices are eating away at the family budget .
The social consequences of the recession are increasingly making themselves felt .
Le Monde 's analysis undoubtedly applies to other Member States too .
Some speakers have already pointed out in this debate that , it is all too often forgotten that the purchasing power problem also constitutes a problem for Europe .
We all welcome solidarity with the Third World , myself included .
As the old saying goes , however : charity begins at home .
If we forget that , Europeans will once again be at risk of turning their backs on a policy that they do not understand , particularly if it is not also tailored towards them .
We have heard it all : the Commission is monitoring the situation .
The Commission has allocated hundreds of millions in emergency aid for the people most affected .
We could only applaud all these acts of good will , were it not for the fact that they again attest to this typically European malady Kurieren am Symptom .
At this moment , I would like to point to just two paradoxes .
The Commission says that it is doing all it can to put a stop to the decline in purchasing power .
Yet how do you explain to Europeans that you want to maintain the purchasing power , when they are the only ones who will have to raise EUR 200 per family per year for an ambitious climate plan ?
How do you intend to develop biofuels for our energy requirements and at the same time combat the food shortage ?
These are just two elements in a major debate , to which too little attention is paid .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the discussion has indeed already moved further on .
I should therefore like to concentrate on two points .
I believe Mr Schulz is absolutely right in pointing out that the markets - particularly the capital and investment markets - have reacted very strongly to the growing uncertainties , not only following the subprime crisis , nor merely in Europe in recent months , and that many investors have therefore switched over to longer-term and more reliable investments .
Ultimately , this is producing truly dramatic consequences for consumers throughout the world because food prices among others have also shot up as a result .
If we take a look at raw material funds , for example , we note that some raw material funds have made up to 30 % profit in past years .
However , it cannot be our idea of a fair world or , of course , of a sustainable policy , where we first of all inflate our prices , where the capital market drives up prices for raw materials and for food , and where we then try subsequently to create solidarity with the nations of southern Africa and of South America in order then to ship correspondingly expensive products out there .
It is right that we must try to appeal to the ECB and the international capital markets to do everything they can to improve confidence in the existing conventional investment opportunities so that investors will find their way back to these strategies , to these investment opportunities .
Unfortunately , Mr Schulz has not given any indication regarding how this is to be made possible .
I believe we are not incapable , and therefore not completely without opportunities , but that we must above all create the impression that the European Central Bank plays a central role here .
My second point is that I believe that we must also warn against disproportionate alarmism .
The rise in food prices is substantial , of course , at the moment - our fellow Member has pointed this out - and it is even of considerable significance for consumers in Europe and is creating dramatic cuts in budgets .
Nevertheless , I believe that it has to be our duty to advocate dealing realistically on a sustained basis here in Parliament as well - some fellow Members have also addressed this - with the various sources of energy if we really want to make these aims our own .
( ES ) Mr President , suddenly , a financial and property crisis in the North and a food crisis in the South have demonstrated all the contradictions of deregulated globalisation .
Suddenly the markets have begun speculating on food products , because there are enormous profit margins .
When the price of rice increases from USD 400 to USD 1 000 in seven weeks no amount of biofuels can justify this massive price rise .
This is purely and simply the market , the sacrosanct market , which having speculated on housing and ruined millions of people in debt is now speculating on food , because that is where the money is to be made : USD 1 000 for a tonne of rice !
This does not have anything to do with a rational structural problem that can be justified in terms of an increase in demand from the Chinese , or which can be justified in terms of a decrease in supply due to drought .
This world needs a little less market and a little more regulation .
Globalisation cannot continue to progress through blows that cause catastrophes such as these ; it needs to be governed , and governing globalisation now means , among other things , boosting Africa 's capacity for agricultural production .
As the Commissioner said , entirely rightly , a continent such as Africa cannot import food .
Africa must be self-sufficient , and in order to achieve this there are many policies that we need to change to enable them to develop their productivity , helping them to do what they know how to do and can do , and what they would do if it were not for the circumstances of the markets - once again the markets - which in the quest for competitiveness at all costs have caused massive human tragedies .
Haiti imports 80 % of the rice that it consumes .
A few years ago it was fully self-sufficient .
Why is it suddenly importing the rice that is produced in the United States , which is highly subsidised ?
Why have we put it in a situation of extreme dependency ?
It is true that biofuels have caused an increase in the price of American corn .
When 30 % of production is diverted , obviously prices will fluctuate .
The price of wheat has not changed , however , as a result of biofuels : 1 % cannot cause these sorts of changes .
We cannot stop the technological development of what is now an alternative to liquid fuels , and perhaps the only one .
Let us avoid excessive diversion , but let us not throw the baby out with the bathwater , or seek scapegoats for problems that are not caused by technological changes or variations in demand , but by speculative movements that the world should not allow and that we , together with all political forces , should fight against .
( DA ) Mr President , since it was introduced in 1957 , the common agricultural policy has provided us with abundant quantities of food at reasonable prices .
However , consumers are now facing very large price increases for bread and milk owing to rising demand , particularly because there have been several years with very poor harvests around the world .
Europeans are now beginning to notice this financially , and for the less fortunate this is already giving rise to difficult situations .
For the poorest developing nations and for developing nations that are dependent on food imports , the situation is completely unsustainable .
However , for the developing countries that export food , the high prices are beneficial , as their revenues are increasing .
I would like to emphasise the fact that we should make a distinction between the supply shortages and high prices .
Supply shortages are something that we should take seriously and react to . However , as long as a litre of cola costs more than a litre of milk , I do not think that the price of milk is unrealistically high .
The World Bank has concluded that demand for food will increase by 60 % during the period up until 2030 , primarily as a result of increased demand from countries such as China and India , where the demand for food is increasing in line with the growth in prosperity .
It should also be noted that our grain stocks are the lowest they have been in the last 60 years - stocks are now at a critically low level .
Yet another poor harvest in 2008 could lead to a food supply shortage that no one ever thought was possible .
We need to appreciate the seriousness of the situation ; we need to trade , and we need to take the opportunities available to us .
We must find the correct balance between environmental needs and the need to produce sufficient food in order to meet demand .
In this connection we cannot progress unless we discuss biotechnology and confront the campaign of fear concerning genetically modified food with objective information .
In my opinion , biotechnology offers a number of potential solutions to the current situation .
The GMO scare so prevalent around Europe has consequences that are completely absurd .
Instead of importing feed in the form of soya beans and maize for our animals , we are feeding them with cereal products that could be used for human food .
The blaming of biofuels for the rise in food prices must also be the result of a lack of knowledge of the facts , as food crops are not generally used for biofuels in Europe .
We have many good tools available .
First and foremost , we should use the agricultural industry , which is ready to take up the challenge .
We should develop the agricultural industry instead of tending to run it down , which has been the case in politics in recent years .
We should retain the environmental benefits that we have achieved , but we have many opportunities to preserve these benefits whilst at the same time increasing production .
For example , political decisions determine how much fertiliser we should add to a corn field .
It should of course be factual and objective considerations that prevail .
( PL ) Mr President , half way through this century the number of people living on our planet will exceed 9 billion .
In addition to population growth we shall see an increase in the demand for food , something we are short of even now - and not just in third countries , but in European countries too .
Europe and the world can look forward to a major food crisis .
The European Union 's common agricultural policy , which is based on orders , prohibitions , quotas and contingents , has meant that some states profit from a food crisis while others lose out .
Only a few EU countries will come out well from this .
Sadly the great majority will suffer losses , including Poland - until recently the EU 's third largest food producer , which in the past could have fed its population twice over .
Food shortages are going hand in glove with higher costs .
According to the World Bank , in the last three years food prices have risen by a total of 83 % ; they are still rising and they will continue to do so .
The International Monetary Fund , the World Bank and the governments of many countries know that food shortages threaten the biological security of peoples .
Following interventions by numerous representatives , including some from Poland , the European Union released 2 900 000 hectares of fallow land for cereal production and increased the milk quota by 2 % .
This did not solve the problem , though .
The short-sighted EU agricultural policy is still in place .
Processing plants are being closed , cultivation areas are dwindling , trees are being grown on arable land and many other actions are being taken that limit food production .
Who will provide us with healthy , cheap foods in the future ?
American producers certainly will , although they will not be healthy , as they will be genetically modified .
Why , then , are we waiting ?
We already know , surely , that the EU 's agricultural policy as implemented to comply with the expectations of certain interest groups is a road to nowhere , or better , to a loss of biological security in the EU and a deterioration in the situation throughout the world .
We therefore need not only a review of the common agricultural policy , but also a re-negotiation of the treaties concluded and a new solution for the future .
( FR ) Mr President , the European Union , the international community , the IMF and the World Bank are raising the alarm , are joining forces , which is good , considering the current food crisis .
However , they are acting like pyromaniac fire-fighters .
I think that we still need to review the policies that have been adopted in the north and south over the last 20 years : structural adjustment plans implemented by leading international financial institutions , which have undermined the ability of States to organise and regulate their own economies , the withdrawal from and lack of interest in agriculture in the context of public development aid , deregulation , the sudden liberalisation of global trade and financial flows that has led to a form of ecological social dumping and speculation .
What makes me uncomfortable is that we offer advice and recommend solutions , but have not really criticised what has been done in previous decades .
Therefore , rather than talking about food security , we should allow the countries concerned , particularly in Africa , to develop their own agriculture , to organise their own regional markets and to protect these , yes , protect them in some way , just as the European Union did when it developed its common agricultural policy .
To do this , we also need to listen more to farmers ' associations in these countries , which are taking action , which have ideas , which have simple demands that could be supported with resources that are not necessarily extortionate .
Let us start , first of all , by listening to people on the ground who are proposing a whole series of initiatives that deserve to be encouraged and supported , especially by the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , the fiercer the exploitation of workers , the greater the wealth accumulated in the hands of the few .
Such is capitalism .
In demonstrations the starving , from Africa to the Middle East , and from south-east Asia to Latin America , chant one and the same slogan : ' we are hungry ! '
Demonstrations are being bloodily suppressed in Egypt , Somalia , Bangladesh , India and elsewhere .
There have been deaths , injuries and hundreds of arrests .
In Haiti , which is already occupied by imperialist forces , the suppressors have been the UN peacekeeping forces , who even shot at children .
For imperialism is no less than occupation , appropriation and subjugation .
The rage at the demonstrations is not solely over food , petrol or biofuel prices ; it is the people 's protest about poverty and degradation , which are being aggravated by capitalist barbarity .
Imperialist organisations and associations are worried by the uprising of the hungry ; they are calling for measures hardly different from those causing millions to starve to death .
Your measures are fragmentary .
You do not want to meet fundamental human needs , nor do these measures do so , for if they did , you would lose wealth .
There is a solution .
It is real disobedience and resistance which will lead to the overthrow of the exploitative barbarity of capitalism itself .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not agree with what has been said about food prices rocketing .
It seems absurd to me that anyone is thinking of feeding developing countries by making them grow plants for fuel rather than food .
I cannot support the pro-GMO lobby at all , because biofuels are one thing and foods are another , and what especially concerns me is the monopoly outside Europe on patents and seeds that makes many highly dependent on the United States and European farmers .
In my opinion , the rise in prices is not due either to climate change or to fuel being expensive , which - though it has an impact - does not do so to the extent that people are saying ; it should be pointed out among other things that we are also enjoying a good euro / dollar exchange rate .
Instead I am convinced that it is caused by speculation by the distribution sector , especially the major retailers , otherwise how do you explain that in Italy , prices for agricultural produce have changed little in the last seven years and certainly not to the extent by which consumer prices have increased ?
In Italy , either the multinational major retailers or the cooperatives are using a cartel strategy utterly speculatively to the detriment of consumers .
Purchasing power will only recover , I believe , with a moratorium on consumer prices .
I agree : less market , less competition and less globalisation to help productivity and consumption .
I will therefore be voting against the Council and Commission statement .
Mr President , for 30 years we have had some degree of food stability in the world , and now that has come to an end .
It is a dramatic end , it is a sudden end , and it is a shocking end .
We see the food riots we have heard of in Haiti - 20 killed , and the price of rice , beans , fruit , going up 50 % in a year .
The problem is , of course , partly population growth : in my lifetime the world 's population has gone up from two and a half billion to six and a half billion .
We cannot do much about that .
It is partly the consequence of new wealth in countries such as China , where the demand for , for example , chocolate is going up 15 % a year , and that is unsustainable in terms of the supply .
We cannot do much about that .
It is partly because of climate change , desertification , changes in rainfall patterns , more flooding and so forth , and we are trying to do something about that .
We have a package of measures to tackle that , and of course we have the measures we have heard about today from the Commissioner : food aid and farming support for the poorest countries .
It is partly , though , a result of the rush into biofuels : the EU proposal of a 10 % increase in fuel for transport ; in America , the 30 % of corn crops now going into ethanol , reducing the land available for food and pushing up the price of cornflour .
We have seen the consequences highlighted by the statements by Jean Ziegler about the crime against humanity .
That may be overstating it , but there is an element of truth there , and it is certainly true that we have to look for the second-generation biofuels .
We have to look for the woody rather than liquid biofuels for transport .
We have to grow biofuels sustainably .
If we do that - not through monoculture - then we can find biofuels to be part of the solution .
But at the moment they are at great risk of being part of the problem .
( PT ) We all know that Europe and the world were unexpectedly caught off guard by a problem that due to its size and economic and humanitarian consequences requires a multifaceted approach and response at European and international level .
This is obviously not an agricultural issue , but is a problem that cannot be solved without agriculture .
We are aware of the different causes but we are a long way from knowing the contribution of each one to the present situation : a straightforward increase in demand , biofuels , the simple coincidence of bad harvests in several areas of the world , consequences of climate change , pure speculation arising from the previous causes ?
The Commission has to take action to provide us with answers to these questions quickly and thoroughly .
Moreover , there is the added importance of deepening and speeding up the adjourned debate on the health check and the WTO negotiations .
As political decision makers , this crisis forces us to answer some questions , of which I highlight the following : is the liberal model that has progressively been applied to the common agricultural policy effective enough to deal with this type of problem ?
How can we produce more without risking the sustainability of resources and what alternatives can be found , especially for animal nutrition ?
What new intervention mechanisms should we adopt to prevent strategic public stocks being replaced by speculative private hoarding ?
Are the cooperation policy priorities of the European Union and international institutions correct ?
We must act quickly to avoid being caught off guard in an even more sudden fashion or by even worse situations .
The socialists and , in particular , those involved in agricultural affairs , are aware of their responsibilities and are ready to take part in this debate and to contribute towards finding effective solutions to what may rapidly become the most important global issue .
( PL ) Mr President , the increase in the global population and the qualitative increase in consumption in developed countries has led to a major hike in food prices .
This could have been foreseen .
We should not be shocked by this .
This problem can only grow , as population numbers will continue to increase and people in developed countries will be looking for good food with no genetic contamination , which will clearly cost significantly more .
Meanwhile , instead of asking ourselves how we can bring down food prices in the EU , we are subsidising expensive agriculture in the old countries , while in the new accession countries we are supporting the cheaper production of healthy foods only to a limited extent , and this is obviously going to restrict any growth in production in these countries .
Europe is faced with a great opportunity to level the negative foreign trade balance with such countries as China and India , as the standard of living in these countries is steadily rising and population numbers are rising hand over fist .
They are going to need a lot more food .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , two reports on today 's discussion .
Firstly , there have been violent protests against high food prices in Haiti , Bangladesh , Egypt and other countries . Secondly , European farmers are demonstrating against the fall in prices in the dairy sector .
To all appearances , there are two conflicting reports , but they do belong together and prove that there are many sides to the crisis .
We need a package of measures because the temptation to resort to protectionism through food producers and retail chains is an aspect that should be taken seriously and policy must be determined here first .
Unlike Mr Borrell , I do no believe that we should be regulating , but that we should be providing greater competition .
That is the key !
I do not therefore see the often quoted connection between food prices and the cultivation of renewable raw materials .
This is disproportionate and not targeted .
The fact is that demand for foodstuffs has increased , particularly in China and India .
We cannot avoid this , but we do nevertheless have to state that there is still no shortage of food to justify this increase in prices .
I do think , however , that we must introduce measures to increase food production .
Our farmers ' benefit payments should therefore be increased along these lines .
I believe the revision of our agricultural policy is wrong ; it has to be developed further - that is an important principle .
We should also , however , be looking at our legislation to see whether it is at all appropriate for increasing production .
We have a lot of regulations , which restrict the use of fertilisers and pesticides , which cause stresses and strains in the Water Framework Directive .
These are not now causing price increases .
Here we should once again be thinking about whether major developments are necessary .
The issue of set-aside must also , of course , be developed further .
Set-aside must be removed . We should be cultivating food in these areas .
( FR ) Mr President , in view of the current food crisis , the European Commission has just announced that it will be significantly increasing its emergency food aid .
This is excellent news , but it is mainly by focusing on these structural causes that the Commission will show that it has grasped the extent of the crisis and that it recognises that both it and the EU are fully accountable for what happens today .
For us European Socialists , the current crisis has nothing to do with fate ; it is merely the result of very clear political decisions taken by northern countries in general in a whole range of areas .
We need to realise that , while people are rioting and there are hunger demonstrations - and who can blame them - the Commission , which has several voices , is still continuing to subsidise exports of its agricultural produce at the expense of millions of small producers in the south who are incapable of competing .
Bear in mind that some within the European Union are reducing the amount of public development aid , while continuing to promise and claim the exact opposite .
We also need to remember that the Commission is still trying to impose so-called economic partnership agreements on ACP countries , the poorest countries in the world ; agreements that they do not want , because it is clear to them that these agreements contain the seeds of other future crises .
There is a long list of decisions that the Union and the European Commission are continuing to take which blatantly contradict the objectives announced regarding development cooperation .
What more can be said about a system , our system , in which rice or wheat have become safe investments ?
Is it really fair to see European banks offer their customers investment products that speculate on the rise in commodity and food prices ?
Do we just lie down and accept the fact that we are forcing millions of people to starve , just so that we can drive around in environmentally-friendly cars and admire our green spaces ?
No , we do not .
This is why we are calling for greater cohesion between the various policies of the European Union and why we are fiercely lobbying the Commission and Mr Barroso so that we stop this rush towards biofuels by working towards the introduction of a moratorium , like the one proposed by Mr Ziegler before the United Nations , both on their use and production , as long as they compete with food .
I should like to finish by informing my fellow Member Mr Cornillet that the fish proverb is Mao Tse-tung , and not René Dumont .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it has been said that around 850 million people suffer from hunger or are undernourished each day .
The curious thing is that the majority of these people live in the countryside and , would you believe , produce food themselves .
This is bizarre .
There is something very wrong there .
We are now also faced with a tremendous increase in food prices .
This is due to various developments , which have already been specified .
Increasing prosperity in China and India and an increasing demand for meat products , the European and US objectives in relation to biofuels , rising energy prices ... the list continues .
The World Food Programme needs USD 7 million more this year in order to help the same number of people as last year .
The consequences for the poorest people are immense .
New strategies will be required , first and foremost in the short term .
In the near future we will have to supplement the shortfalls that exist within the World Food Programme .
I am also happy with the Commissioner 's promises to deploy additional resources in order to achieve this , for example by bringing forward the expenditure on food aid that is anticipated for later this year and by drawing on the reserves for humanitarian aid .
However , according to an excellent proverb , prevention is better than cure .
For that reason we must all look in particular at the longer term policy measures .
How can we ensure that developing countries have a secure food supply ?
What can we encourage and how can we give them space ?
Do we know which of our policies or those of the IMF or World Bank support or pose a threat to food security ?
Can we not do more with our agricultural policy ?
I would like to ask the Commission to what extent food security has featured in the work programme up until now in recent years , because after all , globalisation has not come out of the blue .
As regards prevention being better than cure , I would like to refer to the success formula of the Hunger Project , an international organisation that has already achieved excellent , lasting results in various countries by means of an integrated approach .
I would also like to point to the implementation of the joint strategy for Africa , the EU-Africa strategy .
That strategy specifically devotes attention to a partnership for the development of the African agricultural sector .
My question is how the Commission is also active in this respect .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the energy sector is now faced with a very ethical challenge .
Energy and bread are now at odds with one another .
This is nothing less than the difference between prosperity and poverty .
The consequences of speculation are that the cost of grain is in practice tied to the price of oil .
The higher that is , the more grain will also be used as fuel , unless we intervene .
Now only about 2 % of grain is used in the production of biofuel , but that figure is rising .
The Organization for Economic Development and the United Nations estimated that if the price of oil reached the 56 dollar level , the production of grain for food would go down by a couple of percentage points and the price of grain , which is to say food , would go up by around 10 % .
What about if the price of oil kept rising to reach the 100 dollar mark , which is where it is now ?
We urgently need international norms and agreements , so that the rise in the cost of food can be halted , as can the switch from the use of grain to make bread to the use of grain to make fuel for four-by-fours on our roads .
We might imagine all sorts of threatening scenarios , but there is some good news .
Russia is working on a scheme to produce competitive renewable energy for the European market .
That means hydroelectric power , the use of reserves of water and forest mass on a large scale - in fact , the world 's largest .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am very much of the opinion that we have a serious problem to deal with here .
I would , however , strongly advise that we do not throw the baby out with the bath water , but instead determine the real reasons behind this .
I am rather astonished that this debate about food comes as such a surprise to many of our fellow Members .
The world 's population has been continually expanding over the last 20 years .
Each year there are an additional 80 million people .
Anyone who is now surprised , therefore , should be asking themselves where they have been recently .
We have to look at which points we can do something about and which ones we are unlikely to be able to do anything about .
I believe that one objectionable item is the issue of worldwide stock market speculation on cereal and cocoa products .
Assets on the stock markets are huge and speculators are now climbing aboard instead of investing in raw materials .
This naturally leads to rising prices and human suffering , which , incidentally , also affects livestock farmers in Europe .
We must provide aggressive measures here .
The export rebate is dear to our hearts and everyone says this must now be abolished .
This we have already done , by the way , and it expires in 2013 .
We should not forget , however , to say to the United States that it must likewise phase out its food aid , because only then , when we do this together , can the instrument work .
If it is to work , then we must direct agricultural policy and production in the difficult countries of this world .
For this we need stable political relations in these countries .
Mismanagement is disappointing to many farmers , ownership rights are unclear , enormous basic taxes have to be paid to corrupt governments .
We do unfortunately have race conflicts and there is no equity at all for seed and tractors .
How is a farmer to produce crops - I am indeed one myself - when he has no seed ?
We have to turn our attention to this .
I could envisage the need for a European foreign agricultural policy .
The European Union has to throw all its weight into the equation in order to pick up on these shortcomings .
( FR ) Mr President , Council representative , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like first of all to underline the severity of the food crisis and its dramatic consequences in terms of exacerbating poverty and famine for people in developing countries .
The most disadvantaged people in our western countries are also affected by the rise in food prices and have been struggling for months with the daily price increases .
An urgent response is needed for this situation , as well as tailored solutions in the longer term , with the common agricultural policy recast as a development aid policy and a WTO-style trade policy preventing abuse of the dominant position by supermarkets in Europe , as well as food speculation , since agriculture is no ordinary economic sector .
The risks of famine and social and political destabilisation are too great , and I should remind you that the right to food is a fundamental human right .
We cannot leave agriculture to market economics alone , or to speculators who are today in search of safe investments following the property slump and the energy and mineral crisis .
We must equip ourselves with the tools of market regulation and solid and coherent agricultural and food policies , and replenish emergency stocks as soon as possible so that we can react to this kind of emergency .
In developing countries , we must also prioritise food production and food crops over non-food production , particularly agrofuels .
( SV ) Mr President , the food crisis we are now facing risks setting mankind back a decade when it comes to poverty , and risks creating instability and human misery in a large part of the world .
I believe that it is important to emphasise this , and also to state that we in the agriculture sector have not seen the same rapid development as experienced in the parts of the world 's economy which have been globalised .
What we see is the failure of regulated agricultural markets , a lack of open trade , and regulation which prevents farmers from using their land .
It is clear that , if we wish to , we can also decide to tackle many of the difficult problems we are currently struggling with .
Greater use of the available areas of the earth 's surface is a good thing in the battle for a better climate .
Having more cultivated products contributes towards biofuels as well as food .
However , at the same time there is also an opportunity to open the doors to economic development in the developing world .
At the same time this gives us in Europe the opportunity to pave the way for a more dynamic and open agricultural sector .
However , the answer to these problems does not lie in more regulation and more subsidies .
Instead it lies in greater openness for Europe 's farmers and farmers the world over to produce the food and the biofuels which the world needs .
This is freer agriculture , freer farmers and free trade .
If we manage to achieve this , we will also be able to make more progress in the international Doha negotiations , the free trade negotiations , while simultaneously doing something towards a better climate and a better world .
( HU ) Mr President , social tensions in Europe , human catastrophe on other continents - and the effect of price increases in food in Europe , mostly in poor urban areas , has now reached the middle classes too .
On the continent of Europe there are about one hundred million poor people in the Union , and in Hungary there are about three million people living below the poverty threshold whose difficult situation is exacerbated by the effect both of price increases for food containing fruit and of meat shortages .
The EU programmes already in place , such as the school milk and school fruit programmes , are therefore extremely important .
The current crisis shows that we need a new agricultural policy for 2013 .
The EU must produce the majority of its food , and food of good quality , and must also assist countries not in the EU with know-how , knowledge transfer and developments in agricultural production , so that this global problem of ever-increasing severity can be solved . Thank you for your attention .
( PT ) Mr President , the rise in demand from emerging economies , the increase in the price of oil , and climate change are factors that have contributed to the rise in food prices throughout the world , yet they do not explain everything .
The turbulent rise of the financial markets has contributed to increasing speculation , driven by the yields offered by raw material funds .
The proof is in the increase not only in food prices , but also in the price of nickel , silver and gold .
Food prices have shot up 83 % since 2005 , which , when linked with the high percentage of income that the poorest spend on food , means that we are now faced with the most important factor in increasing poverty and inequality .
Yet even more serious is the possibility that we may be on the cusp of a worldwide tragedy of incalculable proportions , which may lead to hunger and death for millions of people .
The International Monetary Fund warned against this very situation when it stated that if food prices remain at their current levels , more than 100 million people could die , the majority in Africa .
Concerted international intervention is thus urgently needed in order to step up aid to the most needy , because we are dealing with millions of life and death cases here .
But this is not enough !
Mechanisms to regulate international trade and for effective financial market supervision need to be created to prevent speculative operations that benefit only a small minority at the expense of hundreds of millions of poor and defenceless people .
The European Union has an obligation to lead this process at the global level , as it is only through such a stance that the goal of eradicating poverty and promoting peace throughout the world will cease to be utopian .
( FI ) Mr President , I do not believe that poor people in developing countries would fare better if we allowed market forces greater scope to operate in the food markets without regulation , as has been proposed here .
Global capitalism is headed for a moral crisis if it transpires that the origin of the food crisis lies with stock market speculators .
Here people have spoken of biofuels and the way they compete with food production for land .
It has been stated here that this competition has not been very great , at least until now .
Nevertheless , the problem needs to be analysed thoroughly , although we should not jump to any hasty conclusions .
We need fuels obtainable from renewable sources , but obviously not in a way that deprives food production of space .
Different countries and research institutes are now spending large sums of money on research into second and third generation biofuels .
These fuels do not compete with food production .
It has been estimated that the new generation fuels will be on the market in just a few years from now .
There is no reason to prevent research in this field , and for that reason we need to draw up clear sustainability criteria for biofuels and produce second and third generation biofuels in a sustainable way .
( SK ) When solving problems such as the one we are dealing with today , we should pause to think about what caused them in the first place .
The demographic crisis , human trafficking , global warming , cancer or terrorism have not just appeared by chance or overnight , nor did the problem of rising food prices .
By the same token , when dealing with rising food prices and its impact on the population we are inclined more often than not to look for solutions to the consequences without thinking about the causes .
The truth , however , is that we can only prevent the crisis from deteriorating if we get to the root of the problem .
When dealing with rising food prices and food crises in some parts of the world we also have to address the issues of the quality and quantity of food , which is one of the fundamental aspects of the lives of every man , woman , family or nation on this planet .
How can a young person develop physically , intellectually and spiritually without access to the necessary nutrition ?
How can a mother and father provide for their family unless they have the food they need to do so ?
We must not forget that the richest countries are those that used to exploit , often without due consideration , the wealth of poor countries without any compensation .
They did not respect an ecological balance , and today we can see the impact of their actions on the poorest populations .
Perhaps we do not have to look too far .
We should look at our own institutions , throwing away a lot of food every day because of internal regulations , while people suffering from hunger live nearby .
Everywhere in the world , hungry people usually make bad partners .
Mr President , there is now one more challenge for us to meet : to secure our food supply .
We have witnessed a massive rise in the price of food and this will remain the position for a considerable time to come .
The supply of cheap food has disappeared .
I have always been one of those who believed that there was never any such thing as cheap food , but when you direct grain away from food supply to produce energy , then you have changed the balance .
What we are seeing now is the knock-on effect of that .
We all know the reason for this , but it will be those countries who can afford it least that will be affected the most .
There is no need any more for set-aside , and we now have a moral duty to encourage our farmers to produce more to ensure that prices do not spiral out of total control and that many regions of the world do not suffer starvation .
We must look again at the Health Check to ensure that we can respond to the changed situation .
This will have a bitter-sweet effect on farmers and their families .
For years , they have been ridiculed about milk lakes and butter mountains .
Where are they now ?
They are all gone .
In Europe , we now have only 27 days of food supply left , as Mr Daul told us earlier this afternoon .
Yes , I believe we must look at the situation regarding the standards for GMOs .
We cannot turn a blind eye to this any more .
We are over-regulating ourselves out of the marketplace .
We have placed such constraints on our farmers that many have just given up and walked away .
We need more production or there will be a disaster .
We must encourage our farmers to produce that extra food .
This was not predicted , nor was it foreseen by anyone , no matter how hard they may now try to look back and tell us that they did .
The truth is that it has come upon us .
We must now respond to it .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , fairy tales usually begin with the words ' once upon a time ' .
I should also like to begin my speech like this .
Once upon a time there was a world trade organisation called the WTO , which wanted to create a worldwide balance between supply and demand through totally free trade .
It promised people in the poorest countries a substantial increase in prosperity and people in the rich countries cheap food through the liberalisation of trade .
This is the fairy tale ; the reality is somewhat different .
Worldwide free trade in agriculture is not appropriate for fighting global hunger and poverty on a sustained basis .
The World Bank and the WTO need to be aware of this .
Worldwide free trade in agriculture serves only a very few agricultural conglomerates , which export food from the poorest countries without any regard for the food situation itself .
Poverty cannot be combated effectively through global agricultural trade .
People in the poor regions are no longer able to afford food at high farm prices , and farmers in highly developed regions are no longer able to produce food at low farm prices because it is not profitable at that level .
Both clash .
Whether Mr Zoellick from the World Bank , Mr Lamy from the WTO and - unfortunately I do need to say this - my colleague Mr Hökmark from my own group grasp these connections , I very much doubt .
Therefore , nothing much will change in the situation in the near future .
With regard to farm prices in Europe , in 1961 I received 26 cents for 1 kilo of grain .
Two years ago I received 8 cents .
Farm prices cannot therefore be the cause of high food prices !
( SL ) I think that fundamental restructuring of agricultural policy is required regarding the various quotas , quantity allocations , restrictions and different incentives not to produce food .
I am also interested to see how much untilled arable land there still is in Europe .
I fully support the statement made by Mr Nicholson , that agricultural production in Europe should be stimulated , and that incentives for halting a reduction in the agricultural sector should be considered .
The young are leaving , so who will remain to work the land ?
The fact that there is a shortage of food does not mean that the gates should be opened wide to genetically modified agricultural products .
Also , I think that we need to revise our expectations regarding biofuels , and that on domestic markets we ought to examine why it is that high prices always bring superstores the highest profits .
In brief , I anticipate that the European Commission will prepare immediate measures , as well as a strategy for this new situation .
Mr President , we are facing a situation now that we have sleepwalked into , because for too long food was too cheap : it was below the cost of production .
Three years ago wheat was EUR 90 per tonne , which was below the cost of production .
Now it is about EUR 270 per tonne , and it is profitable to produce .
I am not as pessimistic as many speakers here today , because if the market is paying the right price for food , then it will be produced .
Therefore , we have to free up that market .
Europe can produce food : farmers in Europe have been dying for the opportunity to produce food , but for 20 years they have been told that there was too much food in the world and , therefore , food production had to be reduced .
Therefore , we have to use biotechnology to help us increase food production , we have to reduce bureaucracy and , in the mean time , we have to help the poorest in the world through this short-term crisis , because that is what it is .
In a country like Zimbabwe in Africa , it is also about good governance : if a madman is controlling the country , it will never be fed .
( PL ) Mr President , this is one of the most important debates - both political and economic - here in Parliament , as is borne out by the make-up of those who have contributed to it today .
This debate concerns not only the rise in food prices , but also deaths caused by hunger .
Today 's voices in this Chamber and the alarming analyses say what they say .
The price of wheat has risen by 130 % in the last year alone , that of soya by 87 % and that of rice by 74 % - these are facts .
During the last 30 years we have brought prices down , but what has happened during the past year has trumped all the warning signals .
The facts are as follows : there is a worldwide shortage of food ; there is hunger - 850 million people are going hungry .
In a dozen or more countries there have been riots , and these will get worse .
Tropical forests have been felled en masse , along with the Amazon Rainforest - in other words , the desire for biofuels outweighs the desire for a reduction in world hunger .
During the next few years there will be a global shortfall of 200 million tonnes of grain .
Global inflation will rise , there will be a continuing water shortage , and consumers in Europe will be forking out 30-40 % more from their wallets than they did a year ago .
What should we do ?
Urgently reform the common agricultural policy , as there are millions of farmers in Europe too who are suffering from poverty , and convene an international conference at the first available opportunity that will take certain decisions and draw certain conclusions from this discussion and this problem .
Mr President , I have sat in this House since 1994 , and have to say I do not think I have ever heard so much hypocrisy from people .
Years ago we were criticised , as Jim Nicholson said , for the over-production of food .
Now we are being criticised because food has reached what is probably a realistic and genuine price .
But what can we do about this ?
Well , Commissioner , there is something you can do , and you could do it tomorrow , if you had the will to do so .
That is , first of all , to stop the anti-dumping legislation on phosphate and potash , in particular , and nitrogen , coming into the European Union and going to the rest of the world .
Mr Mandelson put that legislation in place and it is causing a huge problem , because you need three things to produce food : sun , water and also nitrogen , phosphate and potash .
Third world countries cannot produce food unless they can get this at an affordable price , and at the moment it has risen from about GBP 80 a tonne to something like GBP 500 a tonne .
If you do something about that , then you will be helping the rest of the world .
( PL ) Mr President , for several years now we have been talking in the European Union and at the WTO about liberalisation of trade , which was meant to be understood as facilitation of trade , but in reality we are implementing a restriction on agricultural production .
In Europe , and not only in Europe , we have been restricting production systematically for quite some time .
The global rise in food prices is the result of a rise in production costs , energy and fuel costs and fertiliser and labour costs .
Let us not forget , however , that little more than a year ago the price of a barrel of oil was USD 70 , the profitability of agricultural production was different , and so was the profitability of biofuels , whereas today a barrel of oil costs USD 115 .
Biofuels are not the cause of the crisis , though .
Biofuels account for only 2 % of agricultural production , so they are only partly to blame .
I see much concern today , not to say fear , even here in this Chamber , but sudden , unconsidered action will not help .
We need a stable agricultural policy , but we must seek stabilisation not only in agriculture , but also in financial markets .
The lack of monitoring of financial markets is giving rise to speculation and the appearance of dangerous situations , firstly on the mortgage market , and then on the foodstuffs market .
Stabilisation in financial markets .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Mr Dillen , a Member of the European Parliament , said that in the situation concerning the food market , we should not just alleviate the symptoms , but cure the illness .
In order to do that , we must establish the correct diagnosis .
In my opinion this was a very useful debate and it will also help the Council in establishing the diagnosis , and in finding the right answers and cures .
However , what are the reasons that caused the situation on the world food market and the dramatic rise in food prices ?
The main reason is greater demand .
As has already been mentioned , the world 's population has grown , and a large part of this is now due to a higher standard of living .
And no one has the right to expect them to return to their previous meagre nutrition patterns .
What is the answer to this great demand ?
Increasing supplies .
I should like to mention here that the Council has already adopted certain measures .
As I have already mentioned in my introductory speech , by temporarily abolishing the fallow land obligation we ensure that European farmers can productively use an additional 10 % of agricultural land .
The significance of this is also evident from the statement made by Joseph Daul on the amount of land in Europe currently dedicated to biofuel .
More about this later .
We have also increased the milk quota by 2 % .
These are only a few measures that the Council has adopted in order to increase supply .
Apart from increasing supply in the European Union itself , it is , of course , necessary to act in order to increase food production in other parts of the world , in particular in developing countries .
Another reason is more expensive production , because of higher energy prices , among other things .
To find the answers we must look into more intensive research , rationalisation , new technologies , and innovative production in farming .
Climate change is definitely another reason .
Long-term droughts in one of the world 's largest producers of cereals and rice have reduced the country 's yields and its contribution to supply on the world market .
This is where the European Union is looking for answers , following the line that has been indicated in the batch of energy legislation currently under negotiation , and for which the Presidency has set itself a firm target of seeking to reach agreement by the end of this year .
Now a word or two about biofuels .
No doubt there is some connection , but it is not possible to maintain that this is one of the main reasons for the current situation on the food market .
In spite of this , the world is considering this aspect very seriously as well .
For this reason , on the initiative of the Slovenian Presidency , an ad hoc task group was recently set up , its main task being to draw up permanent criteria for the production of biofuels .
The purpose of the criteria would be that the production of biofuels should not replace food production , that the social aspects and impact of the production of biofuels are taken into consideration , and that biodiversity is preserved .
However , these are just a few words about the Council 's activities and its approach to this serious problem .
I should like to add something else .
A combination of high food prices and poverty is the worst possible combination .
It is a lethal combination leading to unrest in a number of developing countries ; it is a combination leading to starvation .
Considering that we shall probably be faced with high food prices for some time to come , we must do more to eliminate poverty , and the Slovene Presidency will make efforts to this end .
In our view , one of the important themes for the next session of the European Council is this millennium 's development objective .
Europe 's progress towards realising these objectives has almost come to a halt .
We would like to provide the European Union with fresh impetus to achieve these objectives , and , as I mentioned earlier , in our view this is one of the significant topics for the June European Union Council .
Thank you again for this debate . I reiterate that I am convinced that it will enable the Council to establish the right diagnosis and find the right remedies .
member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , given the short time available to me , I would like to answer very briefly .
However , first I would like to make one or two criticisms .
Evidently I share some of the considerations and points that have been made , although not all of them , so I will try to focus on the factors that need clarification .
Firstly , I clearly agree that solutions cannot be implemented effectively by the European Union alone ; that is quite obvious but also rather enlightening .
It is clear that these solutions must be implemented by all major stakeholders , and I believe that this process is under way .
However , I would like to point out that what I have heard here today is excellent for democracy and for adversarial debate .
However , I have still witnessed rather perfunctory ideological positions - and an extremely radical one , in one case - being adopted .
I respect that , I have absolutely no prejudices on the subject , but if there is one thing that from my point of view is not a solution to the food crisis , it is short-sighted and narrow-minded ideological rhetoric .
I do not believe that this will offer us a solution , because the problem is many-sided and multifaceted .
There is a whole series of answers for a whole series of causes , as the Minister said .
There is not one single cause .
Take biofuels , for example .
The European Commission has always stressed that it is vital to ensure that investments in biofuel development translate into tangible effects for poverty , particularly in rural areas .
We have never recommended or said that biofuels should be grown everywhere .
We can only grow biofuels where there is evidence of possible overproduction .
In countries where there is no self-sufficiency , it is obviously extremely dangerous and absolutely inadvisable to grow biofuels .
Therefore , the solutions are not as simple as that .
I would also like to say something else , which is that basically I do not understand .
I hear MEPs who , I think , still believe in the effectiveness , honour and values of Europe , as well as feeling a certain pride in being European . I hear them constantly complaining and apologising .
Basically this is all meant to be Europe 's fault .
I do not accept that .
Someone said that Europe did not like or was not helping developing countries .
Europe today accounts for 56 % of world aid .
In terms of food aid , today Europe finances produce on local markets and does not send its agricultural surplus to developing countries .
We also need to stop talking nonsense about the political responsibility of Europe .
Personally , I am rather proud of what Europe has done over the last 50 years , particularly for developing countries even if no one else will say it .
Biofuels : I have already answered that question .
It is clear that the WTO must be reformed , that we must go further with the WTO .
However , if there was no WTO , where would we be ?
What would happen to world poverty ?
The WTO is the first international organisation to try to restore some ethical principles to global trade .
I am reminding you of this because it is all too easy to throw the baby out with the bathwater .
This is one ideological prejudice that I would like to get rid of .
We must be reasonable .
GMOs : on this subject , I am of course speaking in a personal capacity , because it is frowned on to become unilaterally involved in this issue .
Personally , I am not one of those people who thinks that this issue has already been settled .
To say that GMOs are a bad thing , just like that , is an ideological prejudice .
It is a kind of scientism , a kind of improvised scientism .
I believe that there is nothing wrong with continuing research into trying to ensure food self-sufficiency , particularly in poor countries .
It is intellectually rational .
To do otherwise would not be intellectually rational , it would not be open-minded .
I think this is something that needs to be said .
I am not going to come back to you , Mr Hutchinson , on your constant refrain about EPAs , because I truly have too much admiration and esteem for you .
Would you like me to tell you that if I am in favour of EPAs , of economic partnership agreements to create regional markets , then it is because I believe that to tackle the question of food security , economic partnership agreements are probably part of the solution , because until we have regional markets that are economically integrated , developing countries will not be able to benefit from globalisation ?
There is my answer .
We cannot agree , in fact in my opinion we will never see eye to eye on this subject , although I think that it is important nonetheless to remind you of my position .
I have heard people talking today about capitalist barbarianism .
I do not really understand what that is .
For me , capitalism is an economic mechanism , it is an economic machine that , until proven otherwise , has demonstrated its benefits more than any other system .
Of course , I have said it often before , I am no lover of capitalism .
Capitalism is not an object of my affection , it is simply a means to an end .
In any case , I do often like to distinguish between capitalism and liberalism .
Clearly , my socialist friends are keen to combine these , yet the two things are not the same . Even I have to say it .
Fine , so capitalism is a means to an end and nothing more than that .
I agree that a market economy and capitalism cannot be virtuous without a government to lay down rules , to enforce them and to redistribute the wealth created properly and fairly , but please do not let us get bogged down in ideological simplification , because if we do there will be no end to this crisis .
I think this has to be said .
That is pretty much what I wanted to say on the subject . This subject is not closed .
I have heard valid and important arguments from both sides of the chamber .
As the Minister said , we need to continue this discussion , but right now I am faced with an emergency .
We need to help the WFP find ways of preventing an imminent food disaster .
The second priority , in the medium term , is to give massive support to developing countries that are not self-sufficient so that they can produce more .
Nevertheless , when I hear all these people saying that they want to introduce laws and regulations , I wonder whether we need to rein in the market economy .
Nevertheless , I should remind you that our agriculture is one of the few economic sectors which has come under enormous regulation and I would even say improvised dirigisme .
Dirigisme , when it is not improvised , can deliver results , but stop-and-go , improvised dirigisme is rather dangerous .
If the effects of this policy in the agricultural sector have not been totally convincing , perhaps we should ask ourselves , as was said earlier , whether this is not precisely because there has been too much improvised dirigisme instead of natural globalisation .
I am not a fan of globalisation , I am simply saying that it is there , we cannot constrain it .
Yes , we can introduce rules , through the WTO , through the United Nations , through any number of international organisations , but to say that we can legislate on all of this overnight and get rid of all the systemic abuses through regulations that you do not have the power to issue , then I do not really see how this can be done .
I too wish to be pragmatic .
We will pull out all the stops , and have already done so , in order to increase production in developing countries ; this seems to me to be the only real solution to tackling this phenomenon , which admittedly I was critical of at first .
I wanted to really raise awareness because , if nothing is done , there will be a humanitarian disaster , a food tsunami , with conflict , with truly unmanageable situations .
Thank you for this debate . I think this is a subject we will return to .
It has been extremely productive and interesting .
What I will take away with me are the best arguments that I have heard from both sides , which I will try to use to defend a cause which is still , when all is said and done , a common cause .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the May 2008 session in Strasbourg .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) My country , Poland , which I represent here in the forum of the European Parliament , could be a major producer of agricultural products , and much healthier products than the food currently produced in the West .
As a result of errors made by our negotiators when we acceded to the EU , we were obliged by the limits imposed on us to place significant restrictions on Polish agricultural production .
This policy of artificially restricting food production is now having drastic consequences for the whole of Europe .
The most pain inflicted by the increase in food prices , plus galloping inflation in energy prices , is being felt by pensioners .
The poverty zone in Europe is growing alarmingly and embracing increasing numbers of people , particularly families with many children , who are currently finding it difficult to survive from one month to the next .
In the new Member States , including Poland , there are many land areas that have so far never been managed .
Through their use , industry could begin producing biofuels , for example , which are having a significant impact on the current rise in food prices .
This requires a radical change in how the problem is approached by European Commission officials , however , as well as the taking of immediate steps to utilise the production potential of the new Member States .
in writing . - ( PT ) The causes of rising food prices in the European Union and developing countries vary , but we cannot ignore the contribution of the CAP and of agriculture being diverted towards biofuel production .
Several bodies are highlighting this issue .
For instance , the EEA Scientific Committee said it believed the EU should suspend the 10 % target for biofuel use by 2020 .
Even the President of the World Bank talked about countries facing food shortages and called on producers of biofuel raw materials to temporarily cease their cultivation .
The FAO itself has already issued a warning about food riots .
There have been demonstrations and serious social tension in various African and Asian countries because of food shortages .
Jean Ziegler , the UN Special Rapporteur on the right to food , said that mass production of biofuels was a crime against humanity because of its impact on global food prices .
It is therefore all the more baffling that the European Commission has confirmed that it will stand by the target of 10 % of the fuel used in road transport being generated by biomass or plant oils .
in writing . - ( RO ) According to Eurostat , in 2007 , the real prices of agricultural products increased 5 % in the Union as compared to 2006 , and the biggest increase , of 15.8 % , was recorded in Romania .
In Europe , the increase in the price of milk and chicken was 7.8 % and the greatest increase in the prices of agricultural products was recorded for cereals ( 45.4 % ) and fodder crops ( 11.5 % ) .
In this case too , Romania recorded the greatest increase ( 29.2 % ) .
Last year in Europe the producer price of agricultural products increased by 4.6 % , while producer costs increased by 5.3 % , and the level of subsidies decreased by 3.1 % .
In the new Member States , the costs of agricultural producers increased dramatically , and the subsidies are very low .
The largest declines of income per farmer were recorded in Bulgaria ( -18.6 % ) and Romania ( -16.1 % ) .
The low value , non-payment of agricultural subsidies and difficult access to agricultural loans made it impossible to implement the agricultural technologies and thus very small productions were obtained per hectare .
The competition for using agricultural land also contributes to the increase in the prices of food products and , in 2007 , the area designed for biofuel cultures increased by 13.6 % as compared to 2006 , and by 31.5 % as compared to 2002-2006 .
in writing . - ( RO ) The latest developments on the global markets of agricultural products have generated a situation that few governments are prepared to deal with .
The spectacular price increases , especially for basic cereals , risk starvation for millions of people .
This new reality should receive an answer from governments and European institutions .
This new level of agricultural prices presents new opportunities for producers , including for those of the EU Member States .
In Romania , 40 % of the population live in a rural environment , many of them being agricultural producers .
The new realities of the markets of agricultural products represent a chance for them to improve their economic results and , implicitly , to increase their living standard .
Unfortunately , the agricultural segment reacts very slowly to price changes on global markets .
Small producers deal with heavy bureaucracy and are disadvantaged when negotiating purchase contracts against big chains of distributors with dominant positions on the market .
The EU should support small agricultural producers in order for them to benefit from higher income from their work .
The access of small agricultural producers to the markets should be facilitated and global distributors should be subject to transparent regulations , which would prevent anti-competitive policies .
European satellite radionavigation programmes ( EGNOS and Gallileo ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Barsi-Pataky , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , on the amended proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the further implementation of the European satellite radionavigation programmes ( EGNOS and Galileo ) - C6-0345 / 2007 - .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) I am delighted to be here with you in today 's plenary session dedicated to the debate on the Galileo Implementation Regulation .
We are all very much aware of the geostrategic and economic significance that the Galileo programme and EGNOS have for the European Union .
However , before I address the text that has been tabled , allow me to mention briefly the decisive events that these two programmes have faced over the past year .
Under the German Presidency , in June 2007 the Council endorsed a courageous decision to discontinue the unsuccessful negotiations on concessions .
This initiative was followed by the European Parliament 's Resolution expressing strong support for the two programmes to be continued under the auspices of the European Union , and making an unequivocal call for the entire funding to be secured from the European Union 's budget .
When later on , in September 2007 , the Commission tabled a bundle of proposals which would steer the projects towards 100 % funding from the public sector , amongst the proposals was a regulation on implementation .
Owing to the agreement reached in November last year between the ECOFIN Council and the European Parliament on a resolution , and a general decision which the TTE Council endorsed a week later , through conclusions regarding the future development of Galileo , we have succeeded in getting the two programmes out of the cul-de-sac and returned them to the public domain .
I am pleased that when they were looking for a compromise on the legal basis so that the Galileo project could be brought to life in its entirety , all three institutions engaged in constructive cooperation .
I should especially like to express my gratitude to the rapporteur Mrs Barsi-Pataky , as well as to Mrs Angelika Niebler , the Chairman of the ITRE Committee .
The Slovenian Presidency prides itself on having made all necessary efforts to reach agreement during its first reading .
I believe that the result of our negotiations is a balanced text .
The text before us specifies the budgeted amount required for the programmes over the period 2007-2013 , as well as the management and implementation of GNSS programmes , including the public procurement principles and structure .
We have all accepted the responsibility which the European Parliament has towards citizens , as the budgetary authority
In order to facilitate the fulfilment of each task as regards programmes , we have formed an interinstitutional committee for Galileo .
The committee will monitor progress in implementing these programmes , the international agreements associated with the two programmes , the preparation of markets , the efficiency of the management structure , and the annual programme review .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that it is not necessary to particularly emphasise the importance of the European satellite navigation programmes to the creation of new jobs and European competitiveness .
The two programmes are completely consistent with the Lisbon strategy and other Community policies , and they will enable us to develop and protect European know-how , particularly in the area of applications , which will directly benefit our citizens .
I should like to thank you for your attention and , in particular , for your constructive cooperation in this important European project .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , clearly this part-session is of major importance .
I believe that together we can congratulate ourselves for finally seeing Galileo emerge as a major European project able to be realised .
At the end of November 2007 , two major political decisions were made in favour of this major European project .
Since then , the European Parliament and the Council , conscious of the need to swiftly adopt regulations relating to the continuation of the EGNOS and Galileo programmes , examined the text of the Commission 's proposal with a view to adoption at first reading .
I would like to pay homage to the constructive work of the three institutions , particularly Parliament .
Thanks to the efforts of each and all of them , we have made enormous progress in the various tripartite dialogues and are today looking at a draft regulation that satisfies Parliament , the Council and the Commission .
The Council , at its sitting on 7 April 2008 , under your presidency , Minister , expressed itself largely in favour .
It is therefore crucial , ladies and gentlemen , that Parliament also expresses itself in favour today .
I can confirm that the proposal includes financing for programmes in complete accordance with the budgetary agreement reached in November 2007 between the European Parliament and the Council .
I should again like to extend my heartfelt thanks to the European Parliament for the major role that it has played in bringing about this result .
The text also establishes satisfactory governance of the programmes .
It proposes a strict division of tasks between the Commission , the supervisory authority and the European Space Agency , with the Commission being assigned the role of owner and the European Space Agency the role of manager .
The future regulation also tackles the issue of safety and security of systems .
This aspect of the programmes , while essential , had not previously been addressed so clearly and satisfactorily .
The Commission will from now on ensure the management of the programme with the permanent and valuable support of the Member States , which have the requisite expertise in this matter .
On this point , I can confirm that the Galileo infrastructure is designed to serve the five functions described in the annex to the future regulation .
The provisions of the text relating to security in no way affect the scope of this annex .
Any amendment that might undermine the civil nature of the Galileo programme should entail a revision of the regulation .
We have been conscious of the question of procurement policy .
We need both to assess the competencies of the industrial stakeholders in each Member State and at the same time , through fair competition of course , limit the attendant risks of excess and delay .
On the question of fundamental ownership , for the three Community institutions , the regulation provides that the European Community must be the sole owner of all tangible and intangible assets developed under the EGNOS and Galileo programmes .
Finally , provisions relating to committee procedure and the specific framework established alongside the regulation satisfy Parliament 's wishes to be kept constantly informed of the progress of the programmes .
Naturally , given the role played by Parliament so far , it is clearly preferable and even essential that Parliament , as budgetary authority , is closely involved in the future of this programme .
The swift adoption of the text proposed would represent the first stage in governance reform of the programmes .
The Commission should table a proposal amending the regulation in terms of the management structures of the European GNSS programmes .
We will adapt the regulation to the new authority and supervision roles based on the text that you have negotiated with the Council .
I will personally see to it that Parliament is closely involved in this second stage of public governance reform .
Minister , ladies and gentlemen , we are counting on you to support Galileo and to open up the way for effective and swift implementation of this vast Community project .
Over the next few months , we will have the chance to cover all of the numerous applications that Galileo might have and , in this regard , an action plan will be unveiled by the Commission .
However , for these applications to become a reality , clearly Galileo must materialise .
Mr President , thanks to the European Parliament , and thanks to the Portuguese and Slovenian presidencies , Galileo now has , I believe , every chance of success .
rapporteur . - ( HU ) Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , Minister Žerjav , Vice-President Barrot , ladies and gentlemen .
The European Parliament has given continuous and positive support to the Galileo programme since its inception .
In November last year , 2007 , the European Parliament , in a bold step , moved the programme out of the doldrums and in December approved the financing for the development of the GNSS programmes from a revised Community budget .
We are now discussing a regulation on the implementation of the Galileo and EGNOS GNSS programmes following a successful informal trialogue in the first reading .
Financing , which will be completely from the Community budget , necessitates special responsibility to European taxpayers and the careful regulation that goes with it .
This is particularly true for financing , programme governance , public procurement procedures and security .
We have learned so much in the past few years , being confronted with so many problems .
With regulations , too , we are going down an entirely new road , you could say we are blazing a trail , since this is the first common European infrastructure which is being built up jointly and is under common Community ownership .
Financing - the European Parliament recognises that the development cost of the programme is EUR 3.4 billion , assured by the budgetary authorities .
The Commission will also be asked to submit a proposal by 2010 for post-2013 financing , in particular for common ownership commitments .
Please note that keeping to schedules and avoiding further delay are pivotal in achieving the financial success of the programmes .
Pricing policy will be determined after detailed analysis of the utilisation stage , bearing in mind that consumers will be getting a good quality service .
Management of the programme will be designed for clear shared authority .
The Commission is responsible for programme implementation and programme management and will be aided in its work , in committee procedures , by the Programme Committee .
The European Space Agency ( ESA ) is the prime contractor , and it is to be noted that the contractual agreement between the Commission and the ESA will be a pledge of the programme 's success .
After long debate , the GSA ( the European GNSS Supervisory Authority ) will oversee programme security .
The European Parliament , the Council and the committee recognise that new forms of cooperation must be found , in order for the programme to succeed .
In future , in line with the declaration in the Annex we will jointly follow the progress of implementation of the programme quarterly , in the Interinstitutional Panel , and the work programme will be reviewed annually .
The regulations on public procurement procedures were an important part of the November rapporteur 's report , and the key elements have been incorporated into the Council proposal . We are in complete agreement with the latter .
With the Galileo programme we have hopes of new technology , development , new business opportunities and work , and we particularly stress the opportunities for small and medium-sized enterprises in all 27 Member States .
The regulations provide for this .
Parliament 's negotiating delegation , under the chairmanship of Angelika Niebler , ITRE Chairwoman ( Committee on Industry , Research and Energy ) , and with the participation of shadow rapporteurs and representatives of opinion-giving committees , submitted the text approved in the first reading as part of the informal trialogue to the ITRE Committee . The ITRE Committee approved it unanimously .
We now submit these regulations to the European Parliament in plenary .
Finally , I am grateful to the Slovene Presidency for its commitment to the programme , to the Commission for its expert work , and to my colleagues for their support , which has made agreement possible .
Thank you .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , let me for my part express satisfaction with the result we have reached . This of course promises to be an anomaly : usually the Committee on Budgets is called on to find the money for a specific programme , but here the reverse has been the case .
We had already found the money , and we were trying to determine the structure of the programme .
After sitting for some 40 days in talks with the Council , we finally succeeded .
The final approval of Galileo , in my view , demonstrates three important facts .
Firstly , just when Europe is accused of having no ambitions of being in turmoil , our willingness to find the resources for such a technologically ambitious plan proves that the EU can more than answer its critics when it comes to benefiting citizens and business .
Secondly , as Commissioner Barrot has pointed out , without the European Parliament there would have been no Galileo .
The European Parliament has played a key part in negotiating with the Council over finding the resources , particularly in view of the private sector 's failure to commit funds , in contrast to earlier promises .
Thirdly and finally , we now have a programme funded entirely by the Community .
As this is a programme backed exclusively and solely by the European taxpayer , it places special obligations on the European Parliament , and on the managers of the programme , who are the European Commission , the ESA and the Galileo Supervisory Authority .
We will not shrink from this responsibility .
Until 2013 we will monitor the management of the programme very closely .
A great deal of money is involved , so our responsibilities are particularly onerous .
Thank you very much , and I congratulate all those who have worked to achieve this highly satisfactory result .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - ( DA ) Mr President , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism , I would also like to express my considerable satisfaction with the result that we have achieved today .
In the future , Galileo will ensure more effective , secure and environmentally sound transport .
For all modes of transport by road , rail , air and sea , this system will facilitate better management and control . This applies to private enterprises , to the authorities and to better information for us as citizens .
Many people have asked : why do we need Galileo when we already have GPS ?
However , we only have GPS on loan .
The EU has no control over the technology ; as satellite navigation is becoming pivotal to our society , the EU should have both its own infrastructure and extensive knowledge and expertise .
As we are now sending this EUR 3.5 billion of EU taxpayers ' money out into space for Galileo , we must ensure that it achieves the desired results .
Therefore , it is important that Parliament has an influence on future processes .
I would like to thank Mrs Barsi-Pataky for the excellent cooperation on this report .
I would also like to thank Mr Schinas and the Chair of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , Mrs Niebler , for their good cooperation and for the fact that we have worked as a team during the negotiations . I would also like to thank Commissioner Barrot for his contribution in tying up the loose ends .
Last but not least , I would like to congratulate the Slovenian Presidency on the excellent result that we have achieved .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , President-in-Office , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today is a good day for Europe .
We are giving the green light to one of the most important EU projects - the Galileo satellite navigation system .
Like the previous speaker , I would also like to begin by saying a sincere thank you , thank you to our rapporteur , Mrs Barsi-Pataky , and to the Members of the Committee on Budgets and of the Committee on Transport and Tourism for their excellent cooperation .
I think that as Parliament we have worked very well together on this dossier and , together with the Council and the Commission , have achieved a really good result .
Whether we need a European satellite navigation system has been discussed on many occasions .
Mrs Jensen has been addressing this .
We still have the American GPS , the Russians have GLONASS , and the Chinese are setting something up .
This does indeed show that we also have to invest our own European satellite navigation system .
We must have this technology in Europe .
We need the know-how in order to build systems such as these independently in Europe and we also have to do something for the owners of our medium-sized enterprises , for small and medium-sized enterprises , which will then , if the infrastructure has been set up , benefit from this by developing the applications in many sectors , to which we perhaps do not give much thought at all today : in the logistics sector , in the road haulage sector , in maritime , rail and air transport and in the security field .
There are so many applications and I hope that we have done some good preparatory work today on behalf of the owners of our medium-sized enterprises .
Galileo has a long history .
I do not want to repeat it ; I would merely like to emphasise that Parliament is backing the Galileo project all the way .
Last year we secured the funding on the European tax revenue and with tomorrow 's vote we shall be making an important contribution to ensuring that the project management runs smoothly here , that the management process is transparent in design and that we as Parliament , as co-legislators in Europe , are involved in the further development and management of this project .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Galileo could also be subtitled ' The Neverending Story ' .
I hope this subtitle will no longer be an issue after today 's discussion and tomorrow 's vote .
The neverending story is now becoming reality .
I should like to thank Mrs Barsi-Pataky specifically for her helpful cooperation , not only in the trialogue negotiations , but also in recent years .
She has always been a fair partner and we have found reasonable and sound compromises .
Thank you also , of course , to the Presidency and specifically to the representative of the Presidency , who has been conducting the five trialogue negotiations with us .
A highly competent , committed woman who , it is safe to say , had quite simply - I suspect - not found this compromise in the Council .
My group , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , has always backed the Galileo Project and we are now also backing the result that has been established .
I can assure you that there will be no dissenting votes tomorrow from our group and we shall all be voting in favour of it .
We must also register the fact - and I would ask you to register this just once more , and it must not appear in the Minutes - that some of the German representatives had to lead the battle with their own government in order to get this going .
Mrs Niebler is smiling because she knows what I am talking about .
We have managed with this regulation to define clear structures , to find clear responsibility between the Commission , the Supervisory Authority and the ESA .
We have the Interinstitutional Panel , on which the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission have witnessed the progress of this project .
We shall be meeting four times a year until 2013 and we all assume that 2013 is a date that we shall likewise be keeping to , and that we shall also be keeping to the budget of 3.4 billion , otherwise it will become difficult to argue .
Galileo is - as my fellow Member Mrs Niebler has just stated - not only a satellite navigation system , which enables some citizens perhaps to arrive more quickly at their destination .
Galileo is an important technological development for us in Europe and we must maintain our know-how in astronautics , in navigation technology and in electronics .
It is therefore important for us to carry out this project here .
It is now particularly important that the Commission finalises the call for tenders before the summer .
This will be a very difficult task .
There will be a decisive settlement .
We must give the industry a second chance and the industry must grasp this second chance .
I hope that the industry representatives know what is in store for them .
We cannot afford a second failure as a result of industry difficulties .
I am very anxious about the proposal , the Commission 's action plan and above all about the financial perspective from 2014 .
Let us in conclusion together assert once again : the PPP is therefore not ultimately washed up .
As from 2013 / 2014 we shall be able to apply the PPP again when using the model .
I would not now want to write the PPP off entirely .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Minister , Commissioner , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , for experts in the aerospace sector , the name Galileo may conjure up not only an Italian astronomer , but a US space probe designed by NASA to study Jupiter and its dunes , due to be launched on 18 October 1989 from the Atlantis space shuttle .
This launch was significantly delayed following a freeze on shuttle flights after the Challenger accident .
Ultimately , the success of the Galileo mission within the Jupiter system was spectacular .
There are similarities with the European Galileo programme .
The programme has experienced setbacks .
However , I hope that our programme will prove just as successful .
What I hope for above all is that from now on , the name Galileo will be associated with the success of the European programme .
Thinking back to the difficult times linked with the failure of the public-private partnership , we need to join forces to get this project off the ground .
The European Parliament wanted to learn from the mistakes of the past and to assume its responsibilities as joint budgetary authority .
The fact that the European Parliament has finally agreed to keeping a supervisory authority seems important .
Expert supervision is in fact necessary , particularly because the Galileo programme is a first for the European Union .
This is the first time that the European Union has invested in its own infrastructure .
The European Commission will be owner and the European Space Agency will be manager .
These responsibilities must be clearly defined and allocated , but also properly monitored .
Since Parliament is closely involved in the project , it seems only right that it should be involved in supervising the programme .
Therefore , I welcome the creation of this Interinstitutional Monitoring Group , which will be composed of representatives from Parliament , the Council and the Commission , and will allow each institution , particularly ours , to take ownership of the project .
The project must succeed .
The credibility of the European Union on the international stage and , more importantly , with its citizens , depends on it .
To achieve this , I believe that the ESA must rely on the network of European experts , surround itself with the necessary expertise .
It will be a case of coordinating the companies building the various parts , to ensure the system 's safety and to control costs .
I would like to take the liberty of mentioning a personal view concerning the military use of Galileo .
The European Parliament has been forced to severely curtail the possibilities of military use .
This is a shame , although perhaps once the programme has matured , it will show that there is a place for careful military use of this tool .
Galileo made scientific advances , but also indirectly brought about progress in philosophy and other areas of thinking .
Galileo will have huge implications in terms of application , in terms of the independence of our continent , but also in terms of the commitment of the Union .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Barsi-Pataky for having such an open attitude , including all those of us who have participated in the process .
The last Galileo project , with private investment , failed , and we are now looking at a project that has solely European funding .
This means greater social responsibility for the project .
In this respect we can welcome the fact that Galileo is committing to offering a high-quality service at fair prices ; fair prices , to ensure that the public investment benefits citizens , so that they do not have to pay twice for the future services .
Something else that is very positive is the fact that Galileo will have to be interoperable with the current United States GPS system ; that it is learning from this line of interoperable services .
It is also important that protection of personal data and the right to privacy are technically incorporated into Galileo .
In short , Galileo has a new lease of life .
We hope to take advantage of this opportunity to offer useful and innovative services to all the people of Europe .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as a shadow rapporteur I am very glad that we have solved the main problems that were hindering the implementation of the Galileo system .
I would like to stress the importance of the contribution by Mrs Barsi-Pataky , whose expertise and diplomatic tact helped to negotiate the renewed referral .
I am saying this too as a participant in the trialogue with the Council and the Commission that was led , in my opinion with great success , by Mrs Niebler on behalf of Parliament .
This is not my first time speaking here about Galileo .
Like before , I do not deny that this is a project that is not only ambitious and costly , but also - or exactly for that reason - controversial for several of my colleagues in my group .
Drawing on my experience with cosmonautics , I myself am still convinced that we in Europe are going in the right direction .
However , the best argument in favour will definitely be for Galileo to function as quickly and as successfully as possible .
After the attempt to rely on a consortium of private companies had failed , a prudent solution was eventually reached .
Were we in Europe expected to deprive ourselves of the chance to be at the cutting edge of technology ?
Were we supposed to say no to the possibility of an increase in manufacturing productivity , enhanced safety of all types of transport , fuel savings , faster handling of industrial and other disasters , and other advantages that Galileo offers ?
I am convinced that the answer is no .
The text in question also provides answers to frequent questions , for example on protection of personal data and privacy , or on guarantees of fair economic competition .
It also refers to small and medium-sized enterprises , which should be awarded at least 40 % of subcontracted work .
Galileo is not cheap but on the other hand it should provide approximately 140 000 new jobs in the EU Member States .
I am convinced that when Galileo is up and running , the private sector will come back and will also want to profit from the project .
In conclusion , I have already invited the authority that manages Galileo to visit us in Prague .
We are still interested and the invitation still stands .
The Czech Republic , one of the smaller countries in the Union , sees the Galileo project as an opportunity for the future .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , let us be honest .
The EU satellite radio navigation programmes are an unmitigated disaster .
The private sector has been quick to spot the pig in a poke and has shown Galileo a clean pair of heels .
But is the EU prepared to accept the obvious and abandon the project ?
No , far from it .
Instead , we have this report , which advocates not only that the project should go charging ahead , but that the European taxpayer should pick up the entire cost .
It asks for , in this case , a massive increase in the budget , from GBP 120 million to GBP 715 million .
In other words , we are seeing the beginning of an open-cheque-book situation for this shameful project .
The United States has its own satellite system , GPS , and therefore the EU must have one as well ; this is the guiding principle behind Galileo .
It is kindergarten policy-making which defies common sense , has no credible economic justification and is morally and environmentally corrupt .
This institution spends a great deal of time discussing the environment and bringing forward hair-shirt measures designed to force people living in Europe into a kind of permanent guilt-ridden existence over their carbon footprint .
Yet here we are pushing forward a project whose impact on the environment will be almost beyond calculation .
Has anyone stopped to consider the carbon footprint of launching into orbit the 30 satellites required by the Galileo system , which will require the burning of massive amounts of rocket engine propellant ?
The EU 's environmental credentials are already highly questionable , because of the depredations of the CFP and the CAP , not to mention the unnecessary provisions of Parliament 's two buildings , here and in Brussels .
I call upon all Members here today , especially those who see themselves as environmental warriors , to examine their conscience and to oppose this colossal white elephant .
We do not need to duplicate facilities already available from the American GPS , and we certainly should not inflict so much unnecessary carbon pollutant upon this environment .
( SK ) To begin , allow me to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Barsi-Pataky , who has long been active in this area and has made a considerable contribution to the joint decisions and agreements on the successful implementation of the Galileo programme .
In my speech I would like to stress two important aspects that are vital for the successful implementation of the European satellite radionavigation programmes .
I very much welcome the joint agreement and the decision on the budget for these programmes and the fact that additional funds were found after the Public-Private Partnership model of financing the Galileo programme had fallen through .
I think that this was a very responsible and rational decision by all the European institutions .
We saw this as a very positive development in our Committee on Industry , Research and Energy and in plenary .
I think that the European Union must , using its public resources , participate in such programmes and in the development of this sector , which has significant potential for the development of new services with high added value , which are needed in almost all areas of society .
The second aspect in the implementation of the programmes is the procurement process during the Galileo development phase .
Here , too , I want to express my satisfaction with the proposals for a balanced participation on all levels , including the participation of small and medium-sized enterprises in all Member States .
Equally , the division of the procurement of infrastructure into six main work packages , as well as a number of additional work packages , will give more suppliers the opportunity to participate in public procurement , which can only enhance the entire implementation process .
I want to take this opportunity to call on all the relevant institutions , at both European and national level , to launch a high-profile promotional campaign to ensure that all the relevant stakeholders are involved both during the development phase and once the Galileo system is operational .
( FR ) Mr President , I am one of those who was present at the start of the Galileo project , and so I am perhaps rather better placed to gauge the extent of the delay .
I believe that this project has two inherent defects .
Firstly , it is the first major Community project of industrial interventionism .
It has not been easy to persuade people that the EU could own a satellite navigation system , and it therefore took a long time to obtain a political consensus .
Secondly , the business plan could not be how it was imagined initially , simply because GPS , our major competitor , is free and is fully financed by the US government .
We needed to overcome these two initial problems and take stock of the situation , spurred on by the Slovenian presidency and by Mr Barrot , before establishing a remarkable consensus between the three institutions .
This tripartite dialogue has brought us to a point where we now have a document and a text .
Tomorrow will see the launch of Galileo , before the second satellite is launched on Saturday from Baikonur .
( DE ) Mr President , there is a great deal of euphoria regarding Galileo .
However , there are two enormous downers .
Firstly , the high costs , which EU taxpayers are taking on almost exclusively in the meantime .
The talk is of at least EUR 3.4 billion , but it will certainly be even more .
Secondly , the foreseeable military use of Galileo .
Galileo has always been promoted as the civilian alternative to GPS .
Its exclusively civilian use has even been agreed by contract .
Funding now being planned in the EU budget does not allow any military use according to the contracts in force .
Some are therefore waiting for the Treaty of Lisbon , which would make this possible , but which will hopefully be rejected by referendum in Ireland .
Military use was planned long ago , however .
Here we are hoping for funds to be made available for Galileo from the armaments sector .
The fourth function of Galileo , to offer a public regulated service , is obviously planned as a dual use for military operations , just as for the police , coast guards and intelligence services .
Please say something about this !
Nobody needs a second military satellite programme unless it is used for EU geostrategic and military interests .
Therefore , Galileo should simply be a civilian project .
( SL ) It would be difficult to find a European programme which would pursue the objectives of the Lisbon strategy as well as the activities within the framework of the European Global Navigation Satellite System do .
These include research and development work in the area of highly sophisticated technologies , creation of new possibilities for the young , new and better jobs , development of enterprise , and I could go on ...
The implementation of the system is so demanding that no Member State could carry it out on its own .
This is precisely where the added value of European integration is clearly evident .
Also , implementation of the system provides Europe with greater independence , as well as a competitive advantage .
Until only recently , the project was practically buried because of the difficulties with funding .
I therefore congratulate Etelka Barsi-Pataky , the rapporteur , and the head of the European Parliament 's negotiating team , Angelika Niebler , who did an excellent job .
I would also like to congratulate the Slovene Presidency of the European Council for the latter 's agreement with Parliament .
However , implementation is now running several years late .
I would wish for the next stages , involving concrete activities , to be completed as soon as possible , and I appeal for this to be the case .
The purpose of the system is performance of the most demanding and diverse applications .
I know that in some Member States the feasible applications are already part of existing political strategies .
In Slovenia , for instance , an action plan for free-flow tolling has been adopted , and I hope that we shall use the European satellites rather than those of other countries for this purpose .
Finally , we also have to establish a Supervisory Authority and its headquarters .
The Member States should remember the Council decision of 2003 , and they should award the Authority 's headquarters to one of the new Member States that have no European institutions as yet .
One such candidate is Ljubljana , the capital of Slovenia .
This candidate 's proposal has substantial support and , in the hope that it will be successful , it has been carefully and thoroughly prepared .

( ES ) Mr President , the truth is that today we should congratulate ourselves as Europeans , as we have had the good fortune to have been able to successfully complete such a symbolic project as Galileo , which makes the desire for European improvement in all areas , including space , transport and communications , more visible .
It is also a platform for multiple services in the future that now we can only imagine .
I would like to congratulate and thank Mrs Barsi-Pataky , the rapporteur , for her will to help launch it and to ensure its continuation through monitoring , through this interinstitutional group that I think is a very positive innovation which maybe can be adopted for other matters .
I would especially like to congratulate the Commission and its vice-president , Mr Barrot , for his tenacity and his timely outbursts of anger , which have undoubtedly helped to overcome significant financial obstacles as well as national reservations and selfishness .
Finally I would like to acknowledge the Slovenian Presidency , and through it the Council , which has also helped to achieve this and to come to an agreement , and also the people of my country , the Spanish , as we have a great deal of faith in this project and a desire to be able to contribute all of our energies and abilities to it .
All that remains is to ensure and guarantee that what has been agreed , and what Parliament will vote on tomorrow , will be applied , and once again I am reminded of the group that Mrs Barsi-Pataky has started .
The Council representative , Mr Žerjav , has told me that he must leave us before 6 p.m. , and because of this he has asked if he may speak .
I am not clear what kind of speech this will be , as normally a Commissioner and the Council would have the privilege of summarising the discussion , and this discussion is not yet over .
Nevertheless , I have a duty to allow the Council representative to speak , and I am hereby doing so .
President-in-Office . - ( SL ) Allow me to express both my sincere gratitude for your constructive debate and my apologies for leaving this session early because I am returning home .
In conclusion , with your permission , I should like to remind you that the Galileo project is the subject of public scrutiny .
The success of the European GNSS systems does not involve only Europe ; the results will also be evident on an international level .
I agree with you that this is the first joint European structure , so we must not waste any precious time , and we must give the green light to urgent implementation of these programmes .
We are aware that adoption of the Implementation Regulation is an important step towards realisation of the Galileo project .
That is why a lot of collective work is ahead of us , and we believe that we shall be as successful in the future as we have been in the past .
( DE ) Mr President , I wish to drop a few more flies into the ointment .
After the major crisis we now have a good and balanced proposal for a regulation , which in my view will secure the construction phase .
To do this , however , we should not run over the agenda .
The project has been put back five years , with the operating phase planned to begin in 2013 .
Our industrial policy strategy is therefore failing , as regards being ahead of GPS 3 on the market with Galileo and setting the standards worldwide .
I therefore believe that we still need a detailed analysis of the crisis the Commission itself has created , because we have to learn from the breakdown of the PPP model , since another PPP model is available with Caesar .
We now no longer have any competitive edge with Galileo , so marketing the system is clearly becoming more difficult .
For this reason we must have a discussion in sufficient time about the public costs of the operating phase after 2013 and we should concentrate on how we can establish publicly funded systems for Galileo such as tolls , eCall and Caesar .
Finally , we are now already in need of a programme for the combined use of Galileo and GPS signals .
We have to concentrate on this because therein lies the added value .
( The President cut off the speaker )

( ES ) Mr President , I am among those who think that today we should congratulate ourselves on the determination with which the Community institutions have overcome the ups and downs of the project ; finally we are in a position to start planning the deployment phase of Galileo with certainty .
We also welcome the efforts made to ensure that participation in the programme is as broad as possible .
Having said this , I would like to highlight something essential : the civilian nature of the project , which is an essential condition for ensuring transparency in operations .
The independence of the system will enable the services offered to users to be certified and will provide guarantees of its quality , which are prerequisites for developing a wide range of new commercial applications that offer great opportunities to our small and medium-sized enterprises , and that also have great environmental and social potential : navigation for the blind , planning the most accessible route for wheelchair users , etc. etc .
( FR ) Mr President , like EGNOS , the Galileo programme symbolises the spirit of Europe : to join forces so that together we can go further .
More than any other project , Galileo reflects Community spirit rather than national egos .
The idea of funding based on national contributions , albeit even partially , was not a good idea .
Fortunately today this argument has been settled in favour of complete financing from the Community budget .
I would like to thank the European Commission for finding an alternative solution in the absence of an agreement between companies , and for working on a proposal to allocate contracts in a way that would federate all the member states and the European Parliament .
Today , we finally have financial transparency .
It is fortunate that our institution and the Council are ready to agree without delay .
The scientific community and workers in the aerospace industry - and I have encountered many in my own region of Toulouse - are expecting great things from us .
Let us not disappoint them .
( FR ) Mr President , ( inaudible ) Galileo , the first Community infrastructure , requires all stakeholders to share the same goal : success .
This challenge confirms the need for this support , not that we needed confirmation .
Compared with its rival GPS , a series of setbacks have unfortunately impeded progress until now .
With this amended report , we will arm ourselves with the tools for success based on a joint decision .
Our new goal when building this global navigation system must be to look beyond the complexity of the regulations , the new architecture , clarified responsibilities and new governance .
Doing this could avoid adding to the existing five-year delay .
We have a collective responsibility to monitor its actual application and to engage in and instigate market capture by aiding its development . The electronics and software industries have everything to gain from the success of a radio navigation system .
Ensuring that it takes precedence over the existing system will be a tough battle .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , allow me to concentrate on the question of the site of the headquarters of the Galileo European GNSS Supervisory Authority .
My answer is that the Czech Republic is the best-prepared country and , in addition to that , it is a Member State in which no European agency is yet based .
Prague is strategically placed in the heart of Europe and the building suggested for the new headquarters currently houses the Ministry of Informatics in the former military zone in Klecany .
Apart from that , the Czech Republic is a country that has a high level of security and whose science and research is at least comparable to the developed countries of the European Union .
A project researching four applications of the system to railways , roads , airports and the transportation of dangerous goods has been up and running in the Czech Republic since 2001 .
The Czech Technical University in Prague is coordinating a project on a ground receiver , which would be compatible with both the American and the Russian navigation systems .
In addition to that , Prague is also a well-established and beautiful European congress destination .
( PL ) Mr President , the Galileo programme is finally ready .
It is a strategic tool for the future of the European Union in view of its contribution to such important aspects of integration as research and innovation , European space policy and European foreign and security policy .
It is a powerful tool that will enable the EU to play an important role in the international arena .
As regards the draft presented today , it should be remembered that Parliament introduced a very clear division of tasks and established the distribution of responsibility between the European Commission , the European Satellite Navigation System supervisory authority and the European Space Agency .
The Commission is supposed to be responsible for project management only , while all actions and tasks undertaken by the GSA and ESA are to be implemented outside the scope of the Commission 's competence .
Furthermore , Parliament has made it very clear that in future no delays will be tolerated , and the setting up of the Galileo Interinstitutional Panel will contribute to this .
In considering whether to support this proposal , Parliament must bear in mind that establishing a satellite radionavigation infrastructure will exceed the financial and technical potential of the Member States , which is why it is a Community action .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to join my fellow Members who have specifically commended Commissioner Barrot and our rapporteurs Mrs Barsi-Pataky and Mrs Niebler for their staying power .
We need a functioning Galileo system as soon as possible and , what is more , our own European system .
We have dozens of tasks that we want to handle with this system .
We want to control our traffic flows more effectively , whether on the road or on water , and we also want to organise our air traffic in such a way that we save as much energy here as possible through better organisation , thus doing what is sensible to slow down climate change .
Against this background , every month in which we speed up is an advantage for us all .
We should therefore be proceeding along this path in a more concentrated fashion .
( DE ) Mr President , I think the European Union is on the right lines with this system .
We must also , however , take very critical account of the concerns that Mr Pflüger , for example , has expressed .
We have to find out as a matter of principle which dazzling array of satellite navigation systems are currently in operation and how dependent we have already become on the United States in this area .
It will therefore be good when we are able to compare this with something .
It is particularly good and important that this system is being adopted on a massive scale when imposing tolls on heavy goods vehicles and when shifting traffic flows from road to rail because there are so many possibilities associated with it .
We can impose tolls according to the number of kilometres travelled or according to types , or we can impose tolls uniformly for the whole of Europe .
I think it is important for transport in Europe and important for us all .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , evidently the text that you will be adopting will allow the European Union to meet the challenge of developing one of the major technologies of this century .
Mr President , I would particularly like to thank everyone who contributed to this success here in Parliament .
Firstly , I would like to thank Mrs Barsi-Pataky who , on the committee chaired by Mrs Niebler - and I also thank Mrs Niebler for her decisive role in the conclusion of the tripartite dialogue - never stopped believing in Galileo while continuing to set high standards .
I would also like to thank the Committee on Budgets and Mr Böge , who is not here today .
Mr Skynas was rapporteur though , since at the time we needed Parliament 's support to secure funding .
Mrs Jensen , thank you for being such an ardent supporter of Galileo on the Committee on Transport and Tourism .
As Mrs Niebler said , this is a good day for Europe .
Mr President , I cannot reply to all the speakers .
I have listened to them carefully , I have taken notes .
What I would like to say is that we must now approach our SMEs in all of the Member States so that these preparations can be implemented and we can finalise Galileo 's applications .
I will have the chance to return before you to describe all of these applications , which include transport as well as civil protection .
In any event , Galileo will be much more effective than the current GPS .
I would also like to reiterate my ambition to bring the Interinstitutional Monitoring Group into being , which is another way of galvanising our institutions on this project .
I would now like to tell you a bit about the work that awaits us .
Thanks to the EP vote , we now have a budget , a legal basis , clear governance and a procurement plan .
This plan was not easy , since the aim was to divide the work between all the major aerospace companies in our Member States , while at the same time organising the subcontracting that many of you quite rightly called for .
Our SMEs must also be involved in the construction process .
This is why we set aside 40 % for subcontracting in the procurement plan .
The Commission will sign an agreement with the European Space Agency .
We hope that this will be done before the summer and that we can issue calls for proposals for the six main work packages which have been identified .
We would like to be able to sign contracts at the end of the year , so that construction can start on the satellites and the satellite system as soon as possible after the start of next year .
The construction of the remaining 26 satellites will take between two and three years .
It will then be another one or two years before the launch .
Therefore , the Galileo roadmap needs to be very carefully followed .
I must say that the engineers and technicians are working very hard .
As Mr Savary said earlier , I am pleased to announce that the second Galileo satellite , Giove-B , will be launched from a Soyuz launch vehicle in Baikonur , Kazakhstan , at 0.15 a.m. this Sunday , 27 April 2008 ( 4.15 a.m. local time ) .
Giove-B is already in Baikonur , where it will undergo final testing before launch day .
The satellite should be placed on its final orbit around seven hours after the launch , and it will be controlled directly from the Fucino Control Centre in Italy .
We must all hope that Giove-B will be as successful as Giove-A , particularly as Giove-B has all the technology in place .
Mr Remek , allow me to thank you for being here , because you know what there is in space .
I have thanked Parliament extensively , but these are not hollow gestures , believe me .
I really feel that , if this European project sees the light of day , Parliament will have made an effective contribution .
Therefore , I thank you again .
Together we will make Galileo succeed .
( HU ) Mr President , I cannot emphasis enough that European engineers and developers have carried out outstanding work and , as the Vice-President announced , we are awaiting the launch of Giove-B .
The European Commission in the person of Vice-President Barrot brought a new proposal for an intensive one-year programme to the table for discussion , and the European Community implemented a new structure and promised the necessary funding .
The Galileo programme is ready for its new START , in other words , the project has reached an end .
More specifically , we still have many difficult tasks ahead of us .
I would emphasise that the GNSS ' made in Europe ' programme has not been carried out simply in the interests of one or another Member State or one or another industrial concern .
In the implementation of this programme , this must always be borne in mind .
And finally , Mr President , if you will permit me a personal comment - when the Galileo programme was launched , Hungary , where I was elected in 2004 , was not yet a member of the EU , and neither was Slovenia .
I am therefore particularly happy that we are cooperating in the new launch on the 27th .
Galileo is a very important step in the creation of a strong Europe . Thank you .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written declarations ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) As a witness to and participant in the lengthy process of agreeing the financial basis of the Galileo programme , I am following with interest the steps being taken by the European Union to implement this programme .
The method of funding , which constitutes a major departure from the original principles , increases our joint responsibility for the success of the programme .
The public-private initiative ended in fiasco .
We are responsible for the sensible utilisation of European taxpayers ' money , without any risk-sharing with the private sector .
This is why the project management system is of such importance .
It is appropriate to have a clear statement , as contained in the draft report , that the European Community is the sole owner of all tangible and intangible assets created under the aegis of EGNOS and Galileo .
Matters are , unfortunately , moving at a slow pace - 11 years have passed since the European Commission presented its first communication on a European satellite navigation system .
Delays have certainly multiplied the cost of this programme and increased the risk to its competitiveness through the appearance of other initiatives on a global scale .
The world does not stand still !
The purely Community and public nature of the programme justifies the European Parliament 's claims , because of the democratic mandate it holds , for the strengthening of its controlling and operational influence in the preparatory and implementation phase of the Galileo system .
Declaration of financial interests : see Minutes
Commission Question Time
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0019 / 2008 ) .
The following questions have been submitted to the Commission .
Part I
Subject : Exchange of information relating to bank accounts
The recent tax scandal in Liechtenstein had repercussions in many Member States of the EU .
According to investigations by the competent authorities , citizens of the Member States are allegedly involved in tax evasion .
I am informed that the Finance Ministers of the 27 Member States urged the responsible Directorate-General of the Commission to carry out a rapid investigation and propose a revision of the legal framework to permit the exchange of information relating to citizens ' bank accounts .
How will citizens ' personal data be protected under such a framework whilst introducing transparency and preventing the transfer and laundering of illicit funds ?
What procedure will the Commission propose to ensure that the ' opening ' of bank accounts is achieved with the greatest respect for legality ?
In what way is it envisaged that Member States ' taxation systems will be harmonised in order to avoid similar situations in the future whereby illicit funds are laundered through bank accounts ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have to combat tax evasion .
If we do not do this , the basis of our democratic society may erode .
Every nation has the right to enact regulations to ensure that taxes are imposed efficiently with the assent of the people 's representatives .
Individual measures in this sector , however , frequently do not have the desired effect nationally .
International cooperation is therefore required between the tax authorities , involving the exchange of information on bank accounts .
The Finance Ministers of the 27 Member States are working together on this at EU level .
Some measures have already been introduced at European level .
Council Directive 2003 / 48 / EC on taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments is of particular note here .
In addition , the European Union has concluded agreements with third countries , including Liechtenstein , which pursue the same aim as this Directive .
These agreements guarantee that interest received and paid to EU citizens in these third countries is liable either to income tax in their own Member State or to deduction at source .
Deduction at source can be reimbursed to an individual liable to tax in their Member State of permanent residence if the corresponding income is disclosed for tax purposes .
The Economic and Financial Affairs Council carried out an exchange of views on the application of the Directive on taxation of savings income in the form of interest payments on 4 March 2008 .
As a result of the debate , the Ministers asked the Commission to push ahead with work on a report on the implementation of the Directive since it entered into force on 1 July 2005 .
The report should address the definition of the terms ' payment of interest ' and ' beneficial owners ' .
The question rightly being asked here is to what extent systems for exchanging information are compatible with the protection of personal data .
It may be pointed out in this context that the Community rules on data protection , which also apply in the European Economic Area , give Member States the opportunity to take legislative action .
This action can restrict those concerned in some of their rights , such as the right of access or the right to information , if this is necessary for the protection of important financial or economic interests of the European Union or of a Member State .
This also applies to the areas of finance , budgets and taxation .
Comparable restrictions also apply to the effective implementation of the Third Money Laundering Directive .
The Member States must at all events reasonably ensure that their competent bodies comply with the appropriate EU regulations and national data protection regulations when supplying and processing personal data .
A balance has to be found here between the lawful pursuit of aims in terms of taxation policy and the protection of privacy .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , taxation history is full of bogus bank accounts , which are even more harmful when such scandals come to light in European countries .
When it happens , we merely take note of the event , but each time such an incident is repeated our memories flood back .
Is it your overall view , Commissioner , that the system is in actual fact failsafe ?
( DE ) Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) The honourable Member 's question can be answered with a simple no .
The systems we currently have are not watertight ; we know this .
We are therefore making efforts to improve them .
Specific regulations to combat money laundering are definitely open to improvement and we are also making efforts in cooperation with European countries that are part of the European Economic Area but not part of the European Union to achieve these respective improvements .
The Commission has requested and also received a negotiating mandate from the Council authorising it to negotiate specifically with Liechtenstein with regard to how existing weak spots in the system for combating money laundering and tax fraud can be eliminated .
My hope is that the strong public opinion we have witnessed recently in Europe on this issue will help us to reach the necessary agreements .
We are working hard on this , but as you know , tax issues are extraordinarily sensitive .
Even within the Member States , there is definitely still room for improvement here .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , you have rightly pointed out that we have to combat tax evasion and tax fraud , without question .
You have pointed out that we need legal resources for this under the rule of law of the European Union .
According to media reports , some of the data in this Liechtenstein scandal is now reaching the financial authorities as a result of the German authorities paying for data acquired by criminal means .
Is this the right path ?
( DE ) Mr President , whether or not this is now the right path , it is good that it has leaked out .
Commissioner , a system has emerged here that continues to benefit those who already ensure that large concerns pay less and less tax and who are now apparently giving up paying tax .
I think this a development that cannot be accepted .
It would interest me to know what exactly you are negotiating with Liechtenstein and what precisely you want to do to stop these crimes - and I say ' crimes ' quite deliberately - in future .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) To the first question I should like to reply that it is surely not the Commission 's job to deliver a judgment on which methods a Member State uses to combat tax evasion by its citizens .
I have pointed out that the general rules also apply in tax matters to the protection of personal data , that the Member States are entitled to restrict these rules if this serves to protect their financial interests .
I think the question you have asked is one that should be put to the German Government .
To my knowledge it has investigated the issue of the legality of proceedings in the case you have described in great detail prior to the decision and has reached the conclusion that the German tax authorities were entitled to secure the data involved here .
With regard to the second , very general question , I agree with you that it is annoying that we do not have to guarantee the possibility in the existing EU Treaty that tax avoidance and tax evasion will be pursued in the same way everywhere in Europe and that it still cannot be guaranteed that nobody will aid and abet tax evasion or tax avoidance .
We have in recent years achieved a great deal , particularly against the background of the necessary battle against money laundering and all forms of international crime and terrorism .
I have already pointed out , however , that the Commission believes that there are opportunities for improvement here and what we want to achieve with Liechtenstein - as with other countries - is completely clear .
We should like to maintain the same cooperation and the same exchange of information in relation to Liechtenstein as already exists between the EU Member States .
Subject : Particulate emissions from mopeds
Research by Utrecht University has shown that mopeds and scooters are emitting large quantities of fine and ultra-fine dust particulates .
The researchers measured emissions absorbed by cyclists and motorists in 12 medium-sized towns .
This showed that cyclists were absorbing an excessive quantity of fine particulates when they were close to a moped .
It seems that mopeds actually emit more particulates per second than heavy goods vehicles .
Directive 2002 / 51 / EClays down emission standards for vehicles of this type .
But it does not mention particulates at all .
Is the Commission aware of the pollution problem from scooters ?
What will the Commission be doing to deal with the problem in an adequate manner ?
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Commission has been advocating the reduction of fine and ultra-fine dust particulates for years now .
Since 2005 the Commission has proposed a raft of legislative measures for improving air quality , of which you are aware .
As part of the Seventh Framework Research Programme , however , important aspects of an environmentally friendly transport policy are being examined .
When laying down standards for vehicle particulate emissions , the Commission concentrated first on diesel cars and commercial vehicles , since the supply of these vehicles was considerably larger than the supply of motorised two-wheelers .
We therefore concentrated to begin with on tackling the problem of where they occur in large quantities .
Here we have reached some important milestones .
Parliament and the Council adopted a regulation on emissions from light and commercial vehicles in 2007 .
These are the Euro 5 and Euro 6 standards .
They have already been adopted and are coming into force .
The additional particulate emissions from diesel vehicles are now being reduced by these Euro 5 and Euro 6 standards from the current 25 milligrams per kilometre to 5 milligrams per kilometre .
In addition , the Commission put forward a proposal on 21 December 2007 for a regulation on emissions from heavy commercial vehicles , and this is the Euro VI standard .
It reduces the limits for nitrogen oxide emissions by 80 % and particulate emissions by 66 % compared with the Euro V standard in force today .
The problem of particulate emissions from two-wheelers essentially arises from two-stroke engines .
Particulate emissions from four-stroke engines are very low in comparison , even when they correspond to the Euro 5 standard .
In 2004 the Commission commissioned a study intended to shed light on whether a legal provision is reasonable for limiting particulate emissions from two-stroke engines .
The result of the study was that the particulates discharged from these engines are predominantly hydrocarbons .
The limits for hydrocarbon emissions from motorbikes and mopeds - two-wheelers , therefore - were already tightened up here substantially in 2004 and in 2007 , and the situation has already improved considerably for new cars .
In addition , manufacturers are switching from two-stroke engines to four-stroke engines so that the hydrocarbon limits can generally be maintained .
For this reason , the Commission has not put forward any specific measures for limiting particulate emissions from two-wheelers .
I must say , however , that the situation is clearly more critical for older vehicles with two-stroke engines emitting hydrocarbons and particulates in larger quantities .
These emissions can be significantly reduced , however , if synthetic oil is used for lubricating the engine instead of mineral oil .
The Commission therefore supports the corresponding campaign by the Association of European Motorcycle Manufacturers and by the Motorcyclists ' Association .
The Commission is nevertheless investigating the need for a revision of the legislative provisions for two- and three-wheeled motor vehicles .
A study was commissioned at the beginning of this year , which will examine the findings of the study from 2004 , taking account of the latest technical development .
The results of this study will be available by the end of this year .
If it emerges that a legislative proposal is needed from the Commission - and I am prepared to make one , should it be necessary - then this would take place in 2009 .
According to the framework directive on ambient air quality assessment and management and the respective individual directives , which define emission limits for PM10 particulates and for benzene , the Member States must ensure by appropriate measures that the limits are maintained nationally on the appointed date .
The Member States must also provide for emergency measures in the event that the limits are temporarily exceeded .
In areas in which there is a considerably higher probability of two-stroke motors exceeding the limits , Member States will make allowance for this situation with their respective air quality plans and emergency measures after the Commission has carried out an assessment .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your elaborate response .
You rightly referred to the efforts that the Commission has already made in relation to emissions from lorries and vans , yet a legislative proposal has not yet been developed in relation to mopeds .
You refer to the industry 's effort to replace two-stroke motors with four-stroke motors , which would bring about a positive development .
First of all , I ask myself to what extent this is just a noncommittal agreement .
Is this a genuine agreement ?
Secondly , we must be aware that the pollution is highly localised and , for example , has a major effect on cyclists in the immediate vicinity of mopeds , which constitutes a problem for public health .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( DE ) I understand the honourable Member 's question very well .
We are concerned here not with an arrangement with industry brought about by the Commission , as was once the case , for example , with the reduction of CO2 emissions from motor cars , but rather with a sort of automatic development .
As I have said , the manufacturers of two-wheelers cannot adhere to the tight limits already in existence for hydrocarbon emissions with conventional two-stroke engines .
They are simply not able to .
This is the reason why they are switching over to four-stroke engines , which raise a different problem .
The study I have been talking about will reveal the results of this technical development and I repeat once again : if it were to transpire that the problem about which I have just been speaking could not be resolved automatically , so to speak , then it would in fact be necessary to put forward a legislative proposal .
I repeat once again : I am prepared to do this .
Subject : 2.2 billion children in need
Worldwide , 2.2 billion children are suffering as a result of poverty , illiteracy , sexual abuse and military conflicts .
A child born in sub-Saharan Africa has a one in six chance of dying before age 5 .
According to the UN Children 's Fund , UNICEF , more than 27 000 children die each day , mainly from preventable diseases .
UNICEF 's latest figures show that , worldwide , 93 million children of primary school age do not go to school , including 41 million children in sub-Saharan Africa , 31.5 million in South Asia and 6.9 million in the Middle East and North Africa .
In view of the fact that next year is the 20th anniversary of the Convention on the Rights of the Child , these figures make very sad reading .
Will the Commission take tangible steps to combat exploitation of children , whether in the sex industry or in situations where they are used as soldiers ?
When the Treaty of Lisbon , into which the rights of the child have been incorporated , comes into force , will the Commission have more clout in this area ?

Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission agrees with the analysis by Mr Van Hecke , and I would like to reassure him that the Commission is very active in its efforts to fight child abuse .
Children 's rights are among the main priorities of the Commission 's Strategic Objectives for 2005-2009 .
This priority was expressed in the 2006 Commission communication ' Towards an EU strategy on the rights of the child ' , and recently in the Commission communication ' A Special Place for Children in EU external action ' , adopted on 5 February 2008 .
The aim of the recently adopted communication is to create a framework for a common EU approach to protecting and promoting the rights of the child in third countries , which would be reflected in all areas of our external relations including development assistance , humanitarian aid and trade policy .
The Action plan on children 's rights in EU external action , included with this communication , identifies the main priority areas requiring action at regional and global level : child labour , child trafficking , violence against children , including sexual violence , and children affected by armed conflicts .
In order to implement these policies , the Commission will make use of the EUR 25 million from the thematic programme ' Investing in people ' to support initiatives in the following areas : child trafficking , children affected by armed conflicts , sexual and reproductive health , and rights of young people .
The Commission will continue to support , within the framework of the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights , projects implementing the EU 's basic principles of supporting and protecting the rights of the child , and the principles concerning children affected by armed conflicts .
Although the Lisbon Treaty has not yet been ratified , it is worth mentioning that it stipulates that in its relations with the wider world , the Union shall contribute to the protection of human rights , in particular the rights of the child .
In so doing the Union gives priority in its external policy to the issue of human rights of probably the most vulnerable group in society .
( NL ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner and also the Commission for the efforts that they are indeed making in order to protect the rights of the child as far as possible .
However , I would like to bring my question up to date .
UNICEF has recently published a report that shows that in the past week in Eastern Congo , 2 to 3 000 children have been kidnapped by militia and are being shamefully misused in military conflict .
What more does the Commission think it can do to avoid such situations in the field ?
I appreciate all efforts and I appreciate what is in the plan of action .
If you talk to people in the field , however , it seems that not enough people or resources are being deployed in order to protect children 's rights in armed conflicts .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr President , Mr Van Hecke , of course such a tragic and cruel act makes us ask whether we can do any more .
In my opinion , the European Commission 's strategy is coherent and consistent , within the capacity and the legal basis available to the Commission .
As regards action on situations that occur locally , I think that it is important to make a decision at the time and in the place where the risk exists , based on the structures available to the Commission and in accordance with the political and organisational options .
Therefore , you are right : in order to strengthen the protection of children against similar violence , it is always necessary to make use of the structures and activities that exist where the events occur .
Mr President , the Commissioner will doubtless be aware that a couple of weeks ago the McCann family from my constituency came to the European Parliament .
They had been engaged in correspondence with Commissioner Frattini beforehand about the amber alert system for child abductions .
I was just wondering what stage that project has reached within the Commission now that Mr Frattini has left and Parliament is busy signing a written declaration pushing this idea forward .
We were just wondering whether the Commission is taking this on board , whether it is being pushed forward and which Commissioner has responsibility for it at this point in time .
( DE ) We are constantly hearing from the media about human trafficking by European or even US organisations .
Adoption associations in Austria , France and other countries are suspected of child trafficking .
For a long time there have been reports about dubious cases in adoption procedures as well as of cases of trading in baby organs and subsequent prostitution .
What measures will the Commission be taking to stop these cases ?
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) The first question was addressed to Commissioner Frattini , who has decided to go back to national politics .
At present this portfolio is the responsibility of my colleague Commissioner Barrot and he will be able to answer this question and give all the latest details on the preparation of the project you mentioned .
The other very important question , international adoption , is a highly sensitive matter : under no circumstances can we accept the idea that international adoption is wrong per se since it provides many children with a suitable family and a suitable home .
It is of course also true that on the fringes of international adoption we are seeing methods and policies that are dangerous and despicable .
At any rate , as regards the European Commission 's competence , it is up to the Member States to adopt measures that would prevent international adoption from being abused .
This , of course , applies to the Republic of Austria , too .
I would like to point out that the rules on international adoption are not uniform in all respects across the European Union , and that each country adopts its own national rules within the framework of international child protection conventions ; these national rules could be changed and improved in various ways .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to repeat that in principle international adoption gives many children the opportunity to find a family and a normal life ; on the other hand , however , it is a very sensitive area and it falls within the remit of the Member States .
Part II
Subject : Social security reforms in Greece
Council decisions and Commission documents repeatedly refer to the need for the modernisation and reform of the Member States ' social security systems , an adjustment to the age of retirement and to the negative repercussions for the economy and society of early retirement .
Does the Commission take part in a consultative capacity in the process of adjustment and does it carry out an assessment of the Member States ' new legislative measures ?
The recent reforms of the social security system in Greece fall within the national sphere of competence . Is the Commission , nevertheless , carrying out an assessment of them ?
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is aware of the demographic issues facing the pension systems .
Because the birth rate has been decreasing since the 1970s and because people live longer , an ever-smaller number of people of working age will have to support a ever-larger number of people who are outside working age .
As you know , in accordance with the Treaty establishing the European Community , social protection falls within the remit of the Member States .
The Commission therefore does not intervene in the Member States ' pension systems , nor does it even have an advisory role in relation to national adjustments .
That is why the Member States and the Commission agreed to cooperate in the area of social protection and social inclusion , on the basis of the open method of coordination , which means that the Commission and the Council set up joint goals , the Member States report on these goals and the Commission compiles its findings in the report that is consequently adopted by the Council .
The Member States submitted the first set of national strategic reports in 2002 , and the second set in 2005 .
This second set was summed up by the Commission in the Joint Report on Social Protection and Social Inclusion , adopted by the Council of Europe in 2006 .
The evaluation shows that although the recent reforms have resulted in more emphatic incentives for people to work longer , there is still the need for further measures to achieve higher employment rates , in particular among women and older workers .
Achieving higher employment rates is the best way to ensure that pension systems remain adequate and sustainable .
In Greece the risks of old-age poverty are significantly higher than the average : 26 % in 2005 for persons over 65 years of age , compared with 19 % for persons aged 64 .
The Greek pension system needs to be reformed to make it more appropriate and more sustainable .
Reforms are needed to encourage older people and women to work more and longer .
Considering the low participation of women , we need to implement policies aiming at achieving higher employment rates among women in order to ensure that pension systems are adequate and sustainable in the long term .
Since pension systems already wrestle with financial difficulties now , poverty among the elderly will continue to be a problem in the future until such time as those who are not involved in the basic pension system gain the right to claim a pension after a longer period of time .
It is expected that the next set of national strategic reports will be prepared in 2008 .
The Commission will draw up a summary of the main developments in the Member States .
This will provide the basis for the Joint Report on Social Protection and Social Inclusion that will be presented in 2009 .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your informative reply .
Now let me touch on the subject of the early retirement of mothers on the grounds that they have children who are still minors when they retire .
The threshold for early retirement used to be at 50 years in Greece ; it has been raised for future generations to the age of 55 , but not of this case of mothers with children .
How do you assess this threshold from the viewpoint of the Commission and in comparison with what you know of other Member States ?
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) As I mentioned at the start , under the Treaty establishing the European Community the overall structure of pension systems is the responsibility of the individual Member States and falls under their remit .
The Member States have different methods for setting the retirement age .
The most common age is 65 years but there are countries where the retirement age is higher , just as there are countries where it is lower .
The same applies to pensions for women : different retirement ages are set on the basis of decisions and political debates in the individual Member States .
The basic principle advocated by the Commission , and enshrined in the Treaty , is that these systems must not discriminate in any way .
Once this condition has been met , it is fully the responsibility of the Member States to set the retirement age .
This is why I do not want to comment in detail on the different retirement ages in individual Member States .
Subject : Combating youth and long-term unemployment in Europe
Can the European Commission make a comprehensive statement describing what new initiatives it is pursuing this year to combat youth and long-term unemployment in Europe and , in particular , what schemes are being promoted to ensure that those who are unemployed can learn new information technology skills ?
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is alarmed at the high unemployment rate among young people in the Member States , which was 15.2 % at the end of 2007 , i.e. almost double the overall unemployment rate .
The Commission is also alarmed at the persistence of long-term unemployment , affecting approximately half ( 45 % ) of all unemployed people , although I must stress that we have witnessed a considerable decrease in long-term unemployment in recent times .
This decrease varies from Member State to Member State but we there is certainly a downtrend across the EU .
However , the situation is still worrying .
Many young people finish their education without gaining the skills needed to enter the job market .
This is because approximately one in six young people in the European Union drops out of school early and one in four does not complete secondary education .
In spite of significant efforts by Member States to improve the employment rate among young people , approximately half of the countries have not yet reached the goal of giving the young unemployed the chance of a ' new start ' within six months , which was the stipulation for 2007 , or within four months , which is the objective for 2010 .
The Member States are primarily responsible for implementing measures to reduce the youth unemployment rate and long-term unemployment .
The European Union has a complementary role through coordination of the Member States 's national employment policies and through financial support under the European Social Fund .
As you are aware , each year the Commission adopts its annual progress report on the employment strategy At its meeting in March 2008 , the European Council adopted a number of recommendations to the Member States : 17 of them were recommendations in the area of education and professional training , and 15 in the area of employment .
I believe that there are three courses of action that are vital for improving the integration of young people in the labour market :
1 .
Improving education and training : it is important to concentrate efforts on developing key skills in childhood and on creating a support mechanism to prevent young people from dropping out of school early .
The Lifelong Learning Programme , in operation since 2007 , contributes to the development of the European Union as an advanced knowledge-based society by providing support for the modernisation and adjustment of education systems and professional training in the Member States .
2 .
Supporting social inclusion : in this context , particular attention should be paid to improving the situation of the most vulnerable young people and to eradicating child poverty .
3 .
Improving geographical mobility : at present unemployment sits alongside a shortage of labour on the job markets .
This has prompted the Commission to support cooperation between the Member States , and in particular to encourage greater mobility of young people in the European Union .
In implementing their labour market policies , the Member States also receive financial assistance under the Structural Funds , and in particular from the European Social Fund .
The Member States have EUR 75 billion at their disposal for the period 2007-2013 .
The European Social Fund is extremely important .
Approximately 25 % of unemployed people in the European Union were in some way involved in ESF projects in 2007 .
This means that each year assistance is provided to approximately 1 million people suffering from exclusion , including young people .
Each year approximately 2 million people enter the labour market after having received assistance from the European Social Fund .
Although the European Regional Development Fund does not concentrate on young people per se , it cofinances projects that directly involve young people , such as infrastructure for education and professional training , university research , and support for businesses , notably small and medium-sized enterprises .
Under the Regions for Economic Change initiative the Commission supports an exchange of best practice through the regional network ' Integrating marginalised youth ' .
Ladies and gentlemen , the fight against youth unemployment and against long-term unemployment is a priority for Europe and for the Member States .
Integrating young people into working life and into society and making better use of their potential are the main preconditions for the reviving strong and sustainable growth in Europe .
I thank you for your extremely comprehensive answer .

Are you encouraging or pushing Member States to use best practice or examples of best practice from one country to another to try and limit the amount of long-term unemployment among young people ?
I am sure that some countries are , shall we say , more successful than others , and I was wondering whether there were ways in which countries could link up with each other to learn from examples of how it is done in other countries .
In the past I have criticised answers to questions , and I just want to compliment you on your very comprehensive answer .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr Ryan , the exchange of information and good practice is one of the enormous assets of the European Union .
It is a permanent part of the open method of coordination and a permanent part of our work , and I would like to stress that the Slovenian Presidency , for example , dedicated one of its presidency conferences to the issue of youth employment .
This is a typical and ideal opportunity to compare the various approaches of individual Member States .
You are right : some Member States are quicker and more efficient in finding solutions for some questions than others .
Consequently , the constant exchange and comparison of experiences and practical knowledge are very efficient methods of achieving progress .
( DE ) New skills , the Internet , technology and the like are certainly very important on the job market .
We have all learnt , however , that even in youth unemployment , it is frequently the lack of key skills - reading , writing and arithmetic - that is the real reason why young people cannot enter the job market for the first time and in early life .
Are there any specific focal points in this area ?
Mr President , Commissioner , you spoke about youth unemployment and , in the previous question , about the under-employment of women .
Does the Commission intend to put forward proposals combining family and professional life and , in particular , with regard to maternity and parental leave ?
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Allow me to return briefly to what I said at the start .
At present , the Commission is concentrating , in particular through the work done by my colleague Commissioner Figeľ , on the early drop-out rates and the acquisition of basic skills .
You are right : it is vital that people acquire the basic skills and the ability to learn in early childhood and adolescence because it makes it easier for them to pursue their careers with more ease and success later on in life .
Under our programmes , such as those financed by the European Social Fund , we concentrate on something that I would call a ' second chance ' , in other words giving children who have had problems ( and there are quite a few of them ) the opportunity to go back to the formal structures and complete their education .
This is one of the Commission 's focal points because , as already mentioned , it is a crucial matter .
Subject : EU anti-discrimination legislation
Under current EU legislation , it is only in the field of employment and vocational training that EU citizens are protected against discrimination on grounds of age , religion or belief , disability and sexual orientation , whilst in the fields of education , social protection and access to goods and services , discrimination legislation only applies on grounds of racial or ethnic origin .
As legislation is broadened to include more categories in the goods and services field , what consideration has the Commission given to the unintended consequences this may cause ?
For example , in any new legislation , what safeguards has the Commission considered to ensure that reductions for elderly people and concessionary groups are not adversely affected ?
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as you know , the European Union has established a broad framework for the fight against discrimination and can be proud of the results that have been achieved .
However , some groups enjoy a higher level of protection than others .
Specifically this means that people are protected against discrimination on grounds of age , disability , sexual orientation or religion but it is only in the workplace that they are protected in this complex manner .
Only the scope of protection against discrimination on grounds of racial or ethnic origin and gender is wider .
As announced in the Commission Legislative and Work Programme 2008 , the Commission is planning a proposal for a directive based on Article 13 of the Treaty establishing the European Community , implementing the principle of equal treatment outside employment and broadening the existing EU legal framework .
The decisions on the details have yet to be made : for example , we are awaiting the results of an impact study that is currently being carried out and these results will be available soon .
However , the Commission understands the need to achieve the balance the principles of non-discrimination and preferential treatment ; under certain circumstances the latter may be justified .
Several types of preferential treatment exist in the Member States and they offer special treatment to certain groups for specific reasons without being discriminatory .
An example of preferential treatment is free travel on public transport for older people : this supports mobility .
The Commission does not deem these practices illegal if they have a legitimate basis in national law for social , educational , cultural or other reasons .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for that assurance at the end of his statement that the Commission does not intend that what he described as ' preferential treatment ' will be adversely affected .
I think that is welcome .
If the work as he describes it continues and he can strike the right balance , I think that will be welcome in all countries in the European Union .
I thank him for that assurance .
Whilst I have the floor , on a related matter , does the Commissioner have any idea when he expects to publish his proposal on a decision to accede to the UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities , which of course fits into this same category ?
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) The UN Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities was completed during the Luxembourg Presidency , thanks , too , to the coordinated endeavours of the European Union .
I am certain that this Convention would not have been concluded without our efforts .
Of course ratification of the Convention is the responsibility of the Member States and the European Union aims to support and accelerate this ratification through its discussions with the Member States .
Regarding your question as to when I expect to publish the proposal , the provisional deadline is the end of June this year , but that is really is only a provisional date .
Mr President , I would like to direct the Commissioner to religious discrimination and to the amazing fact that , despite the EU 's protection against religious discrimination , there is one place in the EU where religious discrimination is permitted .
Sadly it is my constituency of Northern Ireland where by reason of a derogation from EU legislation - permitted by the EU - it is expressly declared that it is lawful to discriminate against Protestants when it comes to recruiting to the Police Service of Northern Ireland .
Can the Commissioner tell us when this preposterous situation will end and the rights which others enjoy will be restored to my constituents ?

Very briefly , I am reassured , as was the questioner , Robert Evans , about what the Commissioner intends about any future legislation .
But the question specifically talked about the potential dangers of unintended consequences .
Given the sensitivity of this area , could the Commissioner please confirm , before any future legislation in this area is developed to a final position , that any impact assessment would be particularly rigorous and done in advance ?

Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) The existing Directives provide for special regulations concerning religious communities and religious beliefs .
In this context , when monitoring the measures the Commission also monitors the implementation of the regulations .
This is a complex and extremely sensitive matter but , generally speaking , it is regulated under the European Directives and the Commission can judge whether or not individual Member States are implementing the legislation correctly or breaching the principle of non-discrimination .
I can give a very simple answer to the other question .
The principle of equal treatment and non-discrimination is a fundamental European value that must be implemented , and when implementing it we have to make use of all the instruments available to the European Union .
On the other hand , it is clear that when making decisions that are so significant for so many , we need to study the consequences and we need impact assessments .
The European Commission applies this method rigorously in all areas , including the area of equal opportunities , fundamental rights and non-discrimination .
( IT ) Thank you , Mr President , I will not add any other questions .
Marie Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , however , asked a specific question about maternity and parental leave .
Would you please allow the Commissioner to answer ?
Mr Mantovani , we have already concluded the period for answering those questions and we clearly cannot do so .
The Commissioner heard the question and if he sees fit to answer in writing , he may do so .
Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou could have mentioned this when she spoke a moment ago .
Questions Nos 51 to 61 will be answered in writing .
As their subject is covered later in this part-session Questions Nos 62 and 63 will not be called .
Subject : Fisheries Agreement with Morocco
Has the Commission carried out any assessment of the results of the fishing voyages made by EU vessels under the last fisheries agreement with Morocco ?

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , I should like to thank the honourable Member , Mr Medina Ortega , for his question , which gives me the opportunity to express the Commission 's position concerning the important issue of the fisheries agreement with Morocco .
The Commission is monitoring the EC-Morocco Fisheries Partnership Agreement .
The figures concerning the first year of implementation of this agreement are not yet final since the first year only ended on 28 February 2008 and there is a six-month delay between the time that fishing operations take place and when the data are transmitted and analysed .
Despite this time delay , the figures that we already have in our possession indicate the positive views of the fishing possibilities that show a utilisation rate of around 80 % of the total fishing possibilities .

( ES ) I thank the Commissioner for his response and acknowledge that it is difficult to have data so soon , but as I happen to live near the area where the fishing is done , the fishermen have told me that there are some structural problems in this fishing ground as a result of the excessive appearance of nets and other fishing gear that has been abandoned in the area , which make fishing extremely difficult .
I do not know whether the Commissioner is aware of the structural difficulties that have arisen in the Saharan fishing ground since the last agreement .
This was a period during which the European fishing fleet was not present , but apparently this has caused a deterioration of fishing conditions as a result of a lack of conservation of the ground .



Member of the Commission . - If I can be a little more precise , during the first year of implementation for the main categories , more than 90 % for small-scale categories and tuna have been fished , and around 80 % for industrial pelagics .
However , the utilisation rate for the demersals is much worse .
In this regard it is only about 23 % utilisation .
This is attributable mainly to certain problems that you have indicated , in particular the question concerning compulsory landings on the insistence of Morocco which was included in the fisheries partnership agreement , and also the problem regarding the recruitment of Moroccan seamen on board Community vessels .
I was in Morocco myself around two weeks ago and I had the occasion to discuss with the Moroccan Minister these teething problems - as one may call them - with regard to the implementation of the fisheries partnership agreement with Morocco .
I think that there is a general understanding that we need to revisit the question concerning compulsory landings , given that in the fisheries partnership agreement the intention was that these landings would be required for re-exportation purposes .
Community vessels would be required to land fish that was caught in Morocco and they would be re-exported after processing .
In actual fact the landing of fish is now being utilised for local consumption .
That means that since the fish are caught outside the territorial limit they are considered to be imported into Morocco and therefore there is a hefty duty being charged .
I raised this issue and there is understanding , and I hope that in the very short-term we will find a solution to it .
In a similar way with regard to the recruitment of Moroccan seamen , we have raised this issue with the Moroccan authorities - with the Minister himself - and there has been a widening of the list of persons that are included and from which the European Community vessel owners can choose .
We are trying to expand this list further so that in that way we will try to lessen as much as possible the inconvenience of a very restricted list of persons from which the vessel owners can chose fishers to operate on board their vessels .
( ES ) Mr President , in the dangerous world of fisheries , I would like to enquire about the fate of the freezer tuna vessel Playa de Bakio , which was hijacked on Sunday off the coast of Somalia with 26 crew members on board , eight of whom are Galician , five Basque and 13 African .
I would like to ask you , Commissioner , what the Commission is doing about this matter , whether the Commission has acted or is intending to act ; because we are very concerned about what might happen to those people who are still on board this freezer tuna vessel .
Member of the Commission . - With regard to the specific case to which Ms Miguélez Ramos made reference , I would like to say that today the Commission issued a statement to the effect that we are concerned to learn of the hijacking of a Spanish fishing vessel in international waters off the coast of Somalia .
The Commission 's number one concern is the safety of the Spanish fishermen on board .
It goes on to say that it deplores all acts of piracy and armed robbery .
The maintenance of security in the waters off the coast of Somalia cannot be adequately ensured by the Somali authorities .
As a result , there is a serious problem with piracy .
It concludes by saying that the Commission is of the view that a coordinated approach to the protection of EU merchant and fishing vessels cruising in unsecured maritime zones might legitimately form part of a European maritime policy , but it also relates to European security and defence policy .
In any case , this is a matter for the Council to decide .
Subject : Small boat fishermen
Is the Commission aware of the establishment of the Small Boat Fishermen 's Association in the UK following the fishing quotas imposed this year ?
Is the Commission aware that these new quotas for some areas of the UK has meant some small fleets can only catch one cod per boat each day ?
Although it is up to the UK Government to decide on the distribution of the fishing quotas amongst large and small boats , does the Commission recognise the local and traditional importance of small fleets , some of which have received sustainability awards ?
Does it believe more should be done in Europe to protect them ?
If so , how ?
Member of the Commission . - I would like to thank the honourable Member , Ms Bowles , for her question , which gives me the opportunity to express the Commission 's position concerning the important issue of small-scale vessels .
I am aware of the creation of an association bringing together owners of vessels under 10 metres long in the UK fleet .
I am also aware that the low cod quota allocation is at the root of this association , since the share of the UK 's cod quota for this part of the fleet is only about 3 % of the total , despite the fact that the relative catch potential of this part of the fleet may be considerably larger .
As you rightly pointed out in your question , Member States - in this case the United Kingdom - are responsible for distributing fishing opportunities amongst their vessels .
I would , furthermore , like to add that Member States are also responsible for adjusting the size of the fleet , whether it is made up of small or large vessels , to the fishing opportunities available to it .
Let me underline that the Commission does recognise the specific circumstances of small-scale fleets , more precisely of vessels with a length of under 12 metres that do not use towed gear .
For this part of the fleet , the European Fisheries Fund provides a very favourable financial framework , which allows Member States to adopt measures to protect it .
That said , I would like to point out that , on the basis of the information I have concerning vessels of under 10 metres in the UK , there are indications that this fleet sector has recently developed a harvesting capacity well beyond the fishing opportunities that were traditionally allocated to it .
The solution to this problem is in the hands of the UK authorities .
I guess that a lot of that is , maybe , as I suspected .
But perhaps you can resolve another little problem for me .
From time to time , I am actually told that the cod that are in the English Channel are not officially recognised as being there as an indigenous stock .
If that is the case , then the fishermen from the south-east coast of England will become even more irritated by being told they cannot catch cod that theoretically do not exist , although , in fact , the supply there is quite plentiful .
Could you resolve this for me and let me know to what extent the cod in the Channel have been taken into account in the latest EU statistics ?
I appreciate you may not come with all this information prepared , so I will accept it in writing if necessary .
Member of the Commission . - I do not have the figures available , but I will certainly look into it and provide you with the information in writing .
With regard to cod , I would like to stress that we are now in the process of revisiting the cod recovery plan , which covers quite a large chunk of the seas around the United Kingdom .
I presented a proposal for a new cod recovery plan in Council on Monday of last week , when we held an initial exchange of views on the plan , which is also intended to cover the Irish Sea .
So , we are extending the reach of the cod recovery plan further .
However , we are trying to fine-tune it to make it more sensitive to the particular realities found in the different waters , so that if there is a particular area of Community waters where cod stocks are more plentiful , then certain measures can be taken .
In other areas , where cod stocks are in much worse shape , more stringent measures are obviously needed in order to give stocks a chance to recover .
Cod stocks in general are in very bad shape .
I think they are among the worst as regards mortality , and very tough measures are therefore needed to enable these very valuable stocks to recover .
Subject : Decommissioning programme for one third of the Irish whitefish sector .
Can the Commission make a comprehensive statement outlining how the decommissioning programme for one third of the whitefish sector in Ireland , at a cost of EUR 60 million , is progressing ?

Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the Honourable Member , Mr Ó Neachtain , for his question , which gives me the opportunity to address the issue of the decommissioning of fishing vessels .
By letter dated 6 August 2007 , the Irish authorities notified the Commission of the state aid scheme entitled ' Adjustment of fishing effort ' .
The scheme foresees the decommissioning of vessels registered in the polyvalent or beam-trawl segments of the Irish fleet , primarily targeting white fish stocks , although vessels targeting pelagic and shellfish stocks are also included .
The overall national budget for the scheme is EUR 66 million .
The Commission approved the scheme under state aid rules on 13 November 2007 .
The Irish scheme foresees that aid can be granted until 1 October 2009 .
However , according to the Irish authorities , the closing date for applications under the scheme is 30 April 2008 , after which date the level of uptake of the scheme will be clearer .
The Commission welcomes the initiative taken by Ireland in seeking to reduce its fishing fleet capacity so as to lessen the pressure on existing fish stocks .
Matching fishing capacity to fishing opportunities is a central pillar of the common fisheries policy .
Moreover , the Irish scheme gives priority to the decommissioning of those vessels targeting sensitive white fish stocks , while giving vessel owners already facing reduced quotas , higher fuel costs etc. the opportunity to leave the sector .
The remaining operators should benefit from more attractive returns .
( GA ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his answer and I agree that there is , and was , a need to decommission boats due to insufficient levels of fish .
However , I would like to ask the Commissioner if the Commission has any plans or proposals that will provide those from the fishery sector who have lost their jobs with the opportunity of finding another career and possibly remain in a similar line of work ?
These people , who have spent their lives at sea , have little hope of securing other employment .

Member of the Commission . - With regard to the crew members of vessels to be decommissioned , I would like to say first of all that the European Fisheries Fund allows assistance for the permanent cessation associated with decommissioning .
However , it is up to the Member State concerned whether to include this item of expenditure within its operational programme for the European Fisheries Fund .
I understand that Ireland considers that the national state benefit scheme provides compensation for the crews .
Having said that , apart from the permanent cessation associated with decommissioning , the European Fisheries Fund ( EFF ) also provides the possibility of socioeconomic compensation , diversification , retraining and early retirement .
So it is also possible to provide assistance under the EFF in order to retrain crew for different , although related , sectors , providing opportunities for diversification and for seeking alternative employment in other sectors as well .
Again , I would stress that it is the Member State which has to draw up the operational programme .
The Commission will approve the operational programme as long as it conforms to the parameters of the European Fisheries Fund , but the actual priorities , the actual areas that are identified , are up to the Member State concerned .
The Commission does not have the right to insist that Member States should opt for one rather than the other .
As long as they are included within the objectives or the aims of the European Fisheries Fund , then that is good enough for us .
As the author is not present , Question No 67 lapses .
Subject : Serious infringements of the rules of the common fisheries policy in 2005
Pursuant to Regulation ( EC ) No 1447 / 1999 , the Member States are required to report annually to the Commission any infringements of the rules of the common fisheries policy ( CFP ) and the related fines imposed .
Recently , the Commission published the sixth report on serious infringements of the rules of the common fisheries policy .
The data published in the report reveal that the number of infringements is rising whereas the fines imposed throughout the EU are diminishing .
In specific terms , in 2005 , 8.1 % more infringements were recorded while the level of sanctions fell by almost 45 % compared with 2004 .
There are also significant differences between Member States as regards the circumstances in which fines are imposed and the level of the fines .
Can the Commission say whether the various national systems of imposing sanctions guarantee equal competition between European fishermen ?
Does the Commission consider that it would be appropriate to set up a harmonised system of imposing sanctions for serious infringements of the rules of the CFP ?
How can fishermen 's confidence that the rules of the CFP are applied even-handedly be strengthened so that they respect the rules on the conservation of fish stocks ?


Member of the Commission . - I should like to thank the honourable Member , Mr Gklavakis , for the important question he has raised , thereby providing me with the opportunity to express my position concerning this crucial issue and also to touch on the reform being prepared in this area .
I am aware of the significant disparities in the sanctions imposed by Member States for serious infringements , leading to persistent shortcomings in the current control system .
As you rightly pointed out in your question , the penalties imposed by Member States are an insufficient deterrent , providing no real incentive for compliance .
To give you an example : the average fine in the European Union in 2005 was less than EUR 2 000 , varying from EUR 98 in some Member States to EUR 8 876 in others .

Let me underline that , according to Community law , it is up to the national authorities to ensure that every serious infringement of the common fisheries policy is subject to appropriate follow-up proceedings and , where necessary , to a deterrent penalty .
It is the Member States which have the primary responsibility and the discretion to define the amount and to impose the sanctions for serious infringements of the common fisheries policy .
The Commission can only supervise and evaluate this process .
Having said this , I would like to inform you that , on the basis of the analysis of the Member States ' annual serious infringements reports over the past years , and especially the Court of Auditors ' Report No 7 / 2007 , the Commission has decided to launch a reform of the control system of the common fisheries policy , envisaging the harmonisation of sanctions at Community level , along with a clearer definition of serious infringements , to guarantee uniformity and transparency .
I am confident that this new , simpler and more effective control regime will ensure a level playing field between Community fishermen by strengthening respect for the common fisheries policy rules and by spreading a culture of compliance .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I am particularly pleased with your answer .
I am glad that we shall have a uniform approach in all the EU Member States .
I just hope that this will apply to all sectors .
I hope you will continue with this principle .
Let me point out one more thing : the lower marine fish stocks become , the stricter we need to be , or else the future will be very bleak .
Member of the Commission . - I would like to thank Mr Gklavakis for his comments .

I would like to appeal to Members of Parliament to support the Commission in this drive in order to try to bring about a measure of harmonisation of the sanctions regime .
I had a first exchange of views in Council only last week on a related area , which is the fight against illegal , unreported and unregulated fishing .
In the IEU proposal , we are trying to harmonise the provisions - the sanctions regime , so to speak .
Although all Member States unanimously agree that we need to effectively fight illegal fishing , when it came to discussing the details on the reach of the proposal , on the harmonisation of the sanctions and on how we can see to it to control the importation of illegally processed fish products , I think there was almost unanimity in finding problems with our proposals .
Obviously I will be taking this up with the Member States during the coming months .
I envisage that when we come to the whole control regulation - which also encompasses the IEU - it is going to be much more of a tough encounter .
I hope that Parliament , in the report that it intends to draw up on the new control proposal , which I will be hopefully presenting to the college for adoption later this year , will give it its full support .
Question No 69 will be answered in writing .
Subject : Progression of bluetongue in northern Europe
A recent study by two Belgian universities demonstrates the high risk of the bluetongue disease becoming endemic in northern Europe .
Since the spread of bluetongue is linked to movements of the carriers and strengthening of the viral strains , should we not immediately undertake emergency measures in anticipation of the disease progressing ?
In addition , since the total number of cattle herds and sheep flocks affected by the disease increased from 695 in 2006 to 6 857 in 2007 in Belgium alone , would the Commission state what measures it intends to introduce for the development of an antiviral treatment , for vaccination campaigns , and for the financing of the foregoing ?
Member of the Commission . - I thank the honourable Member for the question .
I would say that the Commission is well aware of the unprecedented situation caused by the spread of bluetongue in several Member States in recent years and is making strenuous efforts to combat this disease .
Last January , at the Conference on bluetongue vaccination arranged by the Commission , it clearly emerged that vaccination is the main , most effective veterinary measure to combat bluetongue .
In order to achieve a harmonised EU approach , the Commission swiftly issued guidelines and criteria for vaccination plans , while leaving the Member States the necessary flexibility to adapt the vaccination strategy to their particular situation .
The Commission then assessed the plans submitted by the Member States , approved them and ensured a first financial contribution of up to EUR 64 million out of a total of EUR 130 million for the whole exercise .
All these actions reflect the importance that the Commission attaches to the vaccination .
The Community is also supporting several bluetongue research programmes .
Under the fifth and sixth framework programmes , two specific projects were devoted to the development of a safe , efficacious bluetongue virus vaccination strategy .
The EU contribution was EUR 1.7 million and EUR 804 000 respectively .
These actions will have continuity in the seventh framework programme .
However , at present scientists do not consider that the development of anti-viral treatments would effectively reduce the losses caused by this disease .
( FR ) Commissioner , first of all , I know that I am the first person to ask you an oral question today .
I trust that you are as delighted as I am to be in this chamber today .
I just wanted to make a brief digression there .
So , you have given us plenty of information although , according to data compiled recently in the Benelux countries and in Germany , the number of herds infected by the fever has been multiplied by 25 in a year , which is considerable .
I would like to mention a case in Belgium , since obviously this is where I work .
Almost 7 000 herds are affected .
There is therefore a very significant financial impact for farmers .
Member of the Commission . - We believe that the disease will spread throughout the whole of Europe in 2008 .
That is why the Commission is taking very strict measures to contain the disease and , as I said , the best way to fight it is a vaccination .
We have spent and are spending quite a lot of money to assist Member States with regard to the vaccines and the vaccination .
Mr President , I would like to say to the Commissioner : bluetongue has rapidly spread throughout the European Union , and you have said that vaccination is the best way , but would the Commission not , even at this stage , consider that in any area which has not to date been affected by the disease they be allowed to ban imports of animals into their region or area , in cases where herds have been proven to have the disease - where it has been confirmed ?
Surely that would be a sensible thing to do , so that people - even voluntarily - do not import from an area that has been affected into a region that is unaffected , because it is spreading rapidly .
You say that it is inevitable , but I think we should do that .
Member of the Commission . - As you know , we have taken measures .
We have the examples of Italy and France - and Portugal - which have taken unilateral measures to prevent the importation of affected animals .
As a result of the extra measures taken , both countries are now withdrawing the unilateral measures they have taken in the past .
We are watching the situation very closely and we shall take further measures if we feel that we have to .
As they deal with the same subject , the following questions will be taken together :
Subject : Brazilian beef
What are the current requirements concerning the importation of Brazilian beef to the EU ?
Subject : Brazilian beef
Can the Commission make a comprehensive statement outlining the up-to-date position with regard to the substantial restrictions on Brazilian beef imports to the European Union ?

Member of the Commission . - As you know , the EU has had in place for a number of years a very effective import policy for beef coming from Brazil .
Brazilian beef destined for the EU is only authorised from territories which are considered to be free from foot-and-mouth disease .
Currently , these territories are located in six Brazilian states : Espírito Santo , Goiás , Mato Grosso , Minas Gerais , Rio Grande do Sul and Santa Catarina .
Bovine animals whose meat is destined for the EU market must have remained within an authorised territory for at least a 90-day residency period .
In addition , there is a minimum 40-day residency period prior to slaughter within a holding .
At the slaughterhouse , the bovine animals cannot come into contact with other animals that do not comply with the above conditions and have to undergo an ante-mortem health inspection and show no clinical signs of disease 24 hours prior to slaughter .
Only fresh beef can be exported to the EU and the beef itself must have been deboned and matured to ensure inactivation of the FMD virus , should it still be present despite all the previously mentioned measures .
However , a Commission inspection in November 2007 identified serious instances of non-compliance with regard to holding registration , animal identification and movement control and a failure on the part of Brazil to respect previous commitments to take the appropriate corrective measures .
Consequently , the Commission adopted measures in January this year which restricted imports of Brazilian beef to holdings meeting a number of additional requirements .
These additional requirements include the full identification and registration of all animals in the national Brazilian system for bovine animals .
In addition , the holdings have to be placed under the effective control of the Brazilian veterinary services and regularly inspected by the Brazilian authorities .
I too welcome the Commissioner .
Perhaps my question is a little unfair , because it has a historical perspective .
But from your predecessor , Commissioner Kyprianou , I received a reply with regard to the food and veterinary report about six months ago .
His response was that the preliminary conclusions of the report did not justify an immediate change of EU policy vis-à-vis Brazil .
Just literally two or three months before the ban was imposed , the food and veterinary officials were insisting in the Agriculture Committee and elsewhere that the problems were not really of a significant nature .
Yet , within two or three months , the ban was imposed , and now we are just importing from 1 % of the original number of farms .
My question is : did it take the Irish Farmers Association report to prompt the FVO to look much closely at the situation , and did it take that to cause the Commission to act ?
I would like to thank the Commissioner for her response and welcome her to her first Question Time in the European Parliament .
Obviously , you are very engaged and delighted with the response you are getting .
My supplementary concerns the fact that , at your hearing in Parliament before the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , you made the point that food safety is one of our key concerns , but that we also have to be fair to our trading partners .
However , I believe that we should be fair not just with the regulations that apply to European farmers and food producers , but to those who are importing into the European Union as well and that the same regulations should apply .
How do we go about guaranteeing that the food supply is secure and safe to the same standards that European producers are meant to meet , in particular with regard to beef from Brazil ?
Member of the Commission . - Deficiencies with regard to EU health requirements were identified during Commission missions to Brazil .
Some of these deficiencies have been addressed by the Brazilian authorities themselves .
However , during the November 2007 mission , instances of non-compliance were identified , in particular in relation to holding registration , animal identification and movement control , and the failure to respect previous commitments to take corrective measures .
Consequently , as I said , additional requirements were adopted , and at present we are making sure that the Brazilian commitment really is adhered to .
At this point in time , experts from the Commission are offering practical training to the inspectors themselves , but are also making sure that the inspectors who have been trained are there in the farms training their own people , so that every Member State receiving exports of beef from Brazil has guarantees that there are well-trained people to supervise adherence to our requirements and regulations .
Commissioner , welcome .
Your last statement troubles me a little , because the experience of Irish farmers , European farmers , when they are visited by inspectors from the Commission , is not one of great assistance but of inspection and checking .
I get the impression that our officials at Commission level are holding the hands of and assisting the Brazilians to meet the standards .
I wish the same would apply when it comes to our own producers .
My second question is : what efforts is Brazil making to raise its game , and can you envisage - and , if so , when - a return , as I am sure the Brazilians wish , to the levels of beef they were previously sending to Europe ?
I know you are new to the job , but do you believe that their standards , should they ever reach them , are equivalent to ours , given that they only require 90 days and 40 days ?
We tag from birth right through to slaughter .
My welcome too , Commissioner .
Given what you were saying about the last Food and Veterinary Office report and the problems with unreported outbreaks , major flaws being identified in traceability and identification - indeed systemic failures - and the fact that the Brazilian authorities could not put in place guarantees , despite the new measures which you have implemented , surely it seems unlikely that the regionalisation policy for the control of foot-and-mouth disease in Brazil is working at all , and whether it can possibly even be made to work .
Is this not unlikely , Commissioner ?
Member of the Commission . - First of all , I would like to assure you that the requirements we impose are equivalent for the product exported , and Commission officials may now be training people , at their request , to put in place the right controls and regulations , but I am sure that they would not refuse to offer assistance to our people .
We try to be fair , and I am sure that the primary requirement is the safety of our products .
Regionalisation is applied in the same way in Brazil as in the EU .
Subject : Proposal on healthcare
Could the Commission please explain the delay in publishing the draft proposal on cross-border healthcare , given the political requirement to legislate following the ECJ 's judgments in this area and the promise given when healthcare was removed from the Services Directive ( 2006 / 123 / EC ) ?
Member of the Commission . - Honourable Members , the Commission has every intention to respond to the decision of the Parliament and the Council when removing health services from the Services Directive in 2006 to have them treated separately .
It is the Commission 's intention to present a proposal that will codify the rulings of the European Court of Justice in this area , thus clarifying patients ' rights in the provision of cross-border health care and to present flanking measures in order to secure the availability of good quality cross-border health care .
Certain concerns expressed on various aspects of this matter in the course of the last few months led to further reflection and consultation .
However , a draft proposal for a directive on the application of patients ' rights in cross-border health care is now under consideration for adoption by the College before the end of June 2008 .
Our aim is to come forward with a proposal with the ultimate goal of helping citizens to exercise their rights conferred upon them by the European Court of Justice rather than to create more problems .
This proposal will be focused on patients ' rights and increased access to health care .
It will be part of a social package to be launched in cooperation with Commissioner Špidla , promoting access , opportunities and solidarity for all EU citizens .
Patients will be the main focus of this initiative and this is in line with the overarching citizen-oriented approach of the Commission .
The proposal will not create new financial entitlements for patients .
The rights of patients established by the Court relate to the financial entitlements already defined by Member States .
This proposal simply creates a framework for the patients to exercise these rights effectively with greater legal certainty , more transparency and improved predictability .
Finally , the proposal will also set the legal and administrative basis for an improved and renewed cooperation between Member States in some forward-looking health-related areas where EU added value and synergies are expected to be decisive .
I join in the welcome to Commissioner Vassiliou here on her first day taking questions .
It is nice to have her with us .
Thank you for your reply .
Health care was exempted from the Services Directive originally for very good reasons , because we wanted a health services directive .
We have already waited far too long .
I am not quite sure what message the shuffling around the different desks in the Commission is sending to us .
Is it a concern with too much privatisation ?
Is it a concern that we might run down health services in Member States ?
There are already major discrepancies in competences in this area and differences in standards , and under the single market patients are entitled , as the ECJ has decided , to travel for treatment if they cannot reasonably access treatment in their own Member State .
What exactly has caused the delay to date , Commissioner ?
You may not be able to address this immediately , but perhaps you could come back to me .
There are some comments in relation to the Lisbon Treaty about claims being made by the ' No ' campaign in Ireland that the Treaty will push privatisation of health care and trading of services .
I would appreciate it if you would come back to me with clarification on that point .
Member of the Commission . - The only thing I can say at the moment is to stress our full determination to go ahead .
Let us not speak about the past .
There is a decision , and I assure you that , in June , we shall have the proposal in front of the College .
Please take it from me that in June we shall proceed .
Regarding privatisation , there is great concern about this , but my answer is that this concern is unfounded .
The proposal is focused on the needs of patients .
It ensures that , if patients travel to receive care , it is safe and of good quality .
It also makes clear under what conditions citizens can have cross-border health care reimbursed by their national health system or health care provider and when they cannot .
These conditions for reimbursement are not new , but are a codification of European Court of Justice rulings .
This proposal does not create possibilities of receiving health care abroad that were not already established by the Court rulings .
This proposal aims to ensure that cross-border health care happens within a clear framework for safe , high-quality and efficient health care throughout the Union .
The aim is to provide a clear framework .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 8 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Implementation of the posting of workers directive following the judgments of the Court of Justice ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the implementation of the posting of workers directive following the judgments of the Court of Justice .
This is an important matter , which has given rise to a series of misunderstandings and , above all , various rumours and concerns in some of our countries , and therefore we are going to follow this debate with a great deal of interest , and in particular the statement that Mr Spidla is to make on behalf of the Commission .
Member of the Commission . - ( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in its June 2007 communication entitled ' Posting of workers in the framework of the provision of services : Maximising its benefits and potential while guaranteeing the protection of workers ' , the Commission highlighted some shortcomings in the implementation and cross-border enforcement of the Posting of Workers Directive .
At that time we came to the conclusion that these problems could be solved only if the Member States stepped up their mutual cooperation and , in particular , if they discharged their obligations concerning administrative cooperation and accessibility of information , as stipulated in the Directive .
Correct and effective implementation and enforcement are the key elements in the protection of the rights of posted workers , while insufficient enforcement weakens the effectiveness of the Community Directives in force in this area .
Consequently , on 3 April this year the Commission adopted a Recommendation on better cooperation in order to remedy the shortcomings in the implementation , application and enforcement of the existing Directive .
The Recommendation focuses in particular on better exchange of information , improving access to information and exchange of best practices .
Better administrative cooperation should therefore lead to greater protection of working conditions in practice , lower administrative burdens for companies , more effective monitoring of the discharge of existing obligations to observe working conditions , and provision of effective controls .
The Recommendation also proposes the creation of a High-Level Committee that should directly involve the social partners , who are closest to the problems on the ground , and lay the basis for closer cooperation between labour inspectorates .
This Committee could be the appropriate forum to discuss a wide range of issues stemming from the implementation of the Posting of Workers Directive .
The Commission is convinced that this Recommendation lays the basis for a more intensive fight against infringements of workers ' rights and undeclared work , and that it improves working conditions for migrant workers throughout the European Union .
It is up to the Member States now to take the necessary steps to improve the implementation of the Posting of Workers Directive .
The Recommendation is expected to be approved by the next Employment and Social Affairs Council on 9 June .
The Commission then intends to evaluate the implementation of the Directive in the light of the latest European Court of Justice decisions , while cooperating closely with the European Parliament on the preparation of its own-initiative report .
The Commission is fully committed to ensuring effective protection of workers ' rights and will continue to combat all forms of social dumping and infringements of workers ' rights .
It should be stressed that there is no conflict between consistent support for workers ' rights and support for a competitive internal market , which gives us the means to preserve Europe 's social well-being .
If our society and our economy are to continue to flourish , we have to give equal priority to social aspects and to competitiveness .
( on behalf of the PPE-DE Group ) . - ( SV ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his presentation , and I welcome the fact that he emphasises the importance of greater cooperation between the Member States and the responsibility Member States have for implementing the Posting of Workers Directive correctly .
I think it may be justified in this debate to emphasise one thing , and that is that since 2004 we have seen rapid change in the European labour market .
We have gained increased mobility .
It is important to say that the various horror scenarios which were spread at the time regarding the consequences of increased mobility have proved to be false .
There was talk of welfare tourism and countless other problems .
In fact today there are one million Europeans posted in different countries .
Also it is the Member States where we have seen the greatest openness which have also seen the best labour market development and pay setting .
The Posting of Workers Directive has helped to ensure better opportunities for individuals and has also contributed towards the European economy and a European labour market .
One million people !
We must remember this when discussing the three different court cases .
This is because once the court has issued its judgment , we see that it is a question of different situations in different cases .
What is also important , however , is that there is nothing in this to say that there are no barriers to different kinds of industrial action in the different Member States .
There is nothing in the court judgments which means that they conflict with different types of collective agreements or other pay-setting arrangements .
On the other hand , the Member State must have legislation and society must function , in order to permit and encourage mobility .
It is in this context that I also think it is important that we now develop better cooperation , and that the different Member States make sure that they implement and evaluate this so as to combine mobility with social security and stability for everyone in Europe .
We must not blame the EU for the problems which exist .
Instead we must take responsibility in the different Member States , and we must welcome the increased mobility and the wellbeing which can be seen as an opportunity provided by the Posting of Workers Directive .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for the recommendation for improved administrative cooperation and better options for the labour inspectorates .
However , Commissioner , you are aware of the fact that our delight about this has been negated by the Laval and Rüffert rulings ?
These caused a great commotion , not only in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , but also among the trade unions outside Parliament and among the countries that are currently ratifying the Lisbon Treaty .
We have long thought that the Posting of Workers Directive was an excellent directive with a clear principle .
In view of the fact that we cannot ensure that wages and working conditions are equal throughout Europe , it is not unreasonable for employees to be able to expect equal treatment in the place where they work , regardless of their nationality .
It is right that the Posting of Workers Directive does not employ a comprehensive State of employment principle , but simply imposes a number of binding conditions .
Yet the directive also allows the Member States the space to impose more generous provisions for the protection of workers , in accordance with their own social traditions and in keeping with collective agreements or generally binding collective agreements .
The rulings took away the ground of equal treatment from under our feet .
The minimum protection provided by the directive is gradually becoming a maximum .
For a long time now , it has no longer been a problem of poor transposition in certain Member States .
Our awareness is growing , however , that the basic philosophy of the directive is wrong and that is : workers should be protected , but in moderation .
Social rights to negotiate and strike exist , but on the condition that they do not interfere with the free movement of services .
This is not a question of xenophobic remarks ; on the contrary .
Foreign employees are more than welcome .
Indeed , the free movement of workers guarantees equal treatment from day one and that is also what we want to achieve with regard to the free movement of services .
My group therefore requests a revision of the Posting of Workers Directive for three reasons : firstly , to ensure that the equal treatment of native and foreign workers is guaranteed ; secondly , to guarantee that national systems for social dialogue are fully respected ; and thirdly , to ensure that fundamental social rights are safeguarded for everyone .
We are relying on your support , Commissioner .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for his statement .
There have certainly been many strong reactions to numerous judgements by the Court of Justice in recent times .
Some observers feel that , on account of the Laval judgement , among others , the Treaty of Lisbon should be amended and that the Court of Justice should be restrained .
I would like to say that this is overshooting the mark and is due to the fact that people on certain sides would like to put a spanner in the works and make people believe that the Treaty of Lisbon could represent a problem for the legal security of employees .
On the contrary , the Treaty of Lisbon will mean more rights for employees .
Other observers such as Mrs Van Lancker believe that the Posting of Workers Directive should be amended .
Again , I would say no .
I do not think that this should be done in the first instance .
I believe , like the Commissioner who proposed it , that we should first do some thorough work to see how the Posting of Workers Directive is implemented in practice , and assess the possibilities for safeguarding against social dumping within the framework of the applicable legislation .
I also think that we should await the reaction of the Member States .
In this connection I am perhaps particularly thinking about the Laval case .
The final judgement has not been reached in the Laval case in Sweden , and there are many aspects to this judgement - both the obvious discrimination against foreign enterprises , which we cannot support , and also the unclear information given to the enterprise .
In Denmark a working committee has been set up by the government , consisting of social experts - both legal experts and social partners - to assess how the latest judgement harmonises with the Danish model , which is agreement-based and governed by legislation only to a very limited extent .
I think that it would be useful to await the outcome of this committee 's work .
It is a fast-working committee and will complete its work by June .
As is often the case in politics , the devil is in the detail , and it is therefore important that we retain a balanced attitude towards these questions .
It is only a year and a half since we had a thorough discussion in Parliament of the Posting of Workers Directive and carried out a consultation process with social partners .
Everyone said that the Directive was good , but difficult to implement in practice .
Employees do not know their rights and employers do not know their obligations well enough .
Therefore , our conclusion is that there is a need for better information and better cooperation ; this is something that you , Commissioner , are now also proposing .
We have , for example , also proposed that the Dublin agency be used , which represents both governments and social partners in order to develop good practice in this area .
I would very much like to hear what is happening in this area .
I can well understand the fear of social dumping ; however , I feel that we must deal with this issue wisely .
It will take a long time if the Posting of Workers Directive is to be amended , and it is therefore important that we investigate all the possibilities in order to secure the basis for flexible labour markets such as the Danish labour market under the applicable rules .
It is a question of ensuring that we can actually have flexible labour markets .
The right to take industrial action will not be threatened by the judgement ; however , there should be a balance regarding matters connected with conflicts .
I think that it is important to emphasise that the rights of employees will be strengthened by the Treaty of Lisbon and that both social partners and governments must work together irrespective of boundaries in order to make the legislation work better and to operate without friction .
This is the way forward !
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Thank you , Mr President , Commissioner .
The verdict in this case truly offers hope that the European Court of Justice understands the European Union 's four basic freedoms in real terms .
On this occasion the term ' social dumping ' , which is so popular in this Parliament too , did not work in a case where the objective was to ban a business from another Member State from providing services in the EU internal market .
In this discussion , I would like to single out one political aspect : EU Member States , and among them , largely , states such as Sweden , have in recent years made enormous profits in the Baltic states through the provision of ' aggressive ' financial services , particularly loans for immovable property .
We have never restricted the flow of this capital , even when the profits were exceptionally high and were partly obtained through the singular social dumping of exports - that is , Latvians who worked in these banks received salaries that were nowhere near the pay received by Swedes for the same work in Sweden .
Now , during the financial crisis , many Latvian families will be paying through the nose for a long time for the money they have borrowed , but our people and our businesses will not be able to compete in the EU market , and so they will not be able to pay back these debts .
As a result , it will in reality be the Swedish pension funds and other bank shareholders themselves that will lose out .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are all in the same European boat : let us allow Europe 's basic freedoms to be truly free , as we will all gain !
Thank you .
on behalf of the Greens / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , all the court judgments concern cases in which the trade unions have taken internationally recognised collective measures for action against social dumping .
In all three judgments the European Court of Justice recognised that the trade unions had a legitimate right to take these measures .
The Court of Justice , however , challenged this right in relation to the internal market .
In the Laval and Rüffert cases , the legal minimum standard was interpreted as the only maximum standard valid on the internal market .
The European Court of Justice therefore interpreted the Posting of Workers Directive in a very specific way .
The legislator did not , however , intend it that way .
In considering the Directive , the free trade in services must be promoted in fair competition and employees ' rights must be guaranteed .
The Posting of Workers Directive also contains a most-favoured nation clause for employees and this was not taken into account in the court judgments .
The Court of Justice is now creating a situation in the European Union in which the Posting of Workers Directive has been changed from a minimum directive to a maximum directive and in which it is legitimate to assert a competitive advantage over social dumping .
International social law should now be subject to charges for enterprises on the free internal market .
It may be that I am thereby criticising the court judgments .
However , a Union without equivalent elements of a social Europe , such as collective bargaining agreements , collective measures and combating social dumping , is doomed to failure and will no longer have the citizens ' support .
Our group 's response therefore at this point is : the principle of ' equal pay for equal work in the same establishment ' must occupy an equivalent position in the internal market with regard to the criteria of freedom .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Commissioner , first of all , I would like to note for the record that my colleagues from the Conference of Presidents , who decided on a late-night debate against my wishes , are all absent this evening .
Were it not for this being a late-night debate , I would be pleased to have finally initiated a discussion of this serious matter , which is the recognition by the Court of Justice of wage dumping , a matter that you just spent 20 seconds on , Commissioner , in a remarkably offhand manner .
Therefore , I will briefly outline the three stages of this new dimension of European law .
11 December 2007 : the Court quashed a trade union action claiming that the Finnish shipping company Viking Line should not be allowed to register its ferry in Estonia to reduce workers ' wages .
18 December 2007 : the Court again found against the unions , this time in Vaxholm , Sweden , for blockading a building against a Latvian company which was refusing to observe the collective agreement applicable to the building sector .
3 April 2008 : the Court found Lower Saxony in Germany guilty of imposing a minimum salary on any construction company awarded a procurement contract .
The Court then found in favour of a Polish subcontractor of a German company , which was paying its workers less than half the prescribed minimum wage .
This was the Rüffert ruling .
In all three cases , the fundamental reason invoked by the Court to justify its decision to encourage wage dumping was that Community law prohibits any measure - take note - likely to ' make less attractive ' the conditions of a company from another Member State because this is - and I quote - a ' restriction on the freedom to provide services ' or the freedom of establishment , which are among the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Treaty .
This is quite simply unacceptable .
Where is the social aspect of this liberal reasoning ?
Effectively , any social progress in a country will make a market less attractive - to use the Court 's expression - for competing companies .
I should add that , in all three cases , the famous Posting of Workers Directive has not offered the slightest protection to the workers concerned .
Incidentally , the Court explained that , and I quote , the ' directive seeks in particular to bring about the freedom to provide services ' .
It did not mention the protection of workers .
Finally , in all three cases , the Court reached its decision in the light of specific articles of the Treaty and not just the directive .
These were Article 43 , in the first case , and Article 49 , in the two others , both being reproduced word for word in the draft Treaty of Lisbon currently in the process of ratification .
My conclusion is therefore clear .
Amending a directive to solve the problem posed by these rulings is not sufficient .
Anyone who wants to re-establish the primacy of social rights over free trade must insist on a revision of the treaties , and specifically the articles relied on by the Court to justify its recent decisions .
This is difficult , but I think that it is necessary , because otherwise we can expect a real crisis over the legitimacy of the current European economic and social model .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , recently , in the Rüffert case , a Polish company paid 53 workers only 46 % of the agreed wage for the trade in Germany .
The Polish contractor was prosecuted ; they responded by taking the case to court , and the ECJ recently voted in favour of the Polish subcontractor .

Not long ago , Mr John Monks , the President of the European Trade Union Confederation , speaking in a hearing in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs about an earlier case - the Laval case - and warning of future cases , said that ' we have been told that our right to strike is fundamental , but not as fundamental as the free movement of services ' .
The trade union movement is rendered powerless by these rulings .
The Services Directive and the Posting of Workers Directive represent a direct threat to everything that has been gained in workers ' rights in the last 30 years .
There have been three cases - Laval , Viking and now Rüffert - and a body of judicial interpretation is building that renders contracts meaningless , unions impotent and fairness of wages an empty term .
As Mr Monk stated in the hearing on Laval , we need a protective protocol in the Lisbon Treaty or face social dumping in the future .
Mr President , I believe that the Commission first published a guidance document on the implementation of the Posting of Workers Directive back in 2006 , and at the time the Socialist Group - in response - led a call in Parliament for a toughening up of the Directive .
The Commission did not feel this was necessary then and clearly does not feel it is necessary now , and for the record I agree with it .
The problem lies , as the Commission has so clearly defined , in weaknesses in national implementation , in insufficient cooperation between Member States and in poor supply of information .
Toughening up EU legislation would not address these weaknesses .
In fact it would make them even more difficult to address .
Finally , I would observe that the Commissioner confirms full commitment to protect workers ' rights and to fight against social dumping .
We should all agree with that on all sides of the House , but we should also agree that there is another right to be protected : the right of all workers to be mobile , to be posted and to provide services across borders .
The rights of social protection must go hand in hand with the right to provide services , and there need be no contradiction .
It is , of course , a major challenge to get the right balance .
However , the challenge is for Member States to resolve , not by the EU proposing tougher laws .
I suggest that the Commissioner has pointed the way and invite him to agree with me that our role as MEPs should be to get each of our own countries to follow .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , I welcome the recommendation , and I welcome even more the fact that the Commissioner seeks to combat social dumping and that Mr Barroso and Mr Špidla say that the right to strike does not subordinate free movement .
However , your proposal does not go far enough .
It does not go far enough to prevent social dumping .
Let us first look at what the court said in the Rüffert and Laval cases .
It said that it is the minimum wage in the country of origin which counts , in other words a Polish worker must work in the same workplace as a German worker for 46 % of the pay the German worker works for .
If you had said that women had to work for 46 % of what a man earns , we would have said that this was discrimination .
In this case it is discrimination against Polish workers who do not receive the same pay as German workers .
This is unacceptable .
Secondly , different social models are not judged in the same way .
In the Rüffert case it is pointed out that collective agreements must be universally applicable , and not the model which was chosen in Lower Saxony .
The same thing is done in the Laval case .
Certain labour market models take precedence over others .
This too is unacceptable .
Thirdly , it is said that the right to strike is fundamental , but when it is then weighed against free movement , it does not weigh very heavily , not very heavily at all .
Instead it is free movement which takes precedence over it .
Some speakers have said ' yes , but we must have free movement ' .
Of course we must , but how do we encourage free movement if we dump the conditions in countries ?
Do you believe that the people living in these countries will say ' we welcome people ' ?
No , they will be demanding closed borders .
I am in favour of open borders between new and old Member States , but I am also in favour of equal terms for equal work , and that too must be fundamental .
Therefore the Commission must take stronger action regarding amendments to the Posting of Workers Directive .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I share the opinion of my colleagues Mrs Van Lancker and Mr Wurtz for the most part .
Ultimately the question is how many more poor workers do we want there to be in the European Union ?
That is the fundamental question .
Without repeating the Court rulings , I see that we have reached a point where the Posting of Workers Directive is being used against national or regional provisions that are designed to ensure a ' level playing field ' for all workers , to guarantee a minimum wage for all workers .
We have therefore reached a situation in which this directive undermines the territoriality of the right to work .
We can guarantee the mobility of workers , while ensuring the territoriality of the right to work , and that is what is under discussion .
Leaving the Posting of Workers Directive behind for a second , I would like to draw your attention to another related subject , to the complaint that the company TNT has filed with the Commission following a judgment by an administrative tribunal in Berlin , claiming that the German government , by imposing a minimum wage in the postal sector , has failed to take into account the economic impact of the minimum wage - we are talking about a minimum wage of EUR 9.80 an hour - on its competitors .
We find ourselves in a situation where the minimum wage , which is a national competence , in reality is discouraging competition .
This is TNT 's interpretation .
The Commission is currently examining this petition .
If you or your colleagues and the College , find in TNT 's favour in this case , I believe , Mr Špidla , that you will lose all credibility , in this and in other cases , and that it will take more than a recommendation from the Commission on the best information and administrative cooperation between Member States to truly guarantee the dignity of workers in the European Union .
( SV ) Mr President , it is the task of the European Court of Justice to issue judgments in line with the Treaties .
Therefore the Treaties must be amended in order to protect workers ' interests .
The conclusion from the Court 's rulings in the Laval , Viking Line and Rüffert cases is that the Lisbon Treaty cannot be approved by the wage-earners of Europe unless a clause on workers ' rights is added to the Treaty - the right to defend collective agreements , the right to take industrial action to improve pay and employment conditions .
Demanding pay higher than the minimum wage is now a trade barrier according to the Court , and the unions will not be able to prevent wage dumping .
On 17 April this year Commissioner McCreevy answered in writing a question I asked on union rights as follows : ' Trade unions can continue to take industrial action provided that this is motivated by legitimate aims which are compatible with EC law . '
You cannot put it more clearly than that .
EC law must therefore be changed .
Free movement , yes , but without discriminating against workers from other countries .
( SV ) Mr President , time and time again the European Court of Justice has made it clear to the Member States that they cannot consider themselves independent when it comes to fundamental policy areas such as health policy , gambling policy , alcohol advertising and now , most recently , labour market policy .
This is what is known as legal activism , and it must be seen as a direct threat to democracy and the principle of subsidiarity .
Owing to its arrogant attitude to the democratically elected governments of Member States , the European Court of Justice is in fact a self-appointed power in Europe .
When it comes to the Laval judgment , it means that Swedish and foreign companies will operate on completely different terms in Swedish territory .
This is completely unacceptable .
I urge members to think again the next time they decide to grant more power to the EU 's unelected institutions .
As for today , it seems as though we are waking up at last .
- ( PL ) Mr President , the Posting of Workers Directive is one of the foundations on which the practical implementation of one of the four basic Community freedoms , which are European freedoms , is based and which has accompanied treaties and the European Community right from the start .
Article 49 of the Treaty is one of the most clearly formulated regulations governing the internal affairs of the European Union , and it states unambiguously that restrictions on freedom to provide services within the Community shall be prohibited in respect of nationals of Member States who are established in a State of the Community other than that of the person for whom the services are intended .
The persistent practices found in many Member States aimed at administrative restriction of this freedom , which is guaranteed in the Treaty , are therefore surprising .
Since being elected to this Parliament , I have received a flow of complaints from businesspeople originating mainly from the new Member States that acceded to the EU after 2004 , against the activities of local and regional authorities that wilfully impose on these businesspeople additional requirements that are not justified in the least by any EU legal act .
I have raised this issue on many occasions in this House , demanding an unambiguous statement from the European Commission on behalf of EU law , and consequently in defence of the freedom to provide services .
I am pleased that my efforts have received such a clear confirmation in the ruling of the European Court of Justice that we are discussing today .
I am convinced that in the light of recent Court verdicts we - that is , Parliament and the European Commission together - will be able to draw up a formula for the organisation of an internal services market that , while ensuring the fundamental rights of employees , ensuring those rights - those fundamental rights - will not impose extra burdens on EU businesspeople that will hamper their activities and that are by definition - as the Court 's rulings state - in breach of European law .
A free market for services and employee mobility should be supported , not fought .
These are the challenges of the 21st century .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President , Commissioner .
After several European Court of Justice rulings , the Posting of Workers Directive ( 96 / 71 / EC ) has become a focus of attention in the Union .
The Court has spoken .
What it actually said might be debated , but that would not be worthwhile as its decision will remain valid , and anyway the Court did not establish a scale of values .
We can see that in Parliament these rulings have given rise to mutually exclusive opinions , but it is good that the Commission has considered what has to be done and has asked the Member States .
This is even more important as they are trying to pour oil on troubled waters .
It is pertinent that an earlier omission by the Commission unfortunately contributed to the heightened atmosphere , as they still had not thought through the transposition of the Posting of Workers Directive into national systems , although two years before it had been emphatically requested in a European Parliament resolution .
So there is no answer as to whether the Member State measures protecting workers conform to the Posting of Workers Directive and , for want of this , we are unable to state whether the Posting of Workers Directive is really working well or if it needs to be amended in the light of the laws of the service market .
There are no lessons on implementation , at most there are violently clashing statements .
We are moved by the question of whether this uncertain situation gives some scope to populism and demagogy .
And are we not creating a political problem from accidental legal shortcomings ?
It may be that we have produced political tension where there should only be sober-minded regulation .
Ladies and gentlemen , the freedom of the service market operates , with very few exceptions , within the provisions of legislation .
On the other hand , specific measures are required to make good the law .
We hope for these specific steps from the Commission , since a comprehensive examination of the legal material cannot be undertaken by the Court .
That is for the Commission to do .
And it is the Commission 's job to initiate proceedings against violations of the law , where necessary .
This could reinforce Mr Spindla 's words , that we have to act simultaneously and together , in the interests of the legal rights of employees and in the interests of the social market . Thank you .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , I disagree with you in that there would be no discrepancy between strong social protection of employees and a strong internal market .
An EU internal market that complies with the system of global competition is ultimately the incarnation of this kind of opposition .
I do agree with you , however , that Member States bear responsibility for the transposition of EU law into national law .
At least in the Rüffert case , the rulers in Berlin and Lower Saxony do not simply point the finger at the European Court of Justice .
They have failed in general to explain the law on collective bargaining authoritatively and to demand the legal minimum wage .
Commissioner , I demand that you discharge your responsibility and openly demand the necessary requirement to amend the EU legal bases .
This concerns Article 50 and Article 56 , for example , of the consolidated version of the Lisbon Treaty of 15 April , the sharpening of the Posting of Workers Directive , the granting of the right to take industrial action and the cross-border right to take industrial action .
I also refer to the fact that the review of the political problems should not simply be left to the ECJ , but that here both the EU Institutions - the Council , the Commission and the European Parliament - and the nation states bear responsibility for this through their legislation .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Treaty of Lisbon will mean a considerable improvement for employees - Mr Wurtz , I have to contradict you here .
We therefore have to accept it because social policy is becoming a duty across the board .
Everything in future has to be checked by legislative means from the viewpoint of social policy and the definition of the social market economy as provided for in the Treaty represents substantial progress .
We need competitiveness , we need more productivity - and this must certainly be a headline in a global order - but in all three cases we note that it is not a matter of competition in a global order here , but rather whether work was carried out in certain sectors in the European Union between its Member States as part of a common internal market .
We must not get into a situation in which global order is used here to set employees from different Member States up against one another on the basis of international competitiveness .
If employee solidarity is destroyed , the European Union , the cohesion of our societies , will also be destroyed .
For this reason it is important that we are not now taken to task by the courts , but that we make it clear that we have to examine the legislation .
The Posting of Workers Directive dates from the beginning of the 1990s .
It no longer applies today .
We have to find out what is wrong with it .
I do not know in detail .
Collective bargaining partners must check that they are concluding their collective bargaining agreements in accordance with the internal market .
National legislation must be adapted to it .
We have to check all this .
At the same time this must not lead to partitioning and protectionism because mobility should be guaranteed .
When we address the four basic freedoms , we mean the four basic freedoms of the market .
However , my definition of a social market economy means that market can take place only within the framework permitted by the legislator so that we have a fair distribution of the benefits of this economic order and do not leave them to the free play of market forces .
If this happens , the market will devour even itself .
We therefore need this kind of framework condition of a social market economy .
Mr President , allow me in conclusion to read out a quotation .
' Not the free market economy of the laissez-faire plundering of a past era , nor the free play of market forces ' - and similar phrases - ' but the socially responsible market economy , in which the individual comes into his own again , which places a high value on the person and subsequently also provides a fair return for work carried out ; this is the market economy of a modern type ' .
This is a quotation by Ludwig Erhard , of whom it definitely cannot be said that he was against a market economy .
Mr President , let me say how much I agree with Mr Brok and how much I disagree with Mr Bushill-Matthews , but I will come to that in a moment .
I would like to thank the Commissioner for the recommendation adopted on 3 April .
It is an important step in the right direction .
I believe that the more effective exchange and access to information and the exchange of best practice will certainly help , but it was one of those strange quirks of timing that the recommendation was adopted on the same day that the Rüffert judgment was handed down .
I think the Laval and Rüffert cases in particular require us to go much further than that recommendation now .
Those cases raise the prospect that the economic freedoms can be interpreted as granting undertakings the right to evade or circumvent national , social and employment laws and practices .
The only protection , it seems , are the provisions of the posted workers directive .
If that is the case , then it is clear that we need to revisit the directive .
In particular , we need to clarify the scope for collective agreements , to set mandatory standards , and for collective action to enforce those standards .
I think we need to do a number of things .
We need to ensure that host country collective agreements can provide for higher than minimum standards .
We need to make mandatory what are currently only options for Member States , such as applying all generally binding collective agreements to posted workers .
I think we also need a clear time limit for the definition of a posted worker , so that there is a clear idea of when a posted worker ceases to be a posted worker .
Finally , for now , I think we need to broaden the legal base of the directive to include freedom of movement of workers , as well as the freedom to provide services .
That was a proposal which was rejected back in 1996 , but I hope we can see now how important it is .
It is the Court that has said that the right to strike and the right of association are fundamental rights , but not as fundamental as the economic freedoms .
Trade unions might be forgiven for thinking that they are suddenly living on Animal Farm .
We owe it to them to restore a proper balance .
I think these modest proposed changes to the posting of workers directive would be a start .
( DA ) Mr President , when we considered the Treaty of Lisbon in February , both my fellow Members and I proposed that the right to take collective industrial action should belong within the competence of the Member States .
Unfortunately , the majority of you voted against this and now the following question must be raised : why did you do it ?
The only logical explanation and the logical consequence is that the cross-border pursuit of the biggest profits possible by employers will ultimately take precedence over the right of employees to defend themselves against social dumping .
You might of course believe this , but you must then stop talking about a social Europe .
Employees in every country must have the unconditional right to take industrial action in order to ensure that migrant workers receive at least the same salaries as themselves .
This is not discrimination .
We do not believe that migrant workers should have lower salaries than workers who already live in the country .
We are against discrimination and action must therefore be taken .
The alternative is social dumping .
This is a downward spiral .
Therefore , using whatever means necessary , we must at least secure the free and unrestricted right to take industrial action through a legally binding protocol in the Treaty of Lisbon .
( FR ) Commissioner , it is true that we are extremely disappointed to see how the freedom of provision of services is being applied in case law .
One might be forgiven for thinking that , in some interpretations , the ECJ has sought to establish the pre-eminence of articles 43 and 49 over every other consideration .
However , I am wary of Manichean analyses of these case-law decisions , which , as you all know , are first and foremost test cases .
I believe that the question we need to ask ourselves is how to guarantee the social acquis .
More specifically , we need to answer two questions .
Firstly , what wage level must companies be subjected to under the national laws of the host country ?
Secondly , to what extent can we restrict the collective action of trade unions intended to ensure equal treatment of national and posted workers ?
In answer to these questions , I do not believe in a change in the Posting of Workers Directive .
I even think that we would be taking a huge risk in attempting this .
Conversely , I find the European Trade Union Confederation 's proposal for a social clause more interesting .
I think that this is quite simply , as Mr Brok said , a case of applying the treaties , both old and new : Article 3.3 , Article 6.1 and the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which is now substantive law .
We also need to enforce - and the national parliaments could supervise this - the principle of subsidiarity in all that concerns the right to work , workers ' rights and the right to strike in particular .
In the more immediate future , the French Presidency is about to launch the Social Agenda .
For you , Commissioner , the Commission must go further than the point that you made and the minimum administrative recommendation for a more political text , taking full account of the uncertainties arising from case law .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , closer cooperation between national administrations is , of course , right and proper .
I welcome this .
It is even essential .
However , if we all genuinely want to avert a race for the lowest minimum wage in Europe , we need more , and you know that , too , Commissioner .
According to the Rüffert judgment , there is only one solution in my opinion .
We have to improve the Posting of Workers Directive .
The Commission is also required to do this .
We have to draw legislative consequences from this judgment because it reverses the intention of the Posting of Workers Directive .
The freedom to provide services is placed higher than the protection of employees here .
Even the planned change from minimum to maximum protection is explained .
In my country , Germany , 8 out of 16 federal states are directly affected by this judgment .
The regional governments just wanted to serve as models here on wage dumping matters .
Based on the Posting of Workers Directive as well as on the procurement directives , they wanted to ensure compliance with certain social criteria , at least when awarding public contracts .
They have therefore demanded compliance with local standard wage rates as a social criterion , since these are above the minimum wage .
It is difficult for me to understand the decision of the Court of Justice .
If we really want social criteria - and I think we all want this - then it must be possible to achieve even more than a minimum wage .
The judgment should not entrap us into continuing to authorise minimum standards alone in future for posted workers .
This is not the social Europe that my group wants .
To be on the safe side , we also need to examine the procurement directives carefully .
Back in Germany , the judgments of the European Court of Justice on employment addressed this evening have created a back flash in Europe 's acceptance .
We are all now being asked to change tack again here .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , if we were dealing with a minor problem I would understand that a simple recommendation dealing with exchanging good practice and incorporating more efficient information could resolve the problem .
However , Commissioner , the problem is that we are dealing with a major problem , which I regret very much was not even mentioned in your speech .
The problem , Commissioner , is that currently we have consistent case law from the Court of Justice that states that workers from one country may work in another country for less than 50 % of the salary , under a directive which , it has to be said , was created precisely to prevent this .
Therefore , if it is possible to have legislation in force that allows this situation , we clearly have a fundamental problem that cannot be solved purely by solving information problems .
Secondly , Commissioner , we have a problem in that the various national union practices on setting salaries and collective agreements are left out .
Finland , Sweden , Denmark and Germany have been left out .
This is therefore a massive problem , not for those countries , but for the whole of Europe , which is seeing how its national laws are being undermined , and how Europe is not only failing to guarantee better protection for its workers but is breaking the systems of national protection .
In view of this situation , Commissioner , I do not think that we can look the other way .
I do not think that we can prescribe aspirin when what is needed is major surgery , and I think that we need to restore a balance between the principles of workers ' rights and the rights of the market , because otherwise not only social Europe but the whole of Europe will go this way .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the aim of the Posting of Workers Directive is to ensure the freedom to provide services while at the same time guaranteeing employee 's rights .
In my view this Directive has benefited of the European Union , and the criticism I am hearing today here in this House is to a large extent unjustified .
I would point out that in the Rüffert case , which we are discussing , violation of social standards and the setting of wages at the scandalously low level of 46 % took place not as a result of any defects in the Posting of Workers Directive , but simply as a result of the failure to implement part of the relevant legislation of Lower Saxony in the manner envisaged in the Posting of Workers Directive .
We are consequently dealing here with a problem implementing legislation within Germany , not with defects in the Posting of Workers Directive .
We have a similar situation in the Laval case , where there is in turn a situation in Sweden where minimum pay is not prescribed either by statute or in a collective agreement in the manner envisaged in the Posting of Workers Directive .
It is my view , therefore , that the way out of this situation is primarily through the adaptation of national legislation to the provisions of the current Directive , although I concede that there are many matters that could still be improved in the Directive , and in these matters I support the Commission 's opinion .
I would also like to take this opportunity to speak about the concept of social dumping , which has been very frequently mentioned here .
I note that the concept of social dumping does not exist either in international law or in economic theory .
It is purely a propaganda term .
One cannot speak of dumping in a situation where posted workers - Poles in Germany or Latvians in Sweden - receive a remuneration that is higher than what they would get in their own country .
Nor can one speak of social dumping in a situation where there are no binding social or wage standards for all countries , and the reason there are no such standards is that the level of development of our Member States is different , and in addition , policy differs from state to state .
( ES ) Mr President , I think that it is clear that the judgment of the Court of Justice threatens the very foundations of the European Union .
It is clear that the Court of Justice is the highest body for interpreting European Union law , and there is no one right now who wants to weaken that institution .
This case law , however , as Mr Cercas pointed out , threatens the principle of social cohesion .
For many people in Europe , a European Union that does not guarantee minimum social rights does not deserve to exist and therefore we are threatening the very existence of the European Union .
As we cannot go against the judgments of the Court and we have to comply with them , the time has clearly come for the institutions with legislative power - the Commission , Parliament and the Council - to adopt measures to ensure that this case law does not become permanent , because it is case law attached to specific legal texts that can be changed .
It appears that the Court itself is inviting us to make this legislative change , and I think that it is now the responsibility of the Commission , first of all , but also of Parliament and the Council , to change the legislative texts in order to prevent this case law from becoming permanent .
( RO ) The legislative provisions we are discussing today could improve the lives of more than one million European citizens working in another Member State as suppliers of services or posted workers .
In particular the provisions of Article 3 of the Directive are not implemented entirely in every European Union Member State .
Work health and safety standards , the maximum number of working hours and the minimum period of leave or maternity benefits are not implemented when it comes to posted workers .
Moreover , the minimum wage provided by the host country legislation should be guaranteed .
Nevertheless , this last issue makes very many companies resort to alternative labour contracts , which automatically prevent the payment of lower wages .
Moreover , it has become a practice for many European companies to hire workers from new Member States and send them abroad as posted workers for a period that can be extended up to 24 months , thus taking advantage of the differences existing as to the payment of contributions to social insurance .
I end by saying that this type of social dumping must be stopped by implementing all the provisions of the Directive on the posting of workers .
( PL ) Mr President , a lot of remarks have been heard in this House , as well as some very critical evaluations , of judgments - judgments by the European Court of Justice .
I would appeal for calm .
Judgments by the European Court of Justice are not , after all , political in nature ; they are based on a penetrating analysis of actual states of affairs and law in the Member States .
This is the role of this agency , and let us respect it .
Let us take a calm approach to this .
Let us not react badly to these judgments when they do not suit us and well to them when they please us .
Such à la carte justice should not motivate us , and we should not accept it .
The second matter to which I wish to draw attention is this : let us not allow confrontation to arise between employees in the old and the new Member States .
It would be the worst thing if we brought trades unionists from the old Member States into confrontation with trades unionists from the new Member States .
This is not what justice in the European Union is supposed to be based on .
I am warning against this .
Mr President , at the moment in Ireland we are debating the pros and cons of the Lisbon Treaty and there are conflicting interpretations of the recent rulings from the Court of Justice and their implications for the protection of workers and workers ' rights .
While I know we do not have a final ruling on the Laval case , I would ask the Commissioner to briefly outline his reaction to the situation and his views as to how the transposition and implementation of the Posting of Workers Directive in Sweden in particular has impacted on the judgment on the Laval case .
A previous speaker , Mr Andersson , made the very valid point that , if a woman was paid 46 % of what a man was paid for doing the same work in the same country , it would be considered as discrimination .
Yet this seems to be sanctioned by the courts when it comes to workers from different countries doing the same work in the same country .
Again , I would like the Commissioner 's comments as to how the transposition and implementation of the Directive impacted on this situation .
Finally , I listened very carefully to what the Commissioner said when he spoke about guaranteeing the rights of workers and combating social dumping , but I am not entirely satisfied that his proposals and suggestions will accomplish that aim , and I look forward to hearing more robust proposals from the Commission .
( EL ) Mr President , the European Court of Justice 's three judgements on Viking Lines , Laval and Rüffert are based a single premise .
That premise stems from the four freedoms of movement of capital enshrined in the Treaty of Maastricht , the Directives on the internal market and on the posting of workers , as confirmed by Articles 43 and 49 in the renamed European Constitution , which is the Treaty of Lisbon .
The judgements of the European Court of Justice are political and deeply reactionary : big business groups impose mediaeval terms of employment to increase their profits .
Not only are the rights to strike and to collective bargaining being called into question , but there is a third important factor that I should like to add .
International labour conventions , which have been signed and ratified through the International Labour Organisation ( ILO ) , are being called into question .
For this reason , equal pay and equal work for all workers must be guaranteed .
Workers from the countries joining the EU after 1 May 2004 owe nothing to anyone .
Together with all the other workers of Europe , they should fight to improve working conditions and pay .
There should be equal pay for equal work .
( ET ) Mr President , colleagues .
I too am a big fan of equal treatment as a principle and can honestly say that sometimes I find it very difficult to understand why , for the work I do in this House , I receive a much lower salary than my western colleagues ( ten times less than the Italians ) .
However , I understand that it will take some time for salaries in Europe to equalise .
Today I am left with the impression of great hypocrisy here .
Many people take the floor and speak on behalf of the one million posted workers , fighting for their rights .
But let 's be honest - most speakers are not in fact representing those one million posted workers here , but are instead protecting their own labour market .
Because of this I am very pleased that the Commissioner has promised to establish a committee to examine this matter .
A very unfair impression has been left here by these three cases .
It was , however , necessary in order to report on areas where there is exploitation , where there is social dumping , where there is insecurity .
Fortunately , in these three cases there was none .
The free movement of services is in all our interests .
I have been waiting for a plumber to come to my flat in Brussels for three weeks - the drains are blocked .
At night , I can promise you , the legendary Polish plumber haunts my dreams .
member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , thank you for all your contributions .
It has been very interesting hearing them .
I think that we have had a rich and lively debate here today .
I have also taken note of the various opinions expressed .
These differences of interpretation and points of view have led me to treat this subject with caution .
The debate has also revealed the enormous complexity of the subject and the difficult legal issues that arise here .
The three Court of Justice rulings are all specific .
It would be wrong to draw general conclusions from them .
First of all , it is up to the Member States concerned to assess what they need to do in a national context to comply with the Court rulings .
I would also like to endorse the constructive approach taken in Sweden and Denmark to bring about this compliance .
However , today has shown that it is important to have an in-depth discussion so that we can give the appropriate response to the problems raised .
This is precisely one of the priorities of the Commission at this time .
We have effectively decided to continue this discussion as we prepare for a new Social Agenda .
This Agenda , which I will unveil next June before the College , will of course include the results of a wide-ranging consultation launched on the new social realities .
It also follows on from the Commission Communication on ' Opportunities , access and solidarity : towards a new social vision for 21st century Europe ' .
This is a real opportunity to promote new solutions to respond to the challenges faced by our European societies .
Among these challenges are , of course , demographic change and the increasing pace of technological progress , but also the social impact of globalisation .
The diverse forms of mobility among workers and the rise in migration , which is probably inevitable , pose new challenges to which we must respond .
These are questions that we must address in order to preserve and strengthen our European social model .
I am convinced that the Social Agenda is the right vehicle to propose an initial response designed and tailored for the challenges of mobility to ensure protection for workers .
The debate that the European Parliament is about to have in the context of its own initiative report will also be a step in the right direction .
The Commission is also committed to playing an active role in this and to facilitating discussions and the search for solutions .
I want to work with an open mind , setting high standards that are in tune with social and economic realities .
I want us to progress constructively and confidently .
The complexity of social realities makes it harder to formulate ' turnkey ' solutions .
We need to spend more time discussing the Social Agenda .
By doing this , a more protective and global approach will emerge for the Community 's workers .
The Commissioner 's speech brings the debate to a close .
I must acknowledge that , although it is not typical of the Presidency to say so , I am closing it with a degree of perplexity .
This must be because for 30 years of my life I have been fighting to ensure that a Spanish worker in Sweden or Germany does not earn less than a German or Swedish worker , and because for 20 more years I have been fighting to ensure that a Polish , Romanian or Moroccan worker does not earn less in Spain than a Spanish worker .
( Applause )
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
The recent judgments of the Court of Justice in the Laval-Vaxholm case in Sweden , the Viking Line case in Finland and now the Rüffert case in Germany simply serve to clarify the real objectives and priorities of this European Union .
To be more specific , the ' primacy ' of the principle of ' freedom of establishment ' , as laid down in Articles 43 and 46 of the Treaty , which prohibits any ' restrictions on the freedom of establishment ' .
The Court of Justice considers as a ' restriction ' , and therefore ' unlawful ' under Community law , the freedom of workers and their representative bodies to defend their rights and interests , namely respect for what has been agreed in collective bargaining .
This legitimises social dumping and attacks on collective negotiation and bargaining in the EU and encourages ' competition ' between workers , in practice imposing the prevalence of the ' country of origin ' principle , that is to say , paying lower salaries and downgrading protection of workers ' rights in contractual relations with employers .
These judgments uncover the EU 's class nature and who its neoliberal policies really benefit ( and who they are driven by ) , dispelling all the speechifying about the much proclaimed ' social Europe ' and showing how EU policies are an affront to workers ' hard-won rights .
in writing . - The way in which the existing treaties are being used to undermine workers ' rights is a scandal .
The European Court of Justice stated that its judgment on the Rüffert case is in keeping with the provisions of the existing Treaties .
The Lisbon Treaty will do nothing to improve this situation .
Protection of vulnerable workers throughout the European Union should have been secured in the negotiations on the Treaty .
It was not .
The direction in which the Treaty wants to take Europe is one which fundamentally undermines Europe 's social model .
In Ireland we have known since Irish Ferries and before that the pre-eminence of the internal market was leading to situations where workers ' rights are being undermined .
I support the spirit of the ETUC call for a social progress clause to be inserted into the Treaty I believe that the only way to secure workers ' rights into the future is to reject this Treaty and send Member States back to the negotiating table .
A new Treaty could firmly establish that fundamental rights , the right to strike and the right of workers to take collective action to improve their working and living conditions beyond minimum standards , would take precedence over the internal market .
in writing . - ( FI ) The Court of Justice of the European Communities has delivered three judgments against the trade union movement , and we can therefore expect more court decisions on cases in the same series .
The cases concern Viking Line , Vaxholm ( Laval ) and Rüffert , and in all of them the Court has interpreted the Treaties from just one point of view , i.e. freedom of competition , ignoring Parliament 's will .
The proposal to comply with the working conditions of the country of origin in the case of posted workers , as in the ' Bolkestein Directive ' , was dismissed .
Unfortunately , the Court has , with the decisions it has taken in these individual cases , taken on the role of legislator and ignored the interpretation of the will of a genuine legislator , in this case the European Parliament .
The Commission should not defend such a breach of competence on the part of this institution .
China 's policy and its effects on Africa ( debate )
The next item is the report by Ana Maria Gomes , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on China 's policy and its effects on Africa .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , China 's unrestrained quest for oil , natural resources and new markets in Africa raises concerns about the impact of China 's growing presence in that continent and the respective ramifications for European policies .
Europe cannot start pointing the finger at China out of fear , nor can it afford to take part in an unprincipled competition avoiding methods and criteria that are in Beijing 's own interest .
Both Europe and China have an obligation to contribute to achieving the Millennium Development Goals : poverty reduction and conflict resolution in Africa .
Both have to recognise that only through promoting sustainable development and good governance can their own interests and investments be sustainable and seen as legitimate in Africa .
In this report we have tried to analyse China 's presence in Africa in an objective way , acknowledging both the positive and negative impacts .
Based on various specific recommendations for action , there are two key political messages : firstly , the EU needs to give a coordinated response to the challenges raised by China 's supposedly ' no strings ' policy .
This response cannot abandon European principles .
The EU must stick to its development cooperation policy , especially as regards human rights conditionality .
This is because there can be no good governance without respect for human rights and without good governance , and the rule of law it implies , there will be no sustainable development in Africa or any other part of the world .
Secondly , Europe must involve China in discussions on their respective African policies , but such cooperation obviously cannot occur over the heads of the Africans .
This trilateral involvement requires adequate support for the role to be played by the African institutions , such as the African Union , NEPAD , other regional institutions and governments and national parliaments .
For this reason , Europe must increase its support for strengthening African civil society to encourage accountability from the respective governments .
In this report , we recommend that the EU should not pass up opportunities to talk candidly with China , or about China in Africa , specifically when this means voicing criticism in private or in public .
China wants to be seen as a responsible player in Africa , yet it frequently invokes the rhetoric of non-interference to try to justify unacceptable actions , such as its continued complacency towards the Sudanese Government blocking the sending of a UN-African Union hybrid force - which should have been in Darfur long ago - or its more recent and disgusting sending of arms to the Mugabe regime on board a vessel that is - quite rightly - being prevented from unloading by Zimbabwe 's neighbouring countries .
In reality , everything China does in Africa has a political impact , be it positive or negative .
Furthermore , China is showing it is a pragmatic power that learns fast .
It is therefore vital that Europe does not stop trying to get across to Beijing that what is expected of a permanent member of the UN Security Council , such as China , is in fact a contribution towards promoting UN principles and objectives .
In this report , we propose that the EU should encourage China to step up its participation in multilateral donor meetings and adopt specific internationally accepted criteria and guidelines on transparency of aid , the extractive industries , good governance , environmental protection , labour rights , etc . , with a view to ensuring that it really contributes to poverty reduction , the Millennium Development Goals and promoting peace and security in Africa .
Yet Europe also needs to take a look in the mirror and learn from its own mistakes and shortcomings as regards Africa .
Member States need to deliver on official development assistance pledges and cutting aid and the goals to be achieved will only help emphasise China 's merits in making quick funding available to Africa .
Europe needs to improve the effectiveness of its aid and ensure there is consistency between its various policies and this implies no longer turning a blind eye to the crimes committed by certain oppressive African regimes with whom it continues to deal , as usual , at flagrant odds with its proclaimed criteria and principles .
To conclude , Mr President , I would like to thank the shadow rapporteurs and other colleagues for their excellent cooperation .
Their amendments have contributed a great deal to enriching this report .
I hope that such a broad consensus can continue tomorrow , all the more so as there are only a few amendments to vote on .
I have put forward three amendments myself : two involve minor corrections and the third is to restate the European Parliament 's position , calling for the EU Code of Conduct on Arms Exports to become legally binding .
This would avoid the current paragraph 62 repeating the call contained in paragraph 66 .
member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , honourable members , I would first of all like to congratulate Mrs Gomez for her excellent work on this sensitive and difficult , even controversial , subject .
I support the numerous recommendations that you made concerning the policy that the European Union must adopt to tackle China 's growing presence in Africa .
The EU and China actually have a number of things in common in their dealings with Africa .
Firstly , they have both recognised Africa 's enormous potential perhaps more - or in any case sooner - than anyone else .
The EU and China are also two of the most important trading partners investing in Africa , ranked first and third in the world respectively .
Naturally this calls for far greater cooperation , discussion and perhaps joint strategies between China and Europe with regard to Africa and in consultation with Africa .
I share your opinion on this subject .
I would like to talk to you today about the points that I consider promising , in order to engage China and our African partners in trilateral cooperation .
I would also like to share with you my doubts and questions over other points .
Finally , I would like to tell you how I intend to follow up this report .
Firstly , Africa is living in the age of the global economy and globalisation .
It is confirming its status as an international and global player , taking action on major global issues .
It has constructed a vast network of partnerships around the world with a clear commitment to re-establishing relations .
To be honest , it is now forcing its partners to compete with each other , rather clumsily perhaps , but with good reason .
This is a reality , and I would even go so far as to say that it is fair and legitimate .
It means that its partners must be modern , trusting and fair in their attitude .
I believe that the EU and China are ready to implement this new approach and that they want to do so , perhaps for different reasons , but clearly they are ready for this .
We are both major partners of Africa .
Our African policy is of course different in terms of principles and values but , on the ground , it is possible to identify numerous joint interests and similarities .
For example , we have already commenced a dialogue on peace , stability and sustainable development in Africa .
Clearly though we need to go further with the crucial support of our African friends , who must provide the impetus for this dialogue .
This explains the trilateral approach which I proposed last year and which you seem to share , particularly in your proposal for the building of a permanent platform .
In this respect , you quite rightly underline the importance of equality and mutual respect , which must underpin this trilateral partnership .
At the risk of sparking controversy , Europe must understand that it is not necessarily wise at the current time , and with a partner such as China , to try to take control by unilaterally dictating our terms .
We must avoid generalisations and embark on the dialogue process .
It is my belief that once we have embarked on a dialogue with China , we will be able to use this to address issues such as rule of law , democracy and governance ; in other words , everything on which Europe 's values and the inspiration for its policies are built .
I agree with you that we need a European policy which is more effective and perhaps more expeditious , since this is the main advantage that the Chinese have over us .
It would be more attractive too , more in step with the priorities of our African partners .
To give you just one example , we are literally powerless , as European institutions , to deploy programmes , aid or measures in any post-conflict situations .
Take the case of Liberia for example .
This is a country where we have an elected government , a President who has a real programme and who wants change .
Where is the effective response that this country needs to see that peace , stabilisation and democracy pay dividends ?
Nowhere !
This pains me on a daily basis .
The modernisation of Europe 's policy towards Africa has been my priority since I took office .
I think it is safe to say that we have already made considerable progress , particularly with the strategic partnerships resulting from the Lisbon Summit , although clearly there still remains a long way to go .
The fight against poverty continues to the main objective of our development policy .
To do this , we must create wealth and economic growth .
China is witnessing this economic growth on a daily basis , and obviously this experience could benefit the African countries .
Of course , economic growth of any kind must be accompanied by an active redistribution policy if it is to be effective in tackling poverty .
I have said it many times : growth does not guarantee development .
Redistribution is the key , and redistribution needs a solid government .
It also needs a vigilant society , a free press , all of these things .
I believe that the EU and China have a real role to play here , although this a lengthy process that will require considerable effort from both sides .
I would like to tell you about some of the questions I have .
Is it truly realistic for example , is it constructive , is it useful , is it even desirable to begin this cooperation by insisting that China adopt the policies and standards laid down by the CAP ?
I somehow doubt it .
If it works then so much the better , but I doubt it .
In any case , Africans do not seem overly keen to see China go down this path , precisely because they are looking for alternatives to European development assistance .
Chinese aid is valued precisely because it is faster than European aid and it does not impose as many constraints which will ultimately reduce Africa 's political space .
There is some basis for this .
There has been a misunderstanding somewhere .
People often say ' you Europeans , you impose conditions ! '
This is not true .
There are no political conditions attached to the cooperation or the funding that we provide .
The nature of that aid , the way in which it is used , yes .
Budgetary support , for example , will not be offered if there is not good governance , there will be no budgetary support for countries where conflict exists .
However , that does not stop us from offering development assistance or humanitarian aid , even when we do not agree with the government or the regime in place .
What is fundamentally different , where there is confusion , is that the Chinese are responsive , their disbursement process is much faster than ours , with all our bureaucracy , which has been the bane of my life for nearly four years .
This is the reality , this is where the confusion and misunderstanding lie and I think that this point needs to be made .
Evidently I share your assessment .
It is important for Chinese aid to be aligned with African 's national priorities , national systems , preferably in conjunction with other partners .
The same can be said today .
It is premature , maybe even counterproductive , to force things in this sense , not to mention attempting it unilaterally .
This is a long-term goal , but for now I can only see three areas where our cooperation and dialogue can be concentrated .
One is the creation of an open and constructive dialogue on Africa between the EU , a longstanding donor , and China .
The second is the need to trade our development experiences with China and Africa so that together we can progress the development agenda .
For example , China has designed a series of photovoltaic programmes .
Clearly , on a continent such as Africa , there is room for trilateral cooperation , and this is one example .
I spoke to the Minister for Trade about this after I met him at a meeting in Tonga , and he was very open on the subject .
We will discuss it again in Beijing , as I am going straight there after this , so we will revisit these issues there .
Thirdly , we need to honour our commitments in terms of the Paris Agenda .
This is a question of regulatory harmonisation and of the division of labour .
On this I ask , I urge Parliament to help us , to force our Member States to put their money where their mouth is .
Every single development minister , every single prime minister in Europe , without exception , agrees that there needs to be a better division of labour , more coordination to ensure cohesion .
This is fair enough , but when we suggest real labour-sharing strategies to them , we get no response .
This point needs to be raised because it is a fact .
You see , my objective is not just to bring China into the CAP .
I want to go further than that by trying to find common ground with the various Chinese operators in Africa , including the government , in order to foster development in Africa .
We Europeans and the Chinese must start with the African agenda and make contributions and pool our respective advantages , without sacrificing the values and principles that have guaranteed the stability , peace and prosperity of Europe over the last 50 years .
That does not make me a dreamer or a fool , indeed quite the opposite .
It is important to recognise , as you do , that China 's commitment raises questions and sometimes concerns , even in Africa .
I too worry sometimes about what form cooperation with China will take , but so what ?
This is exactly why I am saying that we need dialogue .
It is evident that China is pursuing its economic , diplomatic and strategic interests in Africa .
Europe has all too often made the mistake of not admitting that it is tempted by the same thing and , rather than hide behind arguments , which are at times extremely hypocritical in any case , it would be far better to admit that Africa has potential , that it has special links with Europe and that we have a shared interest in discovering , building and forging those links .
I believe that this is the win-win strategy , because it is only in this way that we will solve the negative equation of donor and beneficiary , which always gives rise to humiliation and suspicion and a feeling of dependency of one on the other - of the weakest on the strongest .
As I have said , the day after tomorrow , I will be in Beijing and I will try , Mrs Gomez , to test the water with a positive interpretation of your excellent report .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - ( NL ) Mr President , as draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs for Mrs Gomes 's excellent report , I would like to emphasise the following points from that opinion .
The Chinese authorities must respect the principles of democracy , good governance and human rights in their relations with Africa .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs therefore deplores China 's purely pragmatic cooperation with the repressive regimes in Africa .
The commercial presence of the People 's Republic on African territory brings ecological effects that China must deal with in a responsible manner .
After all , the Western press is issuing frankly alarming reports of exploitation of the natural environment , particularly in the Congo Delta region .
These reports range from oil exploitation and overfishing , to deforestation in an official nature reserve of all places .
The Committee on Foreign Affairs equally deplores the fact that Beijing excludes a number of African states from the strategic partnership between China and Africa , purely because of their diplomatic contacts with Taiwan .
This attitude of the Chinese is not only contrary to its own principle of non-involvement in the internal affairs of third countries , but is also not in keeping with the current rapprochement between Taiwan en Beijing .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , China began to trade and change in the 1980s , and it has lifted 400 million of its own people out of poverty , as Ms Gomes 's excellent report mentions .
What other part of the world in that period of time has lifted 400 million people out of poverty ?
We have to be realistic about this .
This is one of the issues we need to discuss here tonight .
Many other parts of the world have experienced the heat of the Chinese dragon .
The economic upturns in many Latin American and African countries are largely down to the economic rise of China .
China 's activities , whether in investment , trade or aid in Africa , have grown at a mesmerising rate over the last number of years .
The figures speak for themselves .
The value of Chinese trade with Africa increased from USD 2 billion in 1999 to almost USD 40 billion in 2005 .
As the Commissioner has said , China is now Africa 's third most important trading partner .
China 's engagement with Africa is opening up many opportunities .
However , it is necessary that we pass a critical eye over its development impacts .
The development potential and the conditions for development are two sides of the same coin .
Without one it is not possible to achieve the other .
It is true that the potential for development abounds in many Africa countries , but corrupt African governments have for decades shown a disregard for their populations , denying them the possibility to develop .
It is the African political authorities that will decide whether China 's involvement is to be seen as a benefit or a curse for the ordinary African person .
Congo is a prime example of where great a development potential lies .
The output per head there is USD 714 a year .
The Congolese people have suffered greatly .
China has entered into a deal with Congo to build eight hospitals , thousands of kilometres of roads and rail stations , and in return they will get much-needed minerals for China .
But if this can be made to work , it cannot just be a win-win situation .
It can be a win-win-win situation , because it can advance the cause of the Millennium Development Goals .
Can we in Europe work with China to try to perfect what is happening , to try to improve the situation rather than simply to decry what China does or the shortcomings that China has ?
If we can work together with China and Africa to improve good governance , then I think we can deliver aid and trade and improvement .
I believe that the Commissioner was right : if we want to get China to listen to us , then megaphone diplomacy will not work .
A big part of the Chinese make-up is that they cannot lose face .
Diplomacy - quiet diplomacy - has a better chance of achieving what we want to achieve .
I think that Europe should work with China to encourage best practice in what could be the first real opportunity to do something for Africa after years of talking about it and doing nothing .
If China put us under pressure to compete to deliver the Millennium Development Goals , all the better .
We need that competition ; we need that pressure .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Madam President , first of all I would like to congratulate Ms Gomes on this serious , politically very important report .
China is a global player in the contemporary world , and we would like to see China as a real partner of the European Union in the process of globalisation .
China should play an important role in the new world order and we praise the peaceful role played by China in Africa .
At the same time , China must take her responsibilities in the area of human rights and development .
In particular , China should use its influence to curb the nastiest of its friends , including the Government of Sudan .
Fortunately , China has ceased to resist the deployment of United Nations peacekeepers in Darfur and is sending some of its own military engineers to join the force .
On the negative side , China has still sent arms to dictatorial regimes in Africa .
Just this week , Zambia , Mozambique , South Africa and Tanzania blocked attempts by a Chinese vessel to deliver a massive shipment of ammunition , mortars and other lethal armaments to President Mugabe in Zimbabwe .
These weapons could play an anti-democratic , even deadly role , in the hands of the Mugabe regime .
In this report , the European Parliament calls on China to be on the side of African societies , democracy and human rights in Africa .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , I should like to thank Ms Gomes for the huge amount of work she has done on this report and her close cooperation with colleagues .
The report is very wide-ranging , so I must focus on just a few issues .
In particular , I welcome the call for the Commission to come forward as soon as possible with proposals to outlaw all illegally sourced timber and timber products from the EU market .
This is essential to stop trade by the back door of Chinese furniture made from illegally logged African timber .
Such trade not only puts African tropical forests at risk but also deprives African countries of much-needed tax revenue .
The World Bank estimates that illegal logging costs developing countries USD 15 billion a year in lost revenue .
Secondly , I fully support the rapporteur in calling for the EU to adopt a legally binding instrument on controlling arms exports and to maintain its arms embargo on China .
Since the report was written , we have had graphic evidence , as a number of colleagues have mentioned , that China is still exporting arms to countries like Zimbabwe , which are perpetrating gross violations of human rights .
On wider trade issues , I personally support the mention of economic partnership agreements ( EPAs ) in the report .
EPAs are not irrelevant , because if they were more flexible and more clearly development friendly , they could serve as a model for China-Africa trade .
As it stands , China risks pushing Africa back into the commodity trap .
Finally , I applaud the report 's appeal for multilateral dialogue between the EU , Africa and China .
This is particularly important in relation to climate change .
The Commissioner mentioned the example of photovoltaics .
No continent is more vulnerable to global warming than Africa , and the future of millions of Africans may depend on the EU bringing China into the post-Kyoto agreement and sharing renewables technology .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , the report by Mrs Gomes presents all the most important aspects of the Chinese presence in Africa .
There is only one inaccuracy - the Chinese presence in Africa has nothing to do with any development policy , let alone aid .
Development policy here is no more than a tool for the implementation of China 's two general strategic aims .
The first aim is to ensure supplies of raw materials using fairly brutal raw materials diplomacy .
It is the rising Chinese demand for natural and power-generating raw materials that is turning Sudan , Angola and the countries of sub-Saharan Africa into countries of such significance .
The second , and no less important , aim of the Chinese Government is to consolidate the world 's authoritarian pole as a counterbalance to the liberal-democratic models of the West .
Hence the violation of even a UN embargo on trade in arms with Darfur , Liberia and Congo .
Hence the political bonds between Beijing and Sudan , Chad , Zimbabwe and Somalia .
The exclusion from aid cooperation of countries that recognise Taiwan is a further symptom of the primacy of a particularist strategy over development policy .
Today we have to concede that Europe is powerless in this situation .
Of course we can follow up the Commissioner 's appeals and bin the OECD 's principles as regards corruption and public finances , and then we can do the same with other international understandings .
Finally , we can even bin the United Nations Charter , but in that case we shall cease to know what our role in world politics is based on , and in what way we differ from other players in world politics .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , I would like to thank Mrs Gomes for the excellent and balanced report and for an excellent cooperation .
In the EU , we are used to having a leading role in Africa in terms of trade and development .
However , with growing investment from China things could change quickly .
The EU 's presence in Africa is not without its problems ; however , China 's presence is threatening to develop in a highly unfortunate direction .
China 's enormous demand for raw materials and energy is governing Chinese investments without any particular concern for the healthy development of society .
China should instead focus on concerns such as job creation through appropriate investments , i.e. it should stop bringing in its own workforce and instead develop the production sector and processing in situ , i.e. in Africa .
However , good governance must also be incorporated into the investment policy .
Hitherto , China has refused to adopt this approach and has not shown any concern for whether it is supporting corrupt and violent regimes or whether it is contributing to the suppression of the civilian population .
China must follow the democratic rules of the game and respect human rights , instead of merely offering itself as a cheap alternative .
After all , the Chinese could do so much for the Africans .
Allow me to highlight one of Africa 's most significant problems , which has already been mentioned , namely population growth .
China has unique knowledge and experience in this field , which could be of great help .
In addition , ladies and gentlemen , imagine if China is now buying arms , as several people have mentioned today , arms which have been sent to Zimbabwe and which are now being refused entry at many ports in countries such as Mozambique and South Africa .
China would then show itself as a superpower that listens to others and lives up to the responsibility that results from a seat on the UN Security Council .
This is certainly what the report is encouraging : that a good dialogue be established between the EU , China and Africa to the benefit of all parties .
on behalf of the IND / DEM group . - ( FR ) Madam President , let 's hear it for Mrs Gomes , but I would also like to ask a general question .
I would like to ask who the Chinese government are trying to kid .
Well , I have an idea : I think that it is trying to kid everyone .
It has made a laughing stock of the European Commission , which I must say was extremely naive and lenient in the textile quotas episode .
It is making a mockery of the rules of international trade - if there still are any - by constantly failing to check whether its exports are manufactured in accordance with the quality and safety standards of importing countries , particularly when it comes to toys , thus proving the absurdity of free trade .
It is making a laughing stock of France by organising anti-French demonstrations in Paris because it was upset by French protests about the mistreatment of the people of Tibet , which it continues to oppress .
It is making a laughing stock of the whole world , because it knows that the world is market-led and that it covets the Chinese market .
Therefore , it does exactly what it wants .
Its domination will be all the more complete since , through political cunning , the Chinese government has managed to outmanoeuvre Europe , Mr Michel , to get to Africa , thus gaining control of our staple commodities .
Who can blame it ?
It is only profiting from our weakness , not least of all the stupid and dangerous disengagement of Europe , and France in particular , from a continent which will become increasingly important to us in the 21st century .
( DE ) Madam President , it is becoming clear in the example of Africa that the much vaunted development cooperation does not usually go quite so much to plan as one would like to imagine .
All too often it is used to promote exports from donor countries and sometimes to support dictators or even merely to create new dependencies using debt management policy .
In this context the latest ambitions of China and India on the African continent should be treated from a European viewpoint with the utmost scepticism .
Here low-cost countries , which are damaging the European economy on a massive scale , are apparently trying to secure sources of cheap raw materials and open up new outlets .
This kind of persistent neo-colonialism - as I would like to call it - of Africa by China and India would at one blow negate all the efforts of Western policy to date .
Beijing or New Delhi cannot be allowed to incite nations that have recently had their debts written off to borrow and create new dependencies merely to secure supplies of raw materials .
By the same token , African nations should not be allowed to hold up their hands all too eagerly to receive development aid when they are not even prepared to take back their own citizens when they are seized as illegal immigrants by Frontex off the coasts of Europe .
On the basis of the global balance of power , we as Europeans shall be made to look exceedingly ridiculous , however , if we try to exert pressure on China .
Nor does China shy away from doing business with governments that are pilloried internationally , such as Sudan , for instance .
Nor does it shy away either from supplying weapons to Zimbabwe .
For a country in which human rights and democracy , environmental protection and sustainability currently continue to have such little importance , this approach is probably not totally illogical either .
As regards Africa , we therefore need a policy that demands stability , democracy and human rights , as well as - and this is the most important point - one that has European interests in mind .
The European Union must not hand out money indefinitely in Africa without linking it to objectives in terms of content and policy .
The approach so far has bestowed a vacuum on us , which has resulted in waves of migration , human rights violations and great poverty .
The ambitions of China and India will probably push this even further if we do not ultimately make a U-turn .
We Europeans cannot continue to finance humanitarian projects alone and allow other powers , such as China and India in this case , to continue their major trading operations .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , when I think of Africa , I very often ask myself : is Africa a somewhat forgotten continent from our European perspective or do we as Europeans see opportunities in Africa ?
I often have the impression that we Europeans still see Africa much too much as a problem case and that we do not recognise the opportunities .
The Chinese approach to Africa is very different .
To the Chinese , Africa is first and foremost an opportunity and they are concentrating on utilising this opportunity .
They have been doing this relatively unnoticed in recent years .
Only in recent months have they been noticed much , and for this reason , they are pursuing a policy of purely economic interests .
Issues such as human rights , the rule of law and good governance , which some of our fellow Members have already addressed today , do not hold any sway at the moment for the Chinese in Africa .
Their only concern is investments in infrastructure in Africa so that they can gain unlimited access to the raw materials markets .
It is about covering China 's growing need for raw materials .
It is definitely not about helping the African nations and the African people on their way to truly sustainable economic development .
I am of the firm conviction that we must place greater emphasis on anchoring the African nations in the world economy so that they are able to benefit from globalisation on the world markets with their raw materials , with their resources , with everything they have to offer , and not become unilaterally dependent on Chinese monopolies .
We must enter into a dialogue with the African nations here better than we have so far .
We must also assimilate competition with the Chinese here more intensively than in the past and really do all that we can to persuade Africans about good governance and the advantage of free markets .
Only then will we succeed in promoting the rule of law , democracy and human rights in Africa and thereafter succeed in not allowing the African nations to drift off in China 's direction , because Africa will certainly learn nothing from China - we have learnt this the hard way in recent weeks - about how democracy and the social market economy operate .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , first I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Ana Gomes , on the excellent job she has done .
The growing Chinese presence in Africa forces us to adopt a European course of action to cope with the opportunities and new challenges that present themselves as best we can .
The Chinese contribution to Africa as an aid donor is a good thing , but I would like to take a few moments to highlight two aspects : for us Europeans - partly on the basis of the principles and commitments enshrined in the Cotonou agreement and more generally in line with the overall framework of our development policy - it is worrying that China , along with aid , is unfortunately exporting a number of dreadful domestic practices including corruption , bad lending , lack of respect for workers ' rights , and a low level of consideration for environmental matters .
Another issue that needs to be carefully monitored is the close relationship between Beijing and certain totalitarian and repressive regimes in Africa , such as Sudan and Zimbabwe .
In this context , China needs to shoulder all the responsibilities that come with its role as a permanent member of the United Nations Security Council .
( LT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , China 's policy in Africa poses a threat to the harmonious development of the African countries .
Working conditions in Chinese companies operating in Africa are equal to those of slavery .
China continues to offer African dictators political and financial aid and is escalating military cooperation with African regimes .
Sudan and Zimbabwe are the main importers of arms from China .
China offers African countries huge loans without any transparency conditions , encouraging the already wide-spread corruption within the groups in power in African countries .
The illegal export of African wood and ivory by China is having a disastrous effect on Africa 's environment .
In a situation like this , development cooperation policy fails to achieve its objectives .
Therefore , I would like to urge the EU to ensure that China does not fail to ignore respect for human rights and good administration when implementing investments and that any trade in arms with African countries where a war or military conflict is taking place or is imminent should be stopped .
Until China is prepared to stop trading in arms , the EU should impose an arms embargo on the country .
There is one more thing that needs to be pointed out , and this is mainly that in view of China 's policy in Africa the individual EU Member States should overcome their disagreements .
Newly reexamined EU policy would enable Africa to use its natural and human resources in a mutually beneficial way and continue with the development of its economical and political independence .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , the report by Mrs Gomes is in effect a detailed lecture on the subject of the highly complex trilateral links between African states and China , with particular reference to EU interests .
On top of this we also have the role played in Africa 's development by other organisations , such as the World Bank .
There is no doubt that China 's role in the development of African states , which grows with each passing year , must be viewed in a positive light , despite reservations concerning the priority of actions .
We have to find ourselves an answer to whether commercial investments are more important than humanitarian assistance .
For poor African states , any aid is important , just as water is important , and also the fight against diseases , education , the construction of infrastructure and peace .
There is only one conclusion : we must work together to develop the best methods for sustainable yet accelerated and durable development for these states .
( NL ) Madam President , in Article 65 of her thorough report , Mrs Gomes calls on the European Union and China not to pursue arms trade deals with African governments that are guilty of human rights violations , are involved in conflicts or are on the brink of war .
I am in complete agreement with the rapporteur on that point .
The same goes for the concrete examples that she gives , and in the list of African states , Mugabe 's Zimbabwe most certainly stands out these days .
Late last week the Western press reported a large-scale Chinese arms supply to the Mugabe regime via South Africa , as if the internal tension in Zimbabwe had not mounted enough as a result of all of the presidential voting machinations .
' For Zimbabwe , going to China is going to our second home ' , said President Mugabe during his last visit to Beijing , approximately one and a half years ago .
When will the Chinese authorities truly dissociate themselves from this and other African ' friends ' ?
Commissioner , I expect that you will be asking this pressing question in Beijing .
Mrs Gomes 's report also gives cause for this .
( FR ) Commissioner , after everything that you have said , let us examine China 's presence in Africa .
For this I will continue in Polish .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , at the beginning of the last century , Chinese nationals came to English and French houses as exotic servants .
In the 1950s and 1960s we had Chinese products : pens and various products for schools ; and now the Chinese have appeared as a powerful economic and political force .
As you say , everyone has a right to act on the economic and political stage and no-one will bar them from doing so , but the Chinese have aggregated their efforts and are moving towards their goals with a certain plan ; but what are the goals they strive for ?
Unencumbered by any stain or label of colonialism , they can and will exploit natural resources in Africa .
I am putting it bluntly - exploit .
Further , and worse , they can and already are exporting their totalitarian socio-political model , and Africa needs protecting from this .
Africa needs saving from this .
Europe has traditional links from colonial days to what is nicely termed ' cooperation ' .
Both from a humanist perspective and also from a sense of guilt , we should make a constructive contribution to Africa in every aspect .
We are doing this , but the Chinese are squeezing us out .
In parallel with this superpower , the EU too should gain Africa 's trust and at the same time show its readiness to contribute to developing this large continent , which is so near to us .
Commissioner , we are faced with an enormous challenge .
( DE ) Madam President , renewed interest in Africa throughout the world is attended by a change in perspective .
Today Africa is more than just a continent of poverty .
There are growth rates of up to 10 % in some African countries .
Now to the heart of the matter : what is China looking for in Africa ?
Its most important motive for commitment there is energy resources .
In the battle for access to raw materials , however , Western value-based policy draws the shorter straw increasingly frequently .
Europe 's most important motive is Africa 's sustainable development .
A joint EU-Chinese plan for Africa would be ideal in theory .
We should not be claiming to be the good guys here , because the countries of Africa mistrust the EU just as much as China .
The EU cannot provide solutions for either China or Africa .
In any case the EU must carry on tying commitment to conditions .
At the same time it should be promoting governments , institutions and civil society more strongly than it has hitherto .
Dialogue with Africa is necessary , but should not overlook grievances .
On this note I can but support Mrs Gomes 's report .
Madam President , I congratulate my colleague Ms Ana Gomes for her work and her comprehensive and realistic assessments .
As the report shows , China is already an important economic and political partner for Africa .
Regarding Africa 's development , I believe that there is so much work to do on this continent and that China , as a new player , should be welcome to participate .
However , what I strongly fear is that instead of channelling its support in constructive endeavours - health , education , poverty reduction and infrastructure - China would continue to engage in feeding the tragedies of the continent and will do it by arms trafficking and undermining whatever steps African countries make towards democracy , good governance and respect for human rights .
The Chinese ship carrying guns for Zimbabwe again calls into question China 's real commitment to contributing to peace and security in Africa .
Many African countries welcome their cooperation with China as there is no political conditionality linked to the economic benefits , but the EU should continue to strongly advocate , both to China and the African countries , institution building , human rights advancement and more transparent rules regarding the exploitation of natural resources .
Recent developments have shown that , even in those cases where in the last couple of years governments started to show more openness on how public money and resources were spent , they have gone back to a less transparent administration .
The EU has the duty to help China to become a trusted partner in development cooperation .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , despite the lively trade between China and African countries , and even despite the fact that China has recently become a net donor with regard to Africa , it is still Europe , not China , that African emigrants choose , despite our colonial past .
This is the best proof of Africans ' preference for our values , such as respect for human rights and concern for sustainable development that guarantees a better future .
This gives the European Union a moral right , but also a duty , to examine Chinese policy vis-à-vis Africa , since , as the rapporteur rightly stresses , China could significantly accelerate the process of sustainable development in Africa , but could equally harm it .
In view of this , the idea of holding trilateral talks between the European Union , African Union member states and China is particularly worthy of support .
( CS ) The Chinese courtship with Africa is not just about military cooperation , strategically important raw materials , large-scale investment and the creation of an enormous market for Chinese products ; it is also about building infrastructure .
The volume of trade has multiplied five-fold since 2000 and will soon total USD 100 billion , although Western trade is for the moment still responsible for up to two thirds of African trade revenue .
The Chinese policy is based on the concept of ' non-interference ' and comparative economic advantage .
This means exporting cost-effective goods and weapons in exchange for raw materials .
Investment and long-term contracts represent elements of a premeditated long-term Chinese strategy that has no compassion for Africa .
China 's influence on African countries is a dangerous example of a totalitarian model , and a corrupt market model , devoid of any respect for individuals or human rights , or any respect for the environment .
The Chinese hunger for raw materials in exchange for unconditional supplies of weapons to Africa is becoming a bigger and bigger obstacle in achieving the Millennium Development Goals .
We have to force China to accept its share of the responsibility for development policy , poverty reduction and sustainable growth .
China is , after all , a permanent member of the UN Security Council and as such has a responsibility for the developments in Africa .
I condemn China 's support for the Sudanese regime .
I support a dialogue with China on harmonising policies in Africa with a view to reducing poverty , but I am not holding my breath .
We must not give up , however .
We must put a stop to the plundering of raw materials and help Africa to become economically independent .
We must adhere to our strategy of trade policies based on respect for human rights and environmental protection .
I pray to God that we can achieve this .
( ET ) First , I would like to thank Ana Gomes for this report .
For me its primary message relates not only to China 's conduct , but also to the constant shortcomings in European Union Common Foreign Policy .
We clearly all agree that a common European Union position here would be very welcome .
I would like to focus on a couple of points .
First the global approach : we should view cooperation between China and Africa from a global perspective , not from the viewpoint that Africa is traditionally an area of exclusively European influence .
Secondly , we must stress responsibility : China must recognise the growing responsibility which ensues from a strategic partnership of this kind .
And one final remark : point 13 of the AFET suggestions .
' Considers that Chinese engagement in Africa , on the one hand , and the newly launched EU-Africa strategic partnership , on the other , should be compatible with each other ; '
First , I do not believe that our policy should be aligned with that of the People 's Republic of China , and I am even less convinced that the Chinese will even begin to take our narrative-style recommendations into consideration .
( RO ) The value of trade between China and Africa increased from 2 billion euros in 1999 to approximately 39.7 billion euros in 2005 , China being the third partner of Africa at present as regards the importance of trade .
This proves very clearly the high interest Africa represents for China 's global interests .
The resolution has a few very important conclusions , which are worth being emphasized once more .
We have to transmit very clearly that our expectation is for China 's involvement in Africa to refer not only to nations presenting interest from the point of view of the energy policy .
We should also encourage China to provide unconditional assistance to African partners and the economic conditions associated with international subsidies or loans should not affect the objective of sustainable development .
It is more important for us to see what we will do and what the European Union will do in this circumstance .
I agree with Commissioner Louis Michel who said that , unfortunately , the European Union does not take advantage of its unique position toward Africa .
The European Union should redirect a greater share of its annual budget for financially supporting the infrastructure projects able to draw direct foreign investments .
At last , a more important European presence in Africa should transform from intention to reality .
Madam President , China has begun to increase substantially its diplomatic and economic links with Africa over the last decade , largely because of a demand for raw materials .
Chinese trade with this continent has quadrupled since 2001 , with a scramble for resources also having negative consequences and perpetuating corrupt and oppressive elites in Africa .
An example of such a repressive regime would be Sudan , where CNPC - a Chinese state-owned oil company - controls an estimated 60-70 % of Sudanese oil production , while Sudan is also a major recipient of Chinese arms .
Political conditions in respect of governance , democracy and human rights are very often not attached to China 's dealings with Africa .
China has severe problems itself at home concerning good governance , respect for human rights and core labour standards .
This country seems to be in no position to make its aid dependent on improvements in African standards of human rights , when it does not abide by those same standards itself .
Nevertheless , China 's policy of non-interference in the domestic state affairs of its economic partners has now become too convenient an excuse , giving China carte blanche to continue its sometimes reckless contracts , particularly on the continent of Africa .
This policy of non-interference , with China 's lenient attitudes towards questionable regimes , such as those in Sudan , is a continued issue of concern to be addressed .
Unfortunately , as China 's predominantly bilateral approach to Africa runs counter to the EU 's primarily multilateral approach , the EU is being somewhat left behind .
Corrupt African leaders prefer to sign lucrative deals that do not come with demands attached and so the EU appears to be missing out .
Nonetheless , the EU should uphold its traditional policy of positive conditionality aimed at fostering sustainable development and should not be tempted to nuance its approach to Africa simply because China is landing more contracts .
Instead , the EU needs to press China to adopt more criteria for development in its relations with Africa .
China is a major power , a permanent member of the UN Security Council and therefore has responsibilities in Africa and all over the world .
Madam President , I congratulate my colleague , Ms Gomes , on an excellent report .
This report strengthens our relationship with China , which is necessary to underpin the global economy .
Until recently , and for thousands of years , China only exercised soft power , as we now do in the EU , but China is changing .
She is a superpower , both economically and militarily , and she is in transition .
Our relationship with China must be based on respect .
It cannot be a relationship where either party feels entitled to lecture or hector the other .
We ended the Cold War by engaging with the Soviet Union and we brought peace to Europe .
Similarly , we must engage with China at all levels .
We must preserve the institutions that underpin our rules-based global liberal economy and values , otherwise we are finished .
This means China playing a full and active role in all the post-war Bretton Woods institutions that we have so carefully built .
It also means working with China to strengthen the rules of the international order so that it serves our interest and hers .
By 2020 , China 's economy will be the largest in the world .
We now have a choice .
Either we empower China to play a full and active role in the liberal open-to-all rules-based multilateral institutions built after Bretton Woods - and this includes the EU , the ACP , Rio , Bali , in addition to the UN , WTO , IMF and the World Bank - or , we force China , through our short-termism , to withdraw and inevitably , in time , to destroy these institutions and build her own , to suit her superpowers , institutions .
That is why this report is so timely .
That is also why - and I am being controversial here - the Olympic Games in Beijing are so important , because this is the first time in history that China is engaging with the whole world .
That is why it must be a great success , not only for China , but for the whole participating world .
Our task at the beginning of the 21st century is an enormous one .
It has never been done before in the entirety of our common human history , but it must be done .
That task is to engage the oldest and largest nation on earth in all the affairs of the planet Earth as our partner .
( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , my visit to China in March this year convinced me of the timeliness of this debate .
I think that as far as the European Union is concerned China is not only an important trading partner but also a serious competitor .
The report by Mrs Gomes corroborates my personal experience .
I had the opportunity of seeing the astonishing diligence of cheap labour .
Even though China has to cope with great social and economic inequalities and an alarmingly deteriorating environment , and even though political rights and fundamental freedoms are still very limited , it has a great deal of experience that can be beneficial to African countries .
Africa is fighting poverty but it is rich in raw materials .
Thanks to the demand from China and other parties , African states can gain a better foothold on the markets .
At present the EU is the biggest donor of aid to Africa and its most important trading partner .
China 's ambition is to become Africa 's largest trading partner by 2010 ; its actions in Africa therefore present a serious challenge for the EU .
( PL ) Madam President , China 's interest in African oil , precious metals and gas is beginning to be a little reminiscent of the old colonial policies of certain European powers .
China is posing as a good friend and business partner of Africa ; it is convincing Africans that it wishes to help them escape poverty and backwardness , and that it will back economic development .
Let us hope that their intentions are sincere , but in business as well as in politics it is usually the case that the ends justify the means .
The Chinese are building bridges , roads , stadiums , hospitals , they are supplying Africa with weapons , they are issuing financial loans , and in this way they are gaining for themselves a new sales market while at the same time posing as a state that cares about Africa 's future .
The EU should become considerably more involved in Africa 's development .
We cannot stand by as neutral observers while this new Chinese domination proceeds .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by congratulating Mrs Gomes for the excellent report she has produced , but in the little time I have I would like to draw the Commissioner 's attention , and that of my fellow Members , to a practical case of this relationship that is occurring right before our very eyes .
This practical case is Zimbabwe .
Newspaper reports tell of a ship , coming from where ?
From China .
Loaded with what ?
With arms , arms for Zimbabwe , small arms , grenades and mortars .
It was prevented from unloading in Durban , but there are reports of it heading to Angola to deliver those weapons to be used to harm the people of Zimbabwe .
We must take a strong diplomatic line on China , and also on Zimbabwe 's neighbouring countries , to nip this type of perverse relationship , this type of lethal relationship , in the bud and to make sure the election results are respected .
It is my belief that in our relationship with China we have to draw China 's attention , as a major power and the huge country it is , to its responsibilities on the international stage and to maintain peace and uphold peoples ' rights .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , over the last 10-15 years China has become the most rapidly developing economy in the world , as witnessed by the 10 % plus annual increase in its national income .
This has led to this country becoming the fourth largest economy in the world , with the world 's largest foreign currency reserves .
Such a rapid development in economic potential means that China is becoming one of the world 's leading trade partners .
Over the past 15 years , the value of trade between China and Africa has increased 20 times over .
It looks as if the European Union is not in a position to counter this expansion .
We therefore need to encourage China to ensure that its economic involvement in Africa includes a social and an environmental aspect , as well as maintenance of democratic standards .
The European Union should keep tabs on China 's expansion in Africa .
We do , after all , continue to be the greatest donor to African countries .
We should consequently strive to ensure that aid offered to these countries is linked to a significant broadening of trade relations with Africa .
( DE ) Madam President , I should also like to extend my congratulations on the report .
It very clearly demonstrates that China can also be an example .
Development in China , particularly economic development , can be an example for Africa .
Market relations and the growth being achieved are remarkable .
China is also our partner in the WTO .
We can indeed see that when negotiations in the WTO on standard wage and quota reduction are successful , it can lead to a win-win situation for both sides .
Africa and China need Europe .
Europe is currently the world 's most powerful purchasing forum .
I can imagine a good partnership developing .
member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Obviously it is extremely frustrating for MEPs , in a debate as important as this one and with such an excellent report , to have so little time .
I would simply like to acknowledge the fact that I have seen two camps emerge here in Parliament .
There are those - and I am not being critical , I am simply saying that this is what I have observed - there are speakers who believe that pessimism and fear will get the Chinese out of Africa .
Forget it , clearly that is not going to happen .
Personally , I have an unshaken belief in the optimism that comes from modernity and openness .
I have heard other things here today that make me think that we need to realise that this kind of relationship with Africa is exactly what is making Africa lose faith in Europe .
However , we must stop believing that we have a moral right to be in Africa .
We have no right to be in Africa , none whatsoever , whether moral or otherwise . Our past certainly gives us no right to think this and I would just like to remind everyone of that .
In the same vein , I heard the Chinese being criticised for stealing our natural resources from Africa !
I am sorry , I do not know whether Mr Coûteaux is still here , perhaps it was a slip of the tongue .
Still , as if we owned natural resources in Africa !
It is really quite amazing .
I will be honest with you : this kind of comment rather surprises me at times .
I would tell you that the only danger I see in China 's presence , in Chinese investment in Africa , is the resource curse for Africans .
This is something we need to discuss with Africans .
It is what is known as the ' resource curse ' or ' rentier economy ' .
This subject must be raised in our talks with Africa .
I am a great believer in dialogue , in tripartite partnership , in feedback and in a mutual understanding of problems , as well as in the search for real cooperation .
For others more prone to sermonising , this amounts to saying that ' we Europeans must give lessons on how to protect these poor Africans from the Chinese ' .
I must tell you that I encounter these sorts of arguments every single day in my bilateral relations .
They are pointless and I do not engage in them , nor do I expect anyone else to engage in them .
The report by Mrs Gomes is on the right track .
Personally I think that almost everything the report says is on the right track .
As you know , I am leaving for China in a few hours .
I will meet with the Chinese Minister for Trade .
President Barroso and I will meet with the Chinese Prime Minister .
Do you honestly think that we will not talk about human rights , about Tibet , about democracy , about Africa ?
Of course we will , in the singular vernacular of conventional diplomacy .
Megaphone diplomacy , in this case , is totally counterproductive .
The more you say to Africans , the more you go and tell them that they must be wary of the Chinese , that they are determined to colonise African countries , that this is the resource curse , the more you say that , the less they will hear you and the less they will want to listen to you .
Europe has the tools to achieve its ambition .
It can do this in two ways .
Firstly , we have our model , which we must defend .
We have to be different from others because our model is different from other models .
It is founded on shared values , it is founded on tolerance , it is founded on openness , it is founded on dialogue , it is founded on feedback , it is founded on mutual respect .
This is Europe , and Europe should not have to change .
Europe does not have to become anything else or chase after other models .
That is the first thing I wanted to say .
The second thing is as I said earlier .
If we had a bit of courage - and the European Parliament can help us enormously here and indeed has already done so - to persuade Member States to divide the work better , to tweak the rules on the use of the European Development Fund , if we gave a bit more to the European institutions , if Parliament - by budgetising the EDF for example , which would then become much more effective politically - allocated more resources to Commissioners so that they could act in accordance with Europe 's values , using EDF funding , then I guarantee that Europe would not have to worry about competition with China .
That is a fact .
There is some basis for this , because we have a formidable advantage .
What advantage do we have ?
We are not about giving loans , we offer grants .
I am not explaining myself properly .
Africans today are turning to the Chinese and criticising us for not being responsive enough , even though we offer grants - in other words , money that they do not have to pay back - as opposed to soft loans which , it must be said , absorb natural resources .
However , if these loans are used for infrastructure , for sustainable development , then who can argue that Africa does not benefit from this ?
As you know , when it comes to infrastructure in Africa , Europe , Europe and China , Europe , China and the US , Europe , China , Japan and the US , even the rest of the world , could offer as much funding as they want , it would still take years before there is enough infrastructure in Africa to support any real development .
Therefore , all this money , all these investments , they are not necessarily a bad thing .
The real question is knowing how it is all used , how it is all managed .
I know that I cannot make everybody agree , but that is the beauty of democracy .
I sincerely believe that it is through openness , through dialogue , through the search for a triangular partnership , in this case , that we will make a difference .
In my opinion , Europe will always remain a special partner of Africa for historical reasons , for geographical reasons , for model reasons .
I am not afraid of that and I believe that , if we truly want to be present in Africa - as someone said , this is very important - we must do as I suggest and add another ingredient to the mix .
We must stop implying that our interest in Africa is based solely on generosity , kindness and humanity .
Clearly we also have a duty in that respect , but we need to accept that a relationship with Africa represents an enormous win-win potential for Europe .
It offers enormous potential for mutual economic development , and there is absolutely nothing wrong or immoral in looking at things from that perspective .
At least the Chinese have one good quality : they make no secret of their plans .
I have never heard the Chinese say that they want to help Africans or to foster development in Africa .
No , they are honest .
They play by the rules of economic development , this is their primary interest .
Personally I believe that if we want to respect our partners , then we must accept this .
We must not dismiss this aspect .
There is no miracle solution .
If Africa does not develop economically , it will not develop at all , period , and our charitable policies will make no difference .
That is what I wanted to say .
I am sorry , Madam President , for taking so long , but I have expressed a belief that comes from my experience with these countries every day .
One final thing , for what it is worth .
The Chinese ship is heading back to China for now .
People have always said that Europe has little political influence .
I have just come back from the SADEC Summit , where I spoke with heads of state .
Zimbabwe was obviously on the agenda .
I spoke with all the heads of state : Angola , Mozambique , all of them .
I clarified the question of the Chinese ship .
It was the dockers who reacted , but various countries also refused to unload the ship .
According to the latest information that I have , the ship was sent back to China .
For what it is worth , Europe has tried to do its duty with soft diplomacy and with the dockers , obviously with the voice of the people .
This was all worthwhile , and it proves that Africans are not prepared to accept just anything when it comes to diplomacy , or politics for that matter .
rapporteur . - Madam President , I would like to recall that our colleague Erika Mann , who was the draftswoman for the opinion of the Committee on International Trade , could not be here .
She asked me to stress this point which we have included in the report : it is about the importance for Africa of developing its own strategy towards China , noting that such a strategy can enhance the reciprocal nature of trade relations between China and Africa if it is focused on greater participation by African workers in Chinese projects in Africa , greater willingness on the part of China to transfer technology , and better access to Chinese markets for African exports .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Allow me to thank Commissioner Michel and my other fellow Members for their comments and for the valid questions raised .
I understand the Commissioner when he says that Europe cannot unilaterally dictate terms for Africa , particularly when China does not apply them .
However , this is precisely why we as Europeans must invest more to strengthen African civil society , institutions such as parliaments , free media , universities , etc. so that Africans themselves can demand and impose conditions , such as those emerging from the MDGs , and ensure that these are respected .
I am in complete agreement with the Commissioner , as is evident in the report , when he says that the rapid disbursement of aid or European funding is vital for Africa and that coordinated action and the sharing of tasks between Member States and the Commission is essential if we are to compete with the ease with which China finances Africa at the moment , without weighing up the consequences , apart from its own interests .
In terms of the OECD criteria , clearly it is up to China to decide whether these are worth adopting .
However , I believe that it is our role , based on our positive and negative experiences in Africa , to make China understand that its long-term interest is to ensure that Africa 's natural resources are exploited and not decimated , and that , without good governance , there are no guarantees , not even for China .
Finally , perhaps one of the positive consequences of China 's increasing presence in Africa is this debate and the report that we are going to adopt tomorrow .
China has helped Europe to understand that there is enormous potential in Africa and that there are success stories in Africa .
I sincerely hope that your trip to China this week , Commissioner , will be an opportunity for you to foster the constructive engagement by China and Africa outlined in this report , and to remind China , as you said today , of its responsibilities as permanent member of the UN Security Council not only with regard to Tibet and Myanmar , but also Africa , and specifically Zimbabwe and Darfur .
Congratulations , Commissioner , if your actions did in fact help send the ship back to China .
This is very positive .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) The report by Mrs Gomes is undoubtedly a detailed and interesting analysis of the presence of the People 's Republic of China in Africa .
I cannot , however , rid myself of the impression that somewhere between trade , investments , infrastructure , energy and other important matters , we have lost sight in this report of a matter that is of fundamental importance from the aspect of both the institution that we represent - the European Parliament - and the Committee on Development , which is responsible for this report .
Protection of human rights throughout the world is an absolute priority of the European Parliament - we see this on the homepage of the European Parliament 's website .
If we really do believe in this slogan , we cannot restrict ourselves in the section on governance and human rights to :
a perfunctory summary of the involvement of China ( this being placed in as positive a context as possible ) in Darfur , whereas we all surely know perfectly well that there has been no improvement whatsoever in the region ;
a single-sentence reference to violation of the UN embargo on arms sales in Africa by the People 's Republic of China - which , let us not forget , is a permanent member of the UN Security Council ;
or to the brief commentary on the subject of Chinese cooperation with governments responsible for human rights violations , such as Zimbabwe .
' The EU should not underestimate the power of privately and publicly criticising China ' , as Mrs Gomes writes in the justification for her report .
It is a pity that we have missed just such an opportunity with this report . Thank you for your attention .
in writing . - ( FI ) The report by Mrs Gomes is a vital contribution to the debate on this major challenge to international cooperation .
Once again I thank her for her clear-sightedness .
On the one hand , it would appear that Africa has benefited from its economically close relations with China .
The economic boost given to it by its most important trading partner , Europe aside , has reduced poverty .
China looks on Africa not as a burden , but as an opportunity full of economic potential .
On the other hand , it has become evident that there are some very worrying aspects of China 's position in Africa .
The export of weapons , unhealthy investment , the exploitation of raw materials - Europe knows the signs of neocolonialism amid all the zeal all too well .
It is worth asking if economic power should be used to encourage an obsession with becoming a superpower .
This is apparent , for example , in Darfur .
Another question is how the EU should react .
In many ways China is Europe 's rival in Africa , and several here have said that lecturing a self-respecting rising superpower will not do any good .
The report wisely opts for a constructive approach .
Therein we need to identify our role , which is to remind China of the obligations which partnership brings with it .
Joint efforts need to be made to achieve the Millennium Development Goals , prevent conflict and guarantee sustainable development .
Cooperation is of the utmost importance in curbing climate change .
Bali brought the hope that China , as a major polluter , and Africa , as an innocent victim , would be involved .
Finally , we need to acknowledge the fact that China does not share European notions of respect for human rights .
That is why we must make far more of an effort to ensure that lasting democracy , the rule of law and good governance take root in Africa .
The eventual solution to the Chinese challenge is to be found not in China , but in Africa itself .
in writing . - ( PL ) The rising power that is China is having an enormous impact on the process of sustainable development in Africa , but we must bear in mind that African states are responsible for the overall impact of the presence of foreigners and foreign organisations or governments on their territory .
Both the EU and China are acting to promote security , peace and sustainable development in Africa , but the EU is the greatest donor and the main trade partner for Africa as things currently stand .
Although China has a raft of positive experience through lifting 400 million of its own citizens out of extreme poverty over the past 25 years , we must nevertheless concentrate on the enormous social and economic inequities , as well as the alarming degradation of the natural environment , the restriction of fundamental freedoms and low employment standards .
We must monitor the exploitation of African natural resources , as it may lead to their total exhaustion and the spread of corruption , as well as to a deepening of social inequality and the instigation of conflicts , which will have a negative impact on the development of African countries .
It is precisely the Western states ' trade and consumption that is having the effect of increasing China 's demand for African natural resources , resulting in increasing CO2 emissions in developing countries .
No less important is the fact that WTO membership brings in its train a series of obligations that China is inadequately honouring .
The EU should raise the issue of justice in relation to trade , climate and other problems as part of trilateral cooperation with China and Africa .
in writing . - Mr President , the most disturbing fact about China 's policy in Africa is that they are providing non-conditional aid and investments there .
The development assistance that the European Union contributes has always been bound with strict conditions concerning democratic progress , recognition of the rule of law and good governance as well as respect for human rights .
China 's pragmatic " no conditions " cooperation with repressive regimes in Africa undermines the efforts that the European Union has made to incite democratic state-building in Africa and challenges us to introduce some new more flexible policies on Africa .
Conditional aid , although being sometimes extremely effective , can also be perceived as patronizing and China , in pursuit to satisfy its growing need for resources , has avoided its use .
China 's growing interest and involvement in Africa endangers European interests there and in order not to lose ground in Africa we must come forward with some new more attractive means to encourage democratic transition in African countries .
But on the other hand we must not shy away from a constructive dialogue between the European Union and China as well as other major contributors who might be interested in forming a coherent multilateral strategy on Africa .
in writing . - Napoleon told us that we should let China sleep , for when she wakes , she will shake the world .
Bad news : China has arisen , yet we have slumbered away .
We are still dealing with the legacy of colonial rule , in both the colonised and colonising states , but we have ignored the possibility that this tragedy might occur again .
The accusation that China is exercising neo-colonialism is not at all unjustified .
China has the same interests in exploiting African countries as some of our European states have had over the centuries .
We have learned our lessons at great cost , but China has yet to learn how to implement human rights internally while already experimenting in colonial rule .
We are on a dangerous course with China 's thirst for oil and the hunger that it exerts for African resources .
We should send a clear signal to China : first deal with the internal human rights record , then show the world that it genuinely wants to engage in Africa 's development goals rather then just using them instrumentally .
Programming implementation of the 10th European Development Fund ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Carlotti , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the implementation of the programming of the 10th European Development Fund .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Madam President , development assistance has been in the headlines in recent days , although unfortunately for all the wrong reasons .
In 2007 , EU aid fell for the first time since 2000 .
This is an appalling political message that we are sending out to the countries and peoples of the South , at a time when the most fragile of them are being hit by the food crisis .
Parliament supports the Commission , supports you , Commissioner , in reiterating the commitment of the EU at the European Summit in Brussels and insisting on a tight schedule .
We have a twofold responsibility in terms of international solidarity : first , keeping our word , and second , the guarantee that our aid will make a tangible and effective contribution towards combating poverty .
This is what is at stake in the implementation of the 10th EDF and almost EUR 22.7 billion over the next six years .
I believe that the EU has a major weapon here for tackling poverty and building a fairer world .
This is why we are extremely concerned by the delays in the ratification process .
Granted , the Commission has committed to the continuity of funding , at least temporarily , but the situation could very quickly become untenable for the most fragile African countries .
Our first priority for the 10th EDF is democratic scrutiny .
Democratic scrutiny of the European Parliament , first of all , with the budgetisation of the EDF - and this time I hope that we will not miss the deadline for the review of the financial perspectives in 2010 - and democratic scrutiny of national parliaments , with a reinforced capacity-building programme .
We would also like education and health to be priority action areas and to be allocated 20 % of EDF funds .
However , there are only plans to grant allocate 6.1 % of aid to these areas , and even this figure has fallen compared with the 9th EDF .
The Commission says that it will achieve the 20 % target through budgetary support , and we take it at its word .
The report also underlines shortcomings in terms of the gender dimension , which is not currently an area of action in its own right .
We need to reopen this debate in consultation with our ACP partners , their parliaments and civil society , during the mid-term review in 2010 .
As for budgetary support , I personally have always believed that this was a good instrument , provided of course that it respects democracy , good governance and coordination between donors .
Since we believe that budgetary support must serve the Millennium Development Goals , we are encouraging the Commission to go down this path with its MDG contracts .
For the new incentive tranche proposed in the 10th EDF , of course we say yes to a good governance ' premium ' , but no to a governance profile , which would primarily reflect the interests of the North .
I would like to talk about the fight against terrorism , immigration , etc .
We will also be vigilant on the question of EPA funding .
Here too , the EU and the Member States have made a commitment : an additional EUR 2 billion in aid for trade between now and 2010 .
However , it seems that this EUR 2 billion has melted away and that the Commission is already planning to finance EPAs from integrated regional programmes .
It must clarify its intentions on this subject , because EDF funds , as far as we are concerned , should not be used as a reward for signing an EPA .
The report makes a number of other points , although I do not have time to go into these .
I will just mention two others before finishing .
Firstly , the African Peace Facility .
Obviously we must support the efforts of the African Union for peace and the prevention of conflict on the continent , but I believe that this instrument comes under the CFSP , and so must be financed from CFSP funds .
In terms of co-financing , the report calls for an initial tangible application , i.e. the creation of a ' pan-African development fund ' , jointly funded by the EDF and the neighbourhood instrument .
This is more or less the content of my report , for better or worse .
Mr Michel , you recently said that ' we are the first generation that can face up to extreme poverty and state with genuine conviction : we have the money , the medicines and the science to end poverty .
The question is , do we have the will ? '
Well , on this point , Mr Michel , Parliament is right behind you .
member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , rapporteur , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank and congratulate you for this excellent report , which has given me an opportunity to express myself to you on points of mutual interest .
I would also like to say that I am pleased with the similarities between the viewpoints of our institutions , as exemplified by this report .
It is clear that the overarching aim of our actions is first and foremost the fight against poverty in the context of the Millennium Development Goals .
In this sense , the 10th European Development Fund , which is about to be launched , is the first real opportunity for the European Union to deploy the European consensus and agenda on the efficiency of aid .
Firstly , the amount .
The budget has significantly increased , from EUR 17.9 billion for the 9th EDF to EUR 22.6 billion for the 10th EDF .
I am also delighted to inform you that , for the first time in the EDF 's history and so since European cooperation began , the Commission has been able to commit all remaining balances from previous EDFs at 31 January 2007 , without a single euro being lost due to the sunset clause imposed by Member States on the 9th EDF , as the report asks .
In the meantime , nearly all country strategies of the 10th EDF have been completed .
So far , 58 strategy papers have been forwarded to the EDF Committee , 14 are expected between now and next June and plans for their implementation are already under way .
On its ratification by the ACP , the 10th EDF could be rolled out immediately and without any hangover from the past , while its implementation cycle could be aligned with the previous budgetary cycle .
This is just the first step , and I will continue to campaign , as you do , for full budgetisation of the EDF .
Your support is also vital for us to be able , once and for all , to shift cooperation with ACP countries away from an intergovernmental approach and to integrate it fully into the Community budget and codecision procedures .
Budgetisation will also satisfy your demands , which I fully endorse , for full democratic scrutiny of the EDF .
We have already agreed on the principle that strategy papers must be automatically forwarded to the Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
Clearly this is not enough ; I have already instructed our delegations to send country strategy papers to members of national parliaments and I am also personally committed to raising awareness in our partner countries so that they can involve their national parliaments in monitoring Community cooperation .
A first meeting with the Ghanaian government looks set to take place , although as you know , the last-minute change to my calendar - in other words the SADEC Summit on Zimbabwe , which I have just come back from - forced me to postpone it .
I am convinced that the main advantage of the country strategies prepared by ACP countries in the programming of their national budgets for the 10th EDF lies in the fact that they have made governance the focus of our mutual relations .
This is why , when the 10th EDF funds were allocated , we decided to introduce a governance-related incentive tranche of almost EUR 3 billion .
This is not , as someone mistakenly said , another form of conditionality , but a premium allocated based on the relevance , realism and ambition of the governance plans drawn up by our partners .
In the interests of autonomy and transparency , governance plans are annexed to the strategy papers and are therefore accessible to everyone .
Similarly , criteria such as appropriation , effectiveness and focus on results have led me to call for greater use of budgetary support than in conventional projects .
45 % of our aid for ACP countries will be allocated out of national budgets , both as budgetary support for specific sectors and as general budgetary support .
I would like to take this opportunity to clarify some points of the report , which seem to have arisen from a misunderstanding .
The report criticises the lack of funding for the health and education sectors .
This is long-standing quarrel between the European Parliament and the Commission , I know .
I can only repeat that the eradication of poverty and the achievement of the MDGs cannot happen solely through direct aid for the health and education sectors .
Obviously , a significant proportion of general or sectoral budgetary support , when it is allocated , will be used to pay wages , for example of teachers , to build health clinics and to provide social services .
I am convinced that at least 20 % , or 6 % in total , has been qualified and directly indicated .
Obviously the rest will come from direct or sectoral aid , although I promise to try to quantify and prove this .
By the way , obviously we do not have the right to choose sectors for our partners ; it is up to them to choose these .
Choices are also made based on bilateral aid .
Many countries choose health or education for example , but it is a good question and so I will try to objectify it and give you the results .
Finally , you are right about the gender dimension .
I am the first person to recognise the role of women in development and the need to promote this role .
However , yet again , in the interests of efficiency , Parliament , the Council and the Commission have been forced to recognise , with the adoption of the European consensus , that gender issues , taking into account their implications , have a cross-disciplinary dimension and that they must therefore be integrated into all relevant aid programmes , preferably within the limited framework of a particular sector .
Where you do have my full support is where you commented on EDF funding for the African Peace Facility ; no one can deny the evident links between development and security .
Nevertheless , financing for peacekeeping actions should not be classed as development or deducted from development resources .
Therefore , in principle , you are right .
Unfortunately , you know how these things work .
I think that it is absolutely crucial to lay the emphasis , as you are doing , on national parliaments , to structure and institutionalise consultation with governments and to increase the role of civil society while building its capacity and representativeness so that it can become a driver of development and democratic openness .
Thank you for this report , which I promise I will put to good use and from which I will undeniably draw inspiration .
on behalf of the PPE-DE group . - ( SL ) Rooting out poverty within the millennium development framework is a huge and demanding task .
It includes not only tasks from the social sphere , but also a wider spectrum of topics that enable the human race to develop sustainably .
Efficient utilisation of the 10th European Development Fund can substantially contribute to realisation of this objective .
I agree with the rapporteur that education and healthcare are two of the basic areas involved in improving the quality of life of the poorest populations .
We must adequately increase the share of funds assigned to these two areas in the European Union 's development assistance , including also the 10th European Development Fund .
However , at a time of global challenges such as climate change , this is not enough .
Nowadays , in parallel with economic growth and growth in GDP , greenhouse gas emissions are also growing .
It is because of this , despite economic progress in other areas , that in some areas the wellbeing of the population is in decline .
When we are designing all our development policies , we must define wellbeing within the framework of sustainable development .
That is why it is important for the 10th European Development Fund to reflect the balance between the economic , social and environmental components .
Another area that I should like to mention is gender equality .
Women in society have various roles , from concerns and responsibilities for the family 's basic subsistence to passing on of knowledge and life patterns to their children .
Frequently , however , women have no privileges , no possibility of becoming independent and making their own decisions , and do not have equal access to services .
That is why I believe that ensuring equal opportunities is one of the fundamental horizontal - I repeat , horizontal - building blocks of any development policy .
Finally , I should like to say that a policy can be successful only if it obtains suitable support from the population , which is reflected through democratic and honest elections .
In future , parliaments should play a much more important role in drawing up , controlling and implementing development policies - not just the European Parliament , but also Member State parliaments .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , Mrs Carlotti , I would first of all like to congratulate you for the excellent work carried out in drafting this report , which was expertly done .
Apart from the reminder that it is now urgent to encourage our partners to ratify the 10th EDF , I would like to revisit some of the issues that , for us European Socialists , are essential in view of the current challenges facing the populations of the South ; challenges that are tragically highlighted by the current food crisis .
Firstly , we need a better understanding of agriculture , which represents an inadequate proportion of the European Development Fund .
As a reminder , 9 out of 78 countries in the 9th EDF , and only 8 % of amounts allocated in the 10th EDF , covered agriculture and rural development initiatives .
There is also the late implementation of the increase announced by the Commission as part of its support for the development of agriculture in southern countries .
It is imperative that we monitor the coherence of our policies and those of the Member States compared with the priorities expressed in the 10th EDF , mainly in terms of the common agricultural policy , because no development policy can make sense while we continue to give with one hand what we take back with the other .
Another important question for us is of course the gender dimension , particularly as we are aware of the central role of women in development in most of these countries .
Finally , the need , as mentioned this morning during the budget discharge debate , for the budgetisation of the EDF , which until now has evaded any parliamentary scrutiny , even though it is a budget of EUR 22.6 billion - as you reminded us , Commissioner - and as it accounts for most of our development resources .
This appeal is directed more at the Council than at the Commission , with whom we have reached an agreement on the subject .
Sorry , but I must underline what was said by my colleague Mrs Carlotti on the vigilance required so that the 10th EDF is not used as leverage or as a remedy for economic partnership agreements .
Clearly this would not be responsible .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Development Fund is celebrating the 50th anniversary of its creation .
During this period it has become an important means of development cooperation with ACP countries , enhancing their economic and social development .
During negotiations on the 10th EDF , the EU Member States have agreed on the importance of the Fund and the need to further encourage the development of the ACP countries along with increasing the Fund by EUR 10 billion compared with the 9th EDF .
It would make the fight against poverty more efficient and allow us to continue with the implementation of the Millennium Development Goals .
I would like to highlight the fact that since 2008 the new EU Member States have started to contribute towards the 10th EDF budget .
They are required to pay nearly EUR 820 million .
However , the implementation of the 10th EDF has not yet begun , mainly because half of the ACP countries have failed to ratify the revised Cotonou Agreement .
I would therefore like to encourage the ACP countries to ratify the revised Cotonou Agreement as soon as possible .
Prior to the ratification of the current financial initiative , discussions took place on the incorporation of the EDF into the EU budget , the main idea being that it would enhance the efficiency of its implementation .
We are still awaiting a decision on this issue .
I would also like to urge the EU to allocate a more substantial part of the EDF funds to health services and education .
Since 2001 the EU budget has provided for 20 % of aid to be allocated to primary health care and education , and this should be applied to the EDF too .
In view of the EDF innovations , I would like to emphasise the encouragement of good management .
Although it is not fully clear how it would be done at present , I support the incorporation of additional criteria - the liberalisation of markets , the fight against terrorism , commitments on weapons of mass destruction and the readmission of migrants .
The implementation of these criteria would contribute to enhancing stability in the ACP countries .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , programming implementation of the 10th European Development Fund in the period 2008-2013 is of considerable humanist and political significance .
The aim of these programmes is to eliminate poverty and bring about social stability in partner countries and regions in the context of lasting development , especially in Africa .
The efficacy of this aid established by the European Parliament , Member States and other donors , and assessed at many billions of euros , will be dependent on the proper designation of aims , the simplification of formal barriers , the harmonisation of actions and constant monitoring , part of which will be carried out by European institutions .
Aid in the economic sense should be linked to partnership agreements and should ensure development of the required infrastructure , enabling jobs to be created in the mining and processing industries and in agriculture .
The sales market for products should be the European Union , with its lasting shortage of raw materials and certain products .
Funds should be accompanied by logistical help to ensure their effective utilisation .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , Commissioner , I would first of all like to congratulate Mrs Carlotti on this excellent report and say that when we are talking about the implementation of the agenda , we need to look at each country case by case , the real costs that they have to bear and their management .
It should not be forgotten that the EDF does not fall within the Commission 's general financial aid , and therefore we can demand clear transparency and specific objectives for which this money is going to be used .
EUR 23 billion for five years and 78 countries is not enough for everything , therefore according to what was agreed in the Paris Declaration of 2005 , bilateral agreements always have to be reached on projects , plans and strategies to be followed , and I stress ' bilateral agreements ' .
Finally , even though we know that the general financial aid that is allocated to ACP countries is primarily focused on strategies to eradicate poverty , it would not be superfluous to ensure that the final objective of the EFD was the same .
( PL ) Madam President , the implementation of the 10th European Development Fund in the period from 2008 to 2013 falls at a time of exceptionally important challenges for the European and world development agenda .
We can identify at least a few of these : implementation of the newly adopted joint EU-Africa strategy ; implementation of the Millennium Development Goals , which are envisaged - as we all remember - for 2015 ; implementation of new economic partnership agreements ' EPAs ' ; and the mid-term review of the financial perspective , set for 2009 .
Some particularly tough challenges are therefore facing us as far as programming , the introduction of new solutions and implementation of the 10th EDF are concerned .
In my view , the rapporteur , Mrs Carlotti , has made a splendid job of this task ; she has properly captured and summarised the most important aims and the difficult issues that will be a challenge in the implementation of the European Development Fund .
I would like to draw attention to the two issues that I consider to be of the highest importance .
The 10th European Development Fund envisages the disbursement of almost EUR 23 billion intended for cooperation with the poorest countries of the world .
Properly utilised , the EDF can make a major contribution to the successful achievement of the Millennium Development Goals .
For this reason , then , the absolute priority for our European perspective should be the first of the Millennium Development Goals - the eradication of extreme poverty and hunger .
We must therefore ensure that the executive regulation does in fact concentrate on the implementation of this aim , giving it priority over the other social aims .
The other aims are important , but we should keep a constant eye on the priority of eradicating extreme poverty .
Secondly , in order to increase the cohesion , transparency and efficiency of European development cooperation , the EDF should be included in the EU budget .
The question of including the EDF in the budget should be discussed during a review of the financial perspective .
I am aware that some Member States are afraid of this solution , but from the viewpoint of the Committee on Development , and probably that of the European Parliament as a whole , there is no doubt that this would be beneficial for European development policy .

( SK ) Ladies and gentlemen , meeting the President of the Pan-African Parliament , Mrs Gertrude Mongella , in the European Parliament made a very powerful impression on me .
During the meeting in the European Parliament , Mrs Gertrude Mongella said the following : ' Europe plays an important role in Africa . Europe 's presence in Africa has a long history , both positive and negative .
Europe has the technology ; Europe has the resources ; Europe is developing its scientific knowledge .
Europe can play an important role .
What is more , Europe cannot afford to exist without Africa . '
I believe that the 10th European Development Fund ( 2008-2013 ) is an important instrument in terms of fulfilling the political obligations of the EU and its Member States to provide development assistance .
This is why I call on the EU Member States and the ACP countries that have not yet ratified the Internal Agreement and the Amended Cotonou Agreement to do so , in the hope that the fund can become operational as soon as possible .
member of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , I am going to be very brief because I did not realise , but basically I already answered a number of questions in my initial speech .
I would like to go back to a point that was criticised by Mrs Carlotti - a very fair criticism , of course - which is that , at a time when we have never before faced so many challenges in terms of development , it should be said that our Member States are reducing their development assistance .
In actual fact , we are going to lose EUR 1 700 000 000 - the first time that there has been a decrease .
This is a huge sum .
Imagine what it might be spent on in terms of hospitals , doctors and teachers for developing countries .
Therefore , what the European Council is proposing , Mrs Carlotti , is that each Member State should at least confirm the commitment that it assumed , if you remember , in 2005 , and agree to produce a transitional plan illustrating how they can reach the target set for 2010 and 2015 .
It is my belief that they will then be pinned down by the commitments they assumed publicly .
The second thing , Mr Hutchinson , is that you are right about the percentages .
I would just like to say that , for agriculture and rural development , the 9th EDF was EUR 650 million and the 10th EDF is EUR 1 billion 250 million .
It is an increase in absolute terms rather than percentage terms , you are right .
Secondly , four countries chose agriculture originally , whereas now there are 25 .
However , this is not enough , it is still not ambitious enough , and we really had to lobby hard to get some countries to agree to this approach .
In terms of the EPAs , we always have an exchange of views on this subject whenever we meet .
However , it is very late now , and this has taken the edge off my enthusiasm for the subject .
Despite this , I would simply like to confirm something that you will like .
I have always said that those countries which do not sign an EPA clearly will not be penalised from a financial point of view , and that obviously the two things were unrelated .
In no way will we use the budget or its implementation as pressure or as a form of blackmail to get them to sign an EPA .
We have always said this , and this will not change .
In terms of ratification , I think that it was Mrs Budreikaité who raised this point .
Today , all EU Member States have ratified .
There are five partner countries which still have to ratify .
I hope that this will be done by the end of the month , so that it can all start in June .
I would like to restate my belief that the budgetisation of the European Development Fund would without a doubt allow us to be much more efficient , to have democratic scrutiny , to have involvement in and ownership of this development policy , as we do with other policies .
In my opinion , this would offer a much greater scope for action , responsiveness , legitimacy and credibility .
I hope that we can make those Member States which are still opposed see sense .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Thank you everyone for this debate and for staying so late .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I would like to say that , on official development assistance , Parliament is right behind you .
I read your comments in the press ; I know that it took courage to say certain things .
However , I would like to go back to two points .
Firstly , the incentive tranche .
As you know , a great deal of uncertainty surrounds this instrument .
The decision-making process is not very clear . There is no scrutiny and no information for the European Parliament or the JPA , or for national parliaments , and as I said earlier , there are certain criteria in the governance profiles which cause us a problem .
I will not repeat myself , but I think that this ambiguity would only be removed by only external control outside the Commission , i.e. scrutiny by the European Parliament , by national parliaments and by the JPA of how and under what conditions the incentive tranche is paid .
I also think that this scrutiny should explicitly form part of the implementation of the EDF .
On regional integration and the EPAs , personally I think that EPA financing must be additional to EDF funding .
I heard what you said about this .
However , we need clarification regarding the division of funds , integrated regional programmes , between regions and between ACP countries .
We believe you when you say that there is no new conditionality , but we need this type of assurance and precision .
In any case , thank you very much for staying so late .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Wednesday at 11.30 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( FR ) The 10th EDF provides a long-term framework for cooperation and development of the EU with ACP countries .
It stands at EUR 22.7 billion for the period 2008-2013 and is designed to help some of the world 's poorest and most vulnerable countries .
For this fund , which is the financial arm of European development policy , to be effective , we must go further than the asymmetrical contribution of Member States and integrate it into the Community budget .
The budgetisation of European aid would in fact offer certain advantages , since assistance for ACP countries would be subject to the same programming and management rules as the EU 's other instruments for external action , thereby strengthening the coherence , transparency , effectiveness and democratic control of development cooperation .
We must overcome the idea of ' historic ties ' between certain Member States and overseas countries and territories , and make Africa and development a priority of the EU as a whole .
If the EU wants these policies and programmes to be efficient , then it must continue modernising its external aid and include the EDF within the Community budget from 2009 .
Agenda for the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 12.05 a.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.00 a.m. )
European Union-Latin America and Caribbean Summit ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the European Union-Latin America and Caribbean Summit .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) The Council welcomes the interest shown by the European Parliament in the strengthening of the strategic partnership between the European Union and Latin America and the Caribbean .
We are equally pleased with the active role Parliament has had in encouraging concrete commitments towards this region , which would bring considerable benefits to citizens on both sides .
First I should like to congratulate you for establishing the EuroLat joint Parliamentary Assembly , which will play a crucial role in bringing the citizens of both sides together .
The Resolutions that EuroLat adopted during its session in December were a valuable and stimulating contribution to the objectives of the Heads of State or Government from countries on both sides at the summit meeting which is to be held next month .
We are equally pleased , Mr President , that you have expressed your interest in participating in the May EU-LAC Summit .
In this way , with your participation , the good practice introduced at the summit meeting in Vienna in 2006 will be continued .
The European Union and the Latin American and Caribbean countries have agreed that their summit meeting in Lima , under the title ' Addressing our People 's Priorities Together ' , will focus on two key chapters .
Firstly : on poverty , inequality and exclusion , three of the topics representing the key challenges for social cohesion . And secondly : on environment , climate change and energy - under the title of Sustainable Development .
Regarding the first of the two chapters , poverty , inequality and exclusion , I should like to emphasise that for the European Union social cohesion is of key importance and also an objective which is in line with long-term European traditions .
Social cohesion means all three , it means fighting poverty , inequality and exclusion .
All three components are inextricably connected .
We agree with the Latin American and Caribbean countries that our cooperation should be strengthened in all three areas mentioned .
This is why we intend to devote our attention to the following subjects : social security , taxation policies and their efficiency , productive investments for more jobs and for better jobs , a policy to fight against all forms of discrimination , sexual , ethical , religious or any other , the improvement of basic social services and social security networks , and the quality of education .
A significant aspect of social progress is the provision of suitable jobs .
As you know , all the agreements between the European Union and the Latin American countries and regions contain articles on cooperation in the field of social policy and commitments to respect the so-called primary labour standards , as defined by the International Labour Organization .
During the preparations for the Lima summit meeting , both sides have been looking for ways to encourage jobs which have been defined in this way , especially in small and medium-sized undertakings .
At the same time the Slovenian Presidency has been emphasising that greater investment in education , particularly at elementary and vocational level , is of key importance in improving our countries ' competitiveness both in the European Union and in the Latin American and Caribbean countries .
The second key chapter of the approaching summit meeting : sustainable development and environment , climate change and energy .
We emphasise that poverty is closely related with these issues .
Climate change will seriously affect our economies , growth and our policy to reduce poverty .
We already know that the most vulnerable groups will probably suffer the most .
We are aware , both in the European Union and in the Latin American and Caribbean countries , of the safety risks that will be caused by climate change .
We know that failure to act means that the consequences will be much graver than the costs of preventative measures .
From the current discussions concerning the statement that is to be adopted at the summit , it is clearly evident that we shall be jointly addressing numerous aspects of the global challenge .
We shall both have to change examples of unsustainable manufacturing and consumption .
Provisions for concrete and urgent measures for the sustainable management of forests and the use of resources have to be put in place in order to reduce emissions of greenhouse gases , to stimulate investments in manufacturing with low carbon dioxide emissions , to preserve biodiversity , for the management of water resources , and the like .
Of course , the European Union and the Latin American and Caribbean countries will also give priority to further cooperation in this field within the framework of the United Nations . And in conclusion to this introduction , I would like to thank you for your attention .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentleman , I should like to join the Minister in thanking Parliament for having included this European Union-Latin America and Caribbean Summit on the agenda for its plenary sitting .
This will be the fifth top-level meeting between our regions since our strategic partnership was launched at the Rio Summit in 1999 .
The Lima Summit will place particular emphasis on two specific topics : firstly , the fight against poverty , inequality and exclusion , and secondly , climate change and energy .
The Summit is taking place in a very stimulating climate .
The Latin America-Caribbean region is changing very fast .
For the first time , the gross domestic product of the region has increased by an average of 5 % over the past five years .
Hence public budgets have increased and that is enabling the region to address the risks of social equality , which are still significant .
It must not be forgotten that over 200 million people still live in poverty there .
The region is also becoming increasingly important internationally as a producer of agricultural products and biofuels .
These developments are part of a political context divided between democracy , which is still the most common system in the region , and a growing trend towards populism , indeed , in some cases , the strengthening of executive power at the expense of parliamentary government and the primacy of law .
As you know , Europe is involved at very many levels .
With the region , it has committed itself to resolving those structural problems .
Europe is still the main donor for development cooperation , the biggest foreign employer .
As the second trading partner for the region , Europe leads the field in investment , which is considerably higher than investment by China .
Our general association agreements with Chile and Mexico have had a significant impact on the growth in our trade since they were first introduced .
We are now at the third stage of the negotiations for the signature of association agreements with the Andean Community and Central America , which there is every indication will happen in the near future .
We are working on promoting and supporting regional integration , sharing the positive experience of Europe in that respect .
Similarly , we are currently negotiating with Mercosur on the possibilities for getting things moving again in the present situation .
We have recently signed a strategic partnership with Brazil , which should lead to the initiation of a first joint action plan by the end of this year .
The Caribbean region is the first , and so far the only one , to have successfully negotiated an economic partnership agreement with the Union under the Cotonou Agreement .
We are , of course , continuing to support democracy and human rights throughout the region , both through cooperation programmes and also , where necessary and only when requested , through election observation missions .
Finally , I shall outline the priorities for the Summit and the immediate future .
Social cohesion and regional integration , in view of their importance for economic and political stability , and multilateralism , since the values of the two regions are very similar , must remain the political priorities for the European Union-Latin America-Caribbean partnership .
The main objective of the European Union for the Lima Summit is to consolidate the existing strategic partnership and move it forward in two areas , social cohesion and sustainable development , which will be of crucial importance to our relationship with the region in the immediate future .
As regards social cohesion , the European Commission has been implementing major aid and cooperation programmes to reduce poverty in the region .
Forty per cent of the EUR 2.6 billion cooperation and development allocation for the next six years is being used to resolve social cohesion problems .
As regard the environment and climate change , we want to cooperate more with the region in order to meet this global challenge .
On the initiative of the Commission , the first European Union-Latin America-Caribbean ministerial dialogue on the environment was opened in March 2008 , as a prelude to the Lima Summit .
We need to seize the opportunity that is open to us to ratify with our partners the existing relationship between sustainable development and climate change , even if many countries in Latin America still devote very little attention to the problems of climate change , in spite of its negative and sometimes disastrous impact on the region .
Finally , the European Union must emphasise the important role that it continues to play in promoting this regional integration and the positive effect of the integration on the economic and political stability of the sub-regions .
That is the information that I have for Parliament and I shall obviously be very interested in the speeches that follow .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , beyond mere rhetoric , what the EP wants from the ambitious resolution it intends to adopt tomorrow is to match its words with actions , supporting the Lima agenda in terms of poverty and social exclusion as well as protecting the environment and fighting climate change with a raft of measures .
Mr President , we also wish to expand on the arrangements for the association agreements - in which we must have faith and believe - with the Mercosur Customs Union , with the Andean Community and with Central America , so that they can b concluded as quickly as possible , and especially within this parliamentary term , to allow the House to issue its mandatory consent .
We also wish to express our solidarity with all those who have been kidnapped in Colombia , including , of course , Ingrid Betancourt , and again call for their unconditional and immediate release .
Mr President , Latin America has a population of 600 million , it accounts for 10 % of the world 's GDP , it is home to 40 % of the planet 's vegetable species and has a wealth of exceptional human resources .
For the EU , however , Latin America is not just a market , it is a continent with a shared history and common values , which , not without some difficulty , are apparently becoming consolidated , if not everywhere : freedom , democracy , respect for human rights and the rule of law .
This is the message we wish to send from the European Parliament , which we will repeat at the EuroLat Assembly in Lima next week : we want to see the establishment of a regional strategic association based on values , a bi-regional strategic association with a soul .
Mr President , I feel that this is a wonderful occasion to ask the President-in-Office of the Council and the Commission to make every effort .
Indeed , the EP will see to it that the Lima Summit is a resounding success , and you , Mr President , will have the opportunity , on behalf of the House , to send out a clear and well-defined message of the EU 's new commitment to Latin America .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , distinguished empty Chamber , ladies and gentlemen , on 16 and 17 May the heads of state and government of the European Union and the Latin American countries will meet in Lima .
That will be an opportunity for them to achieve an historic breakthrough in the bi-regional dialogue between Europe and Latin America and develop a new dimension in relations between our two continents .
One third of the member states of the United Nations are European and Latin American countries .
That figure alone should indicate to the Europeans that the transatlantic relationship means more than just Europe 's relations with the United States of America .
Transatlantic relations mean Europe and Latin America , above all !
On almost all the important issues that we debate in this House , the Latin American countries ' views dovetail with those of the European Union .
In our resolution , we talk about our ideas on social cohesion , and these ideas are shared in their entirety by all the Latin American governments , whether they are led by the right or the left .
We talk about the measures that are essential to protect the environment and the climate , and this meets with great resonance on the Latin American side .
Let me point out in passing that none of the climate goals - not one - can be achieved unless the Latin American countries are on board with us .
When we talk about the reform of the international institutions , the reform of the United Nations , about Security Council reform , when we Europeans talk about multilateral policies being the solution to conflicts in the 21st century , all our Latin American partners give us wholehearted support .
When we talk about the need to reform the financial systems and bring the international financial markets under control , then nowhere do we meet with greater understanding than in Latin America .
Speak to any Argentine politician , whether from the left or the right , and they will tell you exactly what havoc international finance policy can wreak in a country !
When we talk about the food crisis , as we did yesterday , and about the increasing scarcity of food and farmland for food-growing as a result of the production of biomass , and how this is a consequence of environmental policy , we should talk to the Brazilians , and to Latin American politicians .
We will find a clear focus on these problems .
The increasing scarcity of food is causing price rises and hitting our consumers hard , but they are hitting consumers in Latin America even harder .
Nowhere is there stronger backing for Europe , and stronger resonance when it comes to solving current problems , than in Latin America .
In Vienna , at the last Summit , Chancellor Schüssel , as the then President of the Council , said : ' It was marvellous , everyone was able to talk to each other ! '
That is great , but we cannot afford that to be the only outcome in Lima .
We must now achieve tangible agreements with Mercosur , with the Andean Community and with the Central American countries and bring the negotiations to a conclusion .
I do not want to draw a veil over the many problems which exist and which have to be resolved ; these have to be addressed as well .
What are we going to do about Cuba ?
Do we want to maintain the sanctions for much longer ?
The vast majority of the EU Member States want to lift these useless sanctions .
There are some who are not in favour , however .
What is interesting is that some of the countries which do not want to lift the sanctions are , nonetheless , massively expanding their trade relations with Cuba at present .
That will be hard to explain to anyone in the long run .
Let us put an end to this policy .
Let us remember that bringing about change by fostering closer relations is always a better approach than the isolation championed by George W. Bush .
Of course , José Ignacio Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra is right to say that FARC must release the hostages .
Colombia , as a country , is a hostage to terrorism , more than any other , and Ingrid Betancourt must be released , and all the other hostages must be released as well .
Relations between the European Union and Latin America could be the key to cooperation between two major world regions .
Making the world a more peaceful place , adapting its institutions to the needs of the 21st century , tackling environmental and food problems , developing better financial controls : all these issues are on the agenda in Lima .
My Group attaches great importance to encouraging the European Parliament to give far more priority to this policy in future than we have done in the past .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , a community such as the Latin-Caribbean community , whose entire population on the American continent resembles our own , whom we can speak to in its own languages - Portuguese , French and Spanish , among others - merits special consideration and treatment by the European institutions .
In additional to historical links , we share Christian roots , principles , values and many interests , and so we must continue to elaborate on the bi-regional strategic association already announced at the four Summits of Heads of State and Government preceding the Lima Summit we are discussing today .
This means we can continue to propitiate social , cultural and political rapprochement between our societies , and also in terms of trade , economics , security and the fight against climate change and in favour of sustainable development .
I agree we ought to give this association a full strategic perspective , which , on the heels of those already in place with Mexico and Chile , should lead as soon as possible to negotiations with Mercosur , the Andean Community and Central America and , on the basis of a multicultural vision , allow us to create a global interregional EuroLat zone as a WTO-compatible model envisaging freedom of movement of persons and free commercial and regional trade facilities .
To this end , Europe must make its contribution to the diversification and modernisation of production processes in Latin America with plans for technology transfer and capacity-building , creating the best possible context for investment within a comparable framework of legal certainty , towards Latin American integration and , as the culmination of all this , the eradication of poverty , inequality and exclusion .
We must make intelligent use of the Community funding instruments relating to development cooperation , promotion of democracy and human rights and other programmes in relation to training , education , scientific and technical cooperation , health , emigration , etc .
We ought to create a bi-regional solidarity fund , a conflict prevention centre , a foundation to encourage dialogue , an emigration observatory , and immediately add Mercosur to the EuroLat Parliamentary Assembly .
The future will not wait , Mr President , and uniting both sides of the Atlantic is the West 's challenge in the context of globalisation and the 21st century .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , although relations between the European Union and Latin America could be described as dynamic , our potential for cooperation is nowhere near being fully exploited .
Now to some practical matters : Latin America is generally rich in energy resources , but demand will increase and it will require the necessary major investments .
It is mutually advantageous that there should be equal opportunities in the different Latin American states for our investment - including those in which restrictions have been laid down .
For its part , the European Union ought to lend a helping hand in the sphere of renewable energy technologies , since climate change is a shared concern .
The reality of the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean region is such that the benefits of democracy on some occasions do not reach society as a whole .
It is therefore very important to pass on our experience in reinforcing democratic institutions .
A stable and secure region with sustainable socio-economic development is in our interests .
A transition from donor policy to cooperation between equal partners is both the objective and the result hoped for from our joint work . Thank you .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , firstly I wish to remind the House that here we are discussing a summit with a dubious process , the results of which are certainly unpredictable .
Nobody entertains any doubts , in my opinion , as to the importance of improving relations between two of the world 's most populated regions boasting high levels of progress , Europe and Latin America .
It is also true , however , at least at present , judging by the results of previous summits , that there are many unknown factors within this process .
For example , beyond the rhetoric , the truth of the matter is that the context of relations between the EU and Latin America , to date at least , has produced little success in terms of regional integration or in reducing poverty levels there .
We all know that it is no easy process to secure specific agreements at such a varied forum with such a wide spectrum of political views as the Lima Summit .
Nevertheless , this is why I feel it is relevant to pay close attention to social and political movements in the region moving towards changes in the erstwhile majorities on the American continent .
I also wish to take this opportunity to congratulate President Lugo on the results obtained in Paraguay , as an example of these changing trends of which we ought to take due note .
I admit that I am highly sceptical about what may emerge from the meeting of the Heads of State in May beyond reiteration of the three commitments already made in the past ; the fight against poverty and in favour of social cohesion and sustainable development .
Be that as it may , I still believe it is important not to miss out on this new opportunity as we did in the past .
Specifically , I feel two essential aspects here ought to form part of both the discussions and their conclusions .
Firstly , we must bear in mind that not only should association agreements between the EU and Latin America be comprehensive , ambitious and balanced , but it is of paramount importance that they make a contribution to people 's human rights and social and economic rights , and to mutual sustainable development and to the reduction of inequalities .
This means that , secondly , the current asymmetries between both regions ought to be taken into account , with a specific goal : not to move us closer to what some parties apparently wish to see , a European-style Americas Free Trade Area .
I would also call for the summit to take note of a call made in this House recently to combat the murder of women , feminicides , since I hold this as one of the world 's main challenges at the present time , including in the region concerned .
I also wish to call upon the organisers of the summit , in this case the Peruvian authorities , and more specifically the authorities in Lima , to guarantee participation by civil society .
Among other measures , this means that the Enlazando Alternativas civil organisations can obtain the space and facilities they need to arrange their work and debates within the framework of the summit , and actually open up dialogue which has been called for on so many occasions .
Lastly , in relation to Colombia , major measures and , I would say in some cases , even drastic measures , must be implemented in all urgency .
However , I am one of those who think - and there are many of us who think the same - that any action in this context must be taken as part of an attempt to find a negotiated end to armed conflict .
If this is not the case , I fear there can be no solution or positive results , especially for those whose immediate release we are calling for today , but also for groups of people who are now clearly under threat and in danger due to a large number of factors , not only the guerrilla factions , but other elements , too .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , Minister , the Fifth Summit certainly has a specific agenda to discuss social exclusion and poverty .
The reality of the situation , ladies and gentlemen , is that a popular response has now emerged to all the policies that have impoverished one of the richest regions on the planet .
The new stance of the people of Paraguay in their election of President Fernando Lugo is the clearest indication of this on the ground in opposition to neo-liberal policies that have impoverished the continent .
The EU must therefore take account of this reality .
This is why we feel there must be a new EU position with respect to the Republic of Cuba as part of that new reality .
Minister , in June we will have the opportunity to do away with the old policy of exceptional status that the EU has maintained with the Republic of Cuba , the only country in the world - in the entire world - with which the EU has maintained this exceptional status .
It is now true , with the bilateral state of affairs of the Member States ' relations with Cuba , that this position no longer exists .
It has been destroyed , and thus we have a magnificent opportunity to become part of the new reality now being introduced by Latin America and the Caribbean .
Thus we intend to support the joint resolution .
I feel that all the EP groups have reached a major compromise to secure this agreement .
We will doubtless maintain two amendments .
One of these concerns Colombia since , in accordance with the United Nations ' approach , we feel the conflict in Colombia must be solved by agreed negotiation , political negotiation .
There is no other solution to the conflict .
Here we should also state our opinion that civil society must be an active participant as an alternative to the Summit of Heads of State and Government in Lima .
We likewise intend to call on the Peruvian Government to do all in its power to allow civil society 's Enlazando Alternativas encounters to be held also , thereby offering criticism and alternatives .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , Commissioner Barroso was on a sales mission the other day in Ireland .
He regretted that President Bush had met 16 different Council presidents during his eight years and praised the Lisbon Treaty for establishing a joint president .
We are currently following the battles between candidates for each competing party , from state to state , on television channels until the American president is elected .
How will we choose our president ?
He will not be elected !
There is no election campaign to follow on TV ; there are no candidates for primary selection ; there are no individuals we can vote for .
In Europe , we are leaving it to 27 prime ministers to meet behind closed doors and select a politician from the past : a politician like Mr Blair , who cannot be elected any longer in his own country , or the former Austrian Chancellor , who was voted out of his job in Austria and who may be a candidate of compromise for Chancellor Merkel , Prime Minister Brown and President Sarkozy - the three European leaders who will elect the president for all of us .
They will meet privately behind closed doors and appoint the president whom we shall send to the US and Latin America .
Our non-elected president will go to China and Russia and criticise their failing democracy .
He - there are no plans for a she - can be accompanied by a Commission president , who is not elected either , and a foreign minister , also hand-picked by a super-qualified majority of 20 of the 27 prime ministers in the Lisbon Treaty Union .
Democracy was born in Europe , 2 500 years ago in Greece .
How can a Commission president praise a Treaty in which all the executive functions are hand-picked behind closed doors instead of being the result of the voters ' choice ?
Too many countries have too often sent to Brussels people they wanted to get rid of at home .
Instead of the lack of democracy in the Lisbon Treaty , we should opt for a Europe of democracies and a democratic Europe where the voters elect all the people who will serve the European citizens in negotiations with other countries .
Commissioner Barroso said in Cork that the Lisbon Treaty would bring the EU closer to its citizens .
No , it will not !
It will erase parliamentary democracy in 49 new areas and give us legislation and representation mainly by people we cannot elect or select .
We , the elected , can be heard in foreign policy , but no one needs to listen .
We , the elected , can send proposals , via amendments , to the non-elected in the Commission .
We , the elected , can vote for or against Commissioner Barroso , if he is reappointed by 20 of the 27 prime ministers .
It is not the recipe for democracy we shall represent in a non-democratic world .
Mr President , thank you for allowing the expression of both critical and constructive views for 29 years in this assembly - the least bad institution in the EU .
This may be my last debate with the Commission and the Council .
After 29 years I will leave this place to my successor , Hanne Dahl , and I will not be a Member during the coming asparagus season in May .
Bye , bye , asparagus , Alsace wine , Munster cheese and the monster travelling circus between Strasbourg and Brussels .
( SK ) The forthcoming European Union-Latin America and Caribbean Summit will be the fifth meeting of senior officials from both regions .
The Summit participants will focus on the priorities that require greater attention : fighting poverty , inequality and discrimination , sustainable development , climate change , environment and energy .
As Vice-Chairman of EuroLat , I would like to speak on the environment , and water issues in particular .
I have prepared a working paper for the meeting in Lima in which I analyse the present state of this important natural source in the European Union .
In the paper I also evaluate the European Union 's assistance to Latin America in relation to water issues , through a survey listing many projects within the scope of this help in areas such as water supply and sanitation , integrated management , research , monitoring and prevention of natural catastrophes .
In conclusion I emphasise the need for a global approach to this issue , through institutional and legislative changes and innovations in the water sector .
Access to clean water , and proper solutions to sewage water disposal and sanitation are important preconditions for public health .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , of course , I too would like to wish Mr Bonde personally all the best for the future .
Nonetheless , I think it is rather a pity that he felt compelled to repeat his frequent comments about the institutions during this important debate on Latin America , because the subject of Latin America is important in itself .
That is borne out by the figures quoted by Mr Schulz .
One third of the members of the United Nations will be meeting in Lima .
Between us , we represent a billion people and if we can reach agreement , we can have a positive influence on the world 's development .
In light of globalisation and the challenges we face , notably in relation to China or indeed other countries , it is essential for Latin America and Europe to work together .
Climate change will be an important topic , and the resolutions rightly state that it is the poor who will be hardest hit by climate change .
I can speak from experience here : I myself am involved in the work of a small NGO in Central America , and what the people suffered there as a result of Hurricane Mitch and Hurricane Stan is just a small foretaste of what we can expect if we do not get climate change under control .
It is good that we agree on so many points here .
There are some points , however , on which we do not yet agree .
Here in the House , we voted by a large majority in favour of the inclusion of aviation in emissions trading .
Vice-President Barrot is aware of this and has expressed himself in very critical terms on this subject .
The rest of the world has attempted to block this move via the ICAO , and unfortunately that includes Latin America .
I think this must be a topic for discussion in Lima .
If we want to work together to combat climate change , the Latin American countries must also play a constructive role .
Finally , may I say a few words about Cuba .
Mr Schulz has said that we should not pursue the same policy as Mr Bush , but we have never done that .
We have never applied the kind of economic sanctions - sanctions that affect the Cuban people - that America has imposed .
What we have done , in the past , is to make it a priority to ensure that our partners , the democratic opposition , feature in the dialogue .
Oswaldo Payá and the Damas de Blanco have been awarded the Sakharov Prize and we cannot simply revert to ' business as usual ' if the Damas de Blanco have still not been able to receive it and , as occurred only last weekend , some of them have been arrested again .
We should not forget about our partners in the dialogue with Cuba .
( ES ) Mr President , firstly I wish to express my support for our group chairman and spokesman on this issue , Martin Schulz .
In my opinion , EU relations with Latin America are our most important relations and have the greatest future potential , in view of the dimensions involved , as has already been said here , our shared values in the multilateral system of the UN , and the evolution of Latin America , which is showing economic growth and a reduction in poverty .
They are all democratic countries , with the exception of Cuba .
The Lima Summit is a good opportunity for the other 49 countries to call on the Cuban authorities to launch a peaceful process of transition to democracy through dialogue , and it is also a wonderful opportunity to establish a genuine strategic and sustainable alliance .
Lastly , to prevent us from falling into some rather typically European romantic temptations with respect to terrorism or organisations which , like the FARC , are now drug-dealing guerrillas , not the romantic paramilitary groups of the 70s , they could also be called upon to abandon violence once and for all , unilaterally and unconditionally .
Mr President , I think that human rights and women 's rights should also be a high priority in the relationship between the European Union and Latin America .
I would like to draw your attention to a specific situation in Nicaragua .
The ban on therapeutic abortion , which was legally imposed in 2006 , has already had tragic consequences on women 's health , with all victims of rape , such as a nine-year-old girl or a paraplegic twelve-year-old girl , obliged to go through with their pregnancies although their own lives are at stake .
Moreover , lawyers and human rights defenders are themselves under criminal investigation for incitement to commit crimes , merely because they challenge this inhuman legislation or because they defend doctors .
This is unacceptable and the European Union cannot afford to be silent .
Last week , the Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe adopted a resolution on access to safe and legal abortion in Europe , which means that we care about women in Europe .
But , if we want to convince our citizens that human rights are values that we genuinely treasure , we must prove that we do not apply double standards with regard to partners with whom agreements negotiations are ongoing .
Mr President , the strategic importance of the partnership between the European Union and Latin America and the Caribbean is a very important one .
Ever since the 1960s , the European Union , Latin America and the Caribbean region have been building closer political and economic ties .
The EU is now the largest donor of aid to these countries , and the EU is the second largest trading partner of Latin America and the Caribbean region .
A large element of these EU monies goes to projects which promote social cohesion and combat poverty .
Together as political democratic bodies we are working on a range of issues of mutual importance , including the following : addressing the increasing importance of energy and environmental issues , including climate change via the EU Rio Group , working together on many projects to promote conflict resolution , the rule of law , democracy , good governance and human rights , and putting in place a stronger level of third level education links between our two groupings .
Our political , economic and social links must continue to grow .
That said , however , we still have our clear differences .
I believe that the EU has made the right decision with regard to Brazilian beef imports , and that all food imports into the European Union in the future must accord at all times to the same exact standards which apply to the European farm and food sectors .
There must be a level playing pitch at all times with regard to the rules which apply to EU food imports - regardless of where they come from - and to EU-manufactured products .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have already stated on another occasion how strategically important it is for Europe to conclude a special partnership with Latin America , given our obvious sharing of principles , values , culture and interests .
In an effort to go beyond the numerous redundancies contained in the resolution , I believe it must be stressed at the forthcoming meeting that the two continents have an interest in stepping up trade in semi-processed high-tech goods , for the sake of both partners , without an asymmetrical relationship ultimately putting other possible trade partners at an advantage .
This will be useful for both continents , I believe , thanks in part to the fact that Europe 's approach undoubtedly demonstrates greater sensitivity towards sustainable development than for example those of the United States and China .
Europe 's considerable experience with social organisation and development can also contribute significant added value to bilateral trade .
Hence the need , in my opinion , to bolster our commitment to creating the EULAC .
( SL ) The events that will take place in Lima in April and May on the parliamentary and governmental line must strengthen the southern dimension of the transatlantic cooperation .
It is essential for the development of the strategic partnership between Latin America and the European Union that it takes place in a stable economic , social and political situation .
That is why I believe it is of the utmost importance that , given the numerous objectives that accompany our efforts , our efforts are directed primarily towards two crucial objectives .
Firstly , towards supporting sustainable economic growth - I am glad that for several years now Latin America has been experiencing economic growth ; secondly , towards strengthening regional and inter-regional cooperation .
I think that Latin America is now facing the same challenges as the European Union did during the first years of implementing the common methodology .
Thus , I am convinced that the European Union 's experience would actually be very applicable in their Continent 's attempts to achieve a new quality in regional and inter-regional cooperation , including the achievement of new dynamics .
I believe that the word dynamics is very appropriate - we know what difficulties Mercosur encountered in the beginning and , in fact , still does .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have had the opportunity to see the disappearing glaciers of Patagonia .
It is a process that is well known also in the European north , and I believe that there could be some unforeseeable developments and / or consequences of these accelerating events that would demand much more cooperation and considerable solidarity , and I hope that the summit meeting in Lima will also pay attention to such possible events .
( PT ) Mr President , the cooperation between the European Union and Latin America has been a success story .
It now has its own particular framework with the creation of the Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly which will give fresh impetus and incentive .
I would say that this is the first stage in the integration of Members of Parliament of Latin America and this House .
I hope that we in the European Parliament will shoulder this responsibility and adopt the Joint Declaration in question so that this can serve as a roadmap for the Summit of Heads of State and Government .
I do not have much time to set out my reasons which is why I will endorse what the Chairman of my political group , Martin Schulz , has said .
Although I fully agree with him , I must just make a couple of minor points : the first is that Europe has particular responsibility for solving the problems in Colombia .
Europe must fully commit to the Colombia issue and help to ensure stability in that country .
It must also quickly find a solution in order to normalise relations between the European Union and Cuba .
It makes no sense for the current situation to continue .
We must move forward in a spirit of progress and cooperation .
( ES ) Mr President , Latin America shares many principles and values with the European Union as a result of their close historical , human and cultural links .
You might even say we are natural partners .
The Lima Summit ought to enhance our bi-regional association with Latin America and the Caribbean in all areas , and encourage agreement to take on global challenges together , from climate change to drug trafficking or terrorism .
One of the most predominant problems in Latin America is social inequality .
We must assist the countries in this regard , and it is my hope that the Lima poverty eradication agenda is an ambitious one , although obviously there is no substitute for the political will of the governments concerned .
A key factor in the fight against poverty is economic growth , which is facilitated by private investment .
Investment , however , requires stable legal frameworks , and I would like to see an undertaking at the Lima Summit in relation to legal certainty .
Foreign investors must not be scared away from Latin America , for in this age of globalisation they will have no difficulty finding other regions for their investment .
To strengthen bi-regional relations , including economic and trade relations , the negotiations on the association agreements with the Central American countries and the Andean Community must be speeded up .
Hopefully the Lima Summit will also help to overcome the impasse in the negotiations with Mercosur .
The agreements with Chile and Mexico ought to push things forward .
While we are on the subject , I should say that consideration ought to be given to elevating Mexico 's association with the EU to strategic status .
With a view to forging closer human and educational links , ladies and gentlemen , I also hope that Lima encourages what is now known as the Area of Higher Education , the Common Area of Higher Education , and that we continue to make progress in terms of cooperation between universities and the recognition of studies and qualifications .
This Summit also ought to approve the Euro-Latin American Foundation , a type of think tank for the development of bi-regional relations , and give our relationship some much-needed visibility , since regrettably it is not well known in Europe .
Finally , I hope that the Summit will deliver a renewed commitment to pluralist democracy and respect for human rights in accordance with the profound concept of human dignity , which we support on both sides of the Atlantic .
The idea of the political prisoner , Mr President , must be totally eliminated in Latin America , and in Cuba , and violence against dissidents must be stamped out .
( PL ) Mr President , European Union-Latin America and Caribbean summits play a significant role in defining and strengthening the direction of the strategic partnership between our regions .
The forthcoming Lima Summit provides a further opportunity to deepen dialogue on matters of crucial importance to both areas .
I am therefore pleased to note that the main focus of the Summit will be on issues that are vital in terms of ensuring the ongoing well-being of our societies and contributing to stable economic growth .
On the one hand , the Summit will deal with issues pertaining to social cohesion , notably poverty , inequality , discrimination and social exclusion .
I should like to point out that according to estimates by the UN Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean in 2007 , 36.5 % of the population of the region is living in poverty , whilst 13.5 % is living in extreme poverty .
The figures have improved in recent years , but the problem still calls for commitment from many partners : Member States of the European Union are numbered among the latter .
On the other hand , issues pertaining to sustainable development , environmental protection , climate change and energy represent challenges that are having an increasing impact on the way both continents function .
Unquestionably , therefore , there is a need to establish common priorities and ways of working together in order to respond effectively to the forthcoming changes .
Reconciling economic growth with the principles of sustainable development is particularly important .
This is a very difficult challenge indeed , particularly in the case of developing economies and of those undergoing change .
It should also be borne in mind that cooperation between the EU and Latin America and the Caribbean transcends the two main areas to be dealt with at the Lima Summit .
I should like to point out too that the second ordinary session of the European-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly is to be held in Lima on the eve of the Summit .
The European Parliament 's involvement will certainly strengthen the strategic partnership between our regions .
Accordingly , I await the results and final declaration of the Fifth European Union-Latin America and Caribbean Summit with great interest .
( DE ) Mr President , I welcome the fact that the governments will enter into dialogue on key issues at the European Union-Latin America and Caribbean Summit .
Małgorzata Handzlik has just made the point that it is very important that the parliaments should also be increasingly involved in this intercontinental dialogue and contribute to the process .
In my view , it is especially important that there should be stronger contacts between Europeans and the people of South or Latin America and the Caribbean .
It is not only business people and tourists but young people , above all , who have an important role to play .
We need them if we are genuinely to establish better relations .
In the European Union , we have gained valuable experience with student exchange programmes among the Member States , and this system should now be intensified in our relations with Latin America and the Caribbean as well .
We need young people so that we can find viable and sustainable solutions in future to many of the important issues we face .
( ES ) Mr President , Latin America is a changing continent .
Changes are occurring on a constant basis , and specifically there have been two major changes in recent months or weeks or days .
The first is Cuba 's policy in terms of how it treats its citizens from an economic and a social perspective ; the second change has been brought about by the elections in Paraguay , which would seem to promise a completely different government .
In view of these situations and these changes , how have the Council and Commission reacted to take account of these changes and the possibility of influencing these two countries ?
( PL ) Mr President , the countries of Latin America have undertaken far-reaching pension reforms with significant involvement by the World Bank .
Europe 's demographic crisis suggests that we should consider whether we are satisfied with legal provisions that promise a relatively good deal despite uncertainty as to the existence of sufficient financial backing to enable those promises to be met .
In view of the different experiences of both continents in this regard , it may be worth working together as we consider how to deal with the problem .
We need to find a way of enabling people of an advanced age to lead a dignified life , even though they are often in poor health and therefore unable to continue working despite the economic impact of the demographic crisis .
( PT ) The parliaments of Latin America and Europe are fundamental to the success of this Summit .
They are also fundamental to achieving the two main objectives , which are the integration of Latin America and cooperation between the European Union and Latin America , based on the values defended in this House and in particular on those highlighted by the Chairman of my political group .
However , Mr President , I must point out another aspect , which is that this cooperation and its effectiveness are important not only for the two continents of Latin America and Europe but also , due to the values defended by these two groups throughout the world , for the global context .
Through this cooperation , those results not achieved through the Millennium Development Goals , through multilateralism and through the pursuit of those values guiding European integration and the European project can be achieved throughout the world .
It is this global aspect that in my view justifies a greater commitment from us all , in particular the parliaments .
( RO ) The historical , social and political conditions in Latin America have put women in a doubly difficult position : on the one hand , they are mostly responsible for the economic production , especially in the rural environment .
On the other hand , they are the favourite victims of forced relocation and dispossession , human trafficking , violence , sexual exploitation and public control over their reproductive capacities .
Under these conditions , taking a gender approach is not only desirable but necessary .
For this reason , we request your support for an oral amendment that would support the strengthening of women 's positions and respect for their rights .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) I have listened very carefully to the debate on the preparations for the EU-LAC Summit , and I believe that it will be of great help for the preparation and conduct of the summit meeting .
Mr Salafranca said that the cooperation between the European Union and Latin American and Caribbean countries must move from words to actions .
I could not agree more ; however , I would add that this is actually happening .
The EU-LAC summit meetings are not just events where eloquent statements are made and grand designs are announced but never materialise .
These meetings are events where commitments are made that do actually come true .
In this connection I should like to mention several points .
The report on bi-regional cooperation between the European Union and the Latin American and Caribbean countries , which the joint presidency presented at the previous , fourth summit meeting in Vienna , is proof of the substantial progress which has been achieved so far in the actual implementation of the commitments made .
I should also like to mention almost 400 bi-regional measures for the implementation of the commitments made in Guadalajara , as well as the new list that has been prepared concerning the implementation of commitments made at the Vienna Summit in 2006 .
We hope that the Lima Summit will achieve a further step towards the acceptance and implementation of commitments undertaken .


A number of Members of the European Parliament , amongst others Mr Schulz , Mr Meyer-Pleite , Mr Liese , Mr dos Santos and several others , regretfully I cannot mention them all , have mentioned the Cuban issue .
I should like to say that the Lima Summit will not be the EU-Cuba Summit , neither will it be a summit on Cuba .
However , as so many opinions have been voiced , I should like to make just a couple of important points .
For the time being the policy of the European Union , and that of the EU Council and the EU Presidency , towards Cuba is being regulated by the following documents : the common platform of the European Union for 2006 , and the General Affairs and External Relations Council 's conclusions last year .
The two documents represent the basic guidelines for all the Member States and their attitude to Cuba , and also for their talks on Cuba with third countries .
I should like to add that the core of the European Union 's policy toward Cuba is human rights .
The session of the General Affairs and External Relations Council in June will be another opportunity to discuss Cuba .
I should like to say that the Slovenian Presidency is making efforts for a new common platform to be adopted at this session .
We hope that our efforts will be successful .
However , as I mentioned earlier , this will not be a subject of discussion at the Lima Summit in May , which will be a meeting between the EU and the Latin American and Caribbean countries as a whole .
In conclusion , I should like to say that it is the wish of the Slovenian Presidency that the summit meeting provide a further impetus , or to paraphrase Mr dos Santos , would generate new dynamism in the relationship between the European Union and Latin America and the Caribbean , and I am convinced that with debates such as this one the European Parliament can contribute to the achievement of this aim .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , Mr Salafranca , I can say that the Commission has put every possible effort into making this Summit a real success .
As Mr Schulz has pointed out , and the Minister has just said , Lima really has to be an opportunity to give a strong impetus to relations between Latin America and Europe .
As many of you , including Mr Schulz , have stressed , we have many shared values .
There is joint support for multilateralism and there is an undoubted need for close cooperation between the European Union and the Latin American countries if we want our influence to be felt in an improved global organisation .
If we want reforms in the major international institutions , we shall only achieve that through a fairly far-reaching agreement between Latin America and the European Union .
There is no other region in the world with which we are working as closely as Latin America at a multilateral level .
Mr President , I should now like to reply briefly to a few questions .
The first relates to the hostages .
Obviously the Commission has systematically supported all efforts to reach a humanitarian agreement on the release of all hostages .
The Commission is , of course , very sensitive to the speeches that have raised this problem .
I should like to say a word about Cuba .
Certainly , as the Minister has said , Cuba will not be the central issue at this Lima meeting , but all the same I want to say that the policy of the European Union is one of constructive engagement .
We are not in favour of a policy of isolation or sanctions .
Our Commissioner , Louis Michel , was in Cuba recently .
We are prepared to cooperate with Cuba on areas of common interest , but obviously our dialogue with Cuba includes the human rights issue .
We also want to make progress on the association agreements .
We intend to make progress with Mercosur .
We also want to reach a conclusion in 2009 with the Andean Community .
I am going to talk about a few points that have been raised in this very interesting debate .
The point raised by Madame Belohorská , access to water , is very important and the issue has been included in the draft statement for the Lima Summit .
The Commission is backing water access projects and programmes in several countries .
Participation by civil society has also been mentioned .
Civil society will be organising two events in preparation for the Lima Summit : the organised civil society conference , ESOSOC , and the conference of NGOs , non-organised societies .
The Commission has provided financial backing for those conferences and a report will be presented on them at the Lima Summit .
The question of food prices has been raised and it is true that the rise in food prices will certainly affect Latin America , where over a third of the population is already living in poverty .
In some countries , such as El Salvador , people are heavily dependent on food .
The increased food prices will obviously have a profound effect on a population that is already very vulnerable .
This issue is of course linked to the strategy on biofuels .
That is a delicate issue , which it will certainly be worth discussing .
The position of women in Latin America has been mentioned .
The Commission is extremely worried about the situation in Latin America , especially in Mexico and Guatemala .
We are fully aware of the position and are trying to combat the problem .
We are grateful to the European Parliament for its work on the subject .
My replies are not comprehensive , but the debate has been very useful and it will certainly add clarification to the Lima Summit .
The Summit will enable us to step up the dialogue with the region and coordinate our efforts better on important international deadlines , especially for the environment .
It is also an opportunity for us to see how we can support democratic responses to the structural problems inherent in social cohesion .
Certainly the European institutions need to coordinate their efforts to differentiate their approach , to adapt it to the problems of each of the states in the region .
Finally , I should like to welcome the work of EuroLat .
EuroLat , the Euro-Latin American Parliamentary Assembly , was set up after the 2006 Vienna Summit .
It has already made a valuable contribution to cooperation with the region , whilst strengthening the democratic will on both sides .
In that connection , we are sure that , with the special links it has with the region through EuroLat , the European Parliament will act decisively in ensuring that the association between the European Union and the countries in the region plays an increasingly important strategic role .
Once again I should like to thank all the Members who have spoken and provided clarification in preparation for the Lima Summit .
To conclude the debate I have received six motions for a resolution pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 24 April 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( HU ) It is no accident that the Latin American rain forests are called the lungs of the world .
Our climate and with it our future depends on how well we retain the original extent of these life-giving rain forests in Brazil , Columbia , Ecuador , Venezuela and other South American countries , along with their biodiversity and richness of fauna and flora .
It is therefore important that environmental protection and a proper climate policy are given heightened emphasis in our cooperation between the European Union and the Latin American countries .
The voracious greed for profit , the clearing of the rain forests and the planting of crops for biofuels are contrary to the fundamental interests of humanity .
We must therefore motivate our Latin American friends to call an end to these destructive actions .
The best way to protect these original natural assets , if we are not to upset the indigenous communities , is to leave the people in ownership of their land and leave them to continue their own way of life .
An essential of our development and support policy must be to mutually uphold the requirements for environmental protection .
Negotiations between the European Union and the United States with regard to visa exemptions ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on negotiations between the European Union and the United States with regard to visa exemptions .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) I should like to briefly inform you of the progress of the visa waiver talks and the talks on ESTA .
To begin with , I should like to say that , for the European Union , visa policy is an extremely important issue and that , ever since new Member States joined the European Union , both the Commission and all the presidencies have made huge efforts so that all countries and citizens would have to meet the same conditions for entry into the United States of America , and so that each of them would be included in the visa waiver programme .
The abolition of visas would , of course , mean that all the citizens of the European Union are equal .
This year the USA have started with certain procedures , and have opened their doors for the visa waiver programme .
They began with exclusively bilateral talks , and this is where some misapprehensions were encountered .
Some intensive discussions were held which we , the Presidency , in conjunction with the Commission , clarified at the beginning of this year , and following a number of meetings a twin-track cooperation system in this area was agreed .
This approach was also confirmed at the Trio 's EU-USA meeting held in Slovenia on 12 March .
A twin-track system means that the Commission is to be given a mandate to negotiate and to reach an agreement with the United States of America in connection with matters concerning the European Union , and at the same time all the countries can hold talks at a bilateral level concerning matters which fall within the competency of the Member States .
On 18 April , at its latest session , the Justice and Internal Affairs Council also voted in favour of granting the Commission a mandate , so that now the Commission too can begin with such talks .
We hope that this twin-track cooperation will be transparent .
Some Member States have already commenced with preliminary bilateral talks as to how the agreements should look , although so far nothing has been put in writing .
We expect that both the Member States and the Commission will be transparent , so that we can then act at that level .
In touching upon the subject of electronic travel authorisation , I must mention that we have had several discussions in this respect .
Jointly with the Commission and the American side we have held so-called exploratory talks .
From the data which have so far been available , it is evident that at present the United States of America will not be requesting any additional information apart from the data which passengers already voluntarily provide on flights to the United States of America when filling in the I-94 form , which is green for those who have a visa system .
This is extremely important .
In the current talks we have also established , and it has been agreed , that such controls will be free of charge and , once issued , the authorisation would be valid for two years .
In fact , once this system is in place the citizens would send their details via the Internet to the United States authorities , which would then process them in the same way in the future as they do now .
There is also another topic which deserves particular mention , namely the talks with the United States of America in connection with a high level team of experts as regards the protection of personal data .
So far we have managed to agree on twelve principles and we have established that they are identical .
One principle is still open .
I hope that by the end of June we shall reach a point where we shall conclude that it is possible to continue the discussions and to provide the team with a different mandate , in order to commence preparations for talks on the possibility of reaching a framework agreement with the United States of America in this area .
Why do we need this framework agreement ?
Firstly , we wish to keep in line with the resolutions that the European Parliament adopted in December last year , whereby it was particularly expressed that such an agreement would be desirable .
Of course , we believe that the opportunity to have negotiations and the opportunity of reaching agreement under such an umbrella agreement are possible only if in line with the principles and once the Lisbon Treaty has been adopted , which means jointly with Parliament , with the Council and with the Commission .
Only a consensus between all three bodies will enable us to achieve common principles and the common principles of action .
At the same time , of course , once we have such an umbrella agreement , we shall continue individually to decide on any exchange of information on a case-by-case basis .
This agreement will not be able to cover everything that follows .
That is to say , the current situation is such that , for every agreement , these principles are repeatedly raised and repeatedly negotiated at all negotiations .
If we had such common principles providing us with a basis , the concrete agreements and treaties would , of course , be in a much better position .
Mr President , this is all I briefly wanted to say .

Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Minister , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union-United States ' justice , freedom and security ' ministerial Troika , in which Mr Mate and Vice-President Frattini took part in March , was an excellent opportunity to discuss certain important issues with our American counterparts .
We have taken a step in the right direction by adopting the ministerial declaration on the approach to be adopted for the introduction of new American legislation on visa exemption .
Under that legislation , security agreements have to be signed with countries that are or will be members of the Visa Waiver Programme .
The United States has noted the two-prong approach required in the case of the European Union , in which competences in that area are divided between the Community and the Member States .
Matters of national competence will be discussed with the national authorities ; matters that are a Union responsibility will be discussed with the European authorities .
The American negotiators have also endorsed the joint objective of secure travel between the European Union and the United States , without a visa , as soon as possible .
To achieve that objective , the Commission has proposed a mandate for the Council that would allow it to open negotiations with the United States .
I am grateful to Mr Mate , who chaired the Justice and Home Affairs Council on 18 April , because thanks to a very wide consensus the Council was prepared to assign that mandate to the Commission .
That is proof of our joint intention to work and proceed in a unified fashion , which is obviously more efficient .
The Commission will now be opening negotiations as soon as possible .
We have already been in touch with the American authorities .
We need to make rapid progress with the United States on the conditions for the Visa Waiver Programme , which is a Community competence .
At the same time we have to safeguard the rights and freedoms of our citizens , to ensure access for Member States as quickly as possible .
We intend to take particular care that any agreement between the Community and the United States is based on the principle of reciprocity , on respect for fundamental rights and individual freedoms , including data protection and the right to a private life .
As Mr Mate has just said , we shall also be discussing the Electronic System for Travel Authorisation in the negotiations .
Under the Visa Waiver Programme , passengers travelling to the United States by air or sea will have to answer certain questions online before departure .
They will then be issued with an electronic travel authorisation .
I should point out that the system is already operating between the European Union and Australia .
The United States has several times supplied us with information on the arrangements for operating the Electronic System for Travel Authorisation ( ESTA ) , notably at our video-conference with Mr Chertoff , the Secretary of Homeland Security .
Obviously further clarification is required and Mr Mate and I will discuss these matters again with Mr Chertoff when he comes to Brussels in mid-May .
We have to maintain solidarity between the Member States on this whole issue .
The two-prong , double track approach will only work efficiently if the states are totally transparent in their negotiations with the United States .
The United States should shortly be submitting the arrangements for implementation of the memoranda of understanding with Member States that have signed them , because these implementing agreements are clearly essential and it will be our responsibility to evaluate them .
Finally , in close association with the Presidency , the Commission will be pursuing its longstanding dialogue with the United States .
Relations between the European Union and the United States in that area require a confident and essential partnership .
The security of our citizens calls for joint action that safeguards fundamental rights .
In my view , adopting the negotiating mandate is the best possible compromise .
It allows the Member States discretion to negotiate with the United States on matters that are their prerogative , such as cooperation and exchanges of information between intelligence services , but it is of course up to us to ensure that travel to the United States is possible for all citizens of the Union .
The extension of the Visa Waiver Programme has been criticised in the United States Congress , but I think that , with support from the European Parliament and the Minister , we shall be able to uphold the position of the European Union , which wants to stand firm on equal treatment for all its citizens .
That is what I can tell Parliament this morning .
I shall now listen carefully to your speeches , which will provide clarification for the forthcoming negotiations .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I warmly welcome the initiative taken by the Council and by the Commission , whereby clear and transparent framework principles will be established concerning bilateral agreements on visa-free travel between Member States of the Union and the United States .
At the start of this year , certain impatient Member Sates began negotiating with the United States independently , without the Union 's agreement .
Other countries chose to wait for principles to be regulated within the framework of the Union , as they understood that they would be in a stronger position if they could count on the backing of the entire European Union .
A strong message has been sent to the United States today , making it clear that pressure must not be put on individual Member States to infringe Community principles .
This also applies to sensitive issues outside the remit of Union arrangements , such as the publication of data on passenger movements .
What is significant is that it is now possible for individual Member States to negotiate separately with the United States .
These are the very countries that are most motivated to secure visa-free travel for their citizens .
These countries must , however , keep in mind the position worked out together and based on the principle of reciprocity , and also the requirement to keep the Commission informed of the progress of negotiations .
Essentially , the ball is now in the United States ' court .
I call on the United States to carefully consider the criteria on the basis of which visas are granted to citizens from the eastern part of the European Union .
Is it really the case that a large proportion of the latter are potential illegal immigrants who will not leave the United States upon expiry of their visa ?
That is actually the reason why the vast majority of visa applications are refused , not the potential threat to security .
After all , Eastern Europe is hardly a spawning ground for fundamentalist Islamic terrorist groups .
In the past , citizens of Eastern Europe were tempted to reside in the United States illegally for financial reasons .
The situation has now changed dramatically .
Eastern Europeans have been able to work legally in the old Europe from the time of accession to the Union .
They can work there without breaking the law and without fear of the immigration services .
In view of these changes , the United States ' negative attitude is increasingly difficult for those citizens to understand .
The stance adopted by the United States is also detrimental to its image .
That is why it is also in the interest of the United States to draw negotiations to a close quickly and ensure that the visa requirement for Union citizens is consigned to history .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to welcome the President of the Council and the Commissioner .
As a Group we welcome the Council 's approval of a negotiating mandate which will at last enable the Commission to negotiate the inclusion of all Member States - I repeat all Member States - in the new Visa Waiver Program as amended by the US Congress last year .
We wish at the same time to express our regret that the Washington Administration decided to launch bilateral negotiations with the countries having recently acceded to the European Union : that decision cannot be endorsed on grounds of either merit or method .
Our Group believes the United States to be an essential partner in the fight against terrorism , but at the same time we think that the US Administration must respect the political subjectivity and powers of the European Union , as enshrined in our Treaties .
I would venture to suggest , Commissioner , that the same reminder be made to the EU Member States : they are the interpreters and custodians of this European subjectivity .
It is worth recalling , as you have done , that visa policy , like our policy on asylum and combating illegal immigration , is the responsibility of the European Community .
Importantly , the Council has drawn red lines around the negotiating mandate , to the effect that no bilateral agreement may be negotiated between a Member State and the United States on matters falling under EU competence , especially where such agreements allow the US authorities access to European Union databases .
We now call on the Commission to work towards an agreement , an overall solution , granting a visa exemption for citizens of all European countries on the basis of equal dignity and above all reciprocity .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , this mandate is very welcome and we shall await the results .
I am also wondering why this was not achieved in previous years and why it is achievable now .
Let us hope that it can be achieved .
I also welcome the statement by Mr Mate that exemption from the visa requirement must apply to all citizens of the European Union and not all Member States , and that is quite a difference .
In that connection , I should also like to draw attention to the ban on entry into the United States by people with HIV .
I hope you will take a firm stand on the removal of that entry ban .
I should also like to ask your opinion of the statements by Mr Chertoff in the Washington Post this week that exemption from the visa requirement will be conditional upon fingerprinting by airlines .
That is a completely new factor and I should like to know your opinion of it .
Then we come to the PNR .
If the American PNR requirements go further than is now set out in the EU-US agreement , which in any case has not yet been ratified , does that mean that the agreement immediately lapses ?
On that point , we need to know what is in the implementing agreements and I really wonder why we have no information on that so far .
I find that a strange situation .
Then we come to the Electronic System of Travel Authorisation and the protection of personal data .
I am really not entirely reassured that that has been properly organised .
The 12 principles we have seen in the meantime are of course good .
However , just as with the rules in the third pillar , the framework decision for the European Union itself , the problem lies not in the principles , but in the long list of exceptions to them .
On that point I want guarantees , not just principles .
I also want to know how that will work in practice before we agree just to hand over the data on everyone to other countries .
Then there is the question of democratic legitimacy .
How are you going to ensure democratic scrutiny ?
I find the proposal of a committee of experts neither democratic nor transparent .
To my mind , this is a typical case for parliamentary scrutiny .
Finally , I hope that the Commission and the Council have learned their lesson , that we as a European Union are far stronger if we are united and not divided , and if , furthermore , we arrange matters of this kind openly with the parliamentary support of the European Parliament .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I should like to thank the Commission very much for all its efforts to ensure equal treatment for all European Union citizens at the US border .
I believe , however , that the negotiations concerning lifting the requirement for US visas provide a clear indication of the European Union 's limitations .
Despite full support for the European Commission , notably on the part of the countries that acceded to the Union in 2004 and 2007 , the talks have collapsed .
The United States is to sign bilateral visa agreements with each Member State in turn , once the country concerned complies only and exclusively with the criteria of US legislation in that regard .
Evidently , it is easy for the Commission to restrict the competences of the Member States .
Sometimes this is achieved by way of treaties , and at other times by precedent .
It is much harder to achieve success in relations with third countries .
Despite such significant support for the Commission 's right to exclusive representation , certain Member States opted for individual negotiations .
My country is not one of them , but I have to say that I am not at all surprised that they acted as they did .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , representatives of the Commission and the Council , you have neither said enough to us nor have you convinced for the European Parliament .
The USA 's choice to sign separate agreements on an issue of Community jurisdiction is an insult to the EU and should be described as such .
The decision by the Czech Republic to sign such an agreement is an infringement of Community jurisdiction .
Nobody has the right to give personal data on European citizens to the Americans , or to anyone else , without verification by the EU and the European Parliament .
This goes beyond the contents of the PNR .
Members of the Council , I ask you therefore to note that not merely the new Member States are involved .
Although Greece was one of the first 15 Member States of the EU , Greek citizens still need a visa to travel to the USA .
We must stop this , but by means of a single approach not infringing the personal data protection of citizens .
Please include this in your final position .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , in Parliament I represent citizens of the Czech Republic , who were just mentioned .
The Czech Republic initiated the bilateral negotiations by some Member States on US visas .
I strongly resent the European Commission 's unjustified criticism of my country 's foreign policy .
The Commission has arrogantly overstepped its factual competences and suppressed the principle of subsidiarity and equality of the members of the Union .
Let me also remind you that the bilateral visa negotiations were simply the Czech Republic 's reaction to the Commission 's complete lack of results in the matter of visa exemptions for the new Member States .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Commission should realise that although it is an executive body of a high standing , there are many areas where it has to respect the political will of Parliament and the individual Member States .
Finally , if the European Commission wishes to be an arbiter of the Union 's airline safety in the context of US visas , it should not reprimand those countries that are making efforts , through information exchange , to spoil the terrorists ' intentions .
On the contrary , it should criticise those countries that negotiate , without scruples , with representatives of Libya or Hamas among others .
( PT ) Mr President , Minister Mate , Vice-President Barrot , ladies and gentlemen , on 10 March I expressed in this House my fears on this issue .
I felt then and I still feel that the United States has opted for a divide and conquer strategy by proposing bilateral agreements within its Visa Waiver Program .
Unfortunately , various Member States have been unable to resist the temptation of trying to make quicker progress , forgetting that the common visa policy is undoubtedly an area of Community competence , just as they are obliged to respect the principle of solidarity enshrined in the Treaty .
When these Member States joined the European Union , they undertook to respect the entire Community acquis , having agreed to share their sovereignty on common issues where a European approach should prevail .
The signature of these bilateral agreements has therefore set a precedent which is totally contrary to the spirit on which European integration is based .
I congratulate the Council on the negotiating mandate given to the Commission on 18 April .
We must prevent this process from weakening the European negotiating position .
In March I argued that it would have been better to opt for a freeze on bilateral agreements until the conclusion of the negotiations between the Commission and the United States .
I call on the Commission and Commissioner Barrot not to compromise on such an issue of common interest .
I call on them to keep a close watch on the initiatives of each Member State , not to hesitate in resorting to the Court of Justice of the European Communities if Community law is breached and , in particular , to keep this Parliament informed of developments in this situation and the level of solidarity , or lack thereof , demonstrated by the various Member States .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in Office of the Council , we welcome the fact that the Council has finally given the European Commission a mandate to negotiate with the United States on the inclusion in the Visa Waiver Programme of the 12 countries that were currently excluded .
It is also a good sign that , in parallel to these negotiations , negotiations are being opened on the Electronic System of Travel Authorisation and the exchange of data .
However , will this mandate really make it possible to call a halt to bilateral negotiations , in favour of a truly European approach ?
Let us hope so .
I would remind you again that no bilateral negotiations are acceptable on visa exemption and any negotiation of exchanges of data with the United States , such as PNR , and that only agreements at European Union level can be considered .
Does this negotiating mandate also provide for a general agreement on personal data protection ?
That is what I want to ask , because the American legislation still excludes Europeans and does not protect them .
Finally , I should like to point out that the SIS and VIS were set up for specific purposes and that opening up access to the data in those systems to third countries would breach the principles of purpose and proportionality .
We are thus relying on you .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have a few brief observations .
First of all , I welcome the efforts by the Commission President and the Member States leading to the approval of a proper negotiating mandate on 18 April .
This issue had been dealt with in a disorganised manner and , I would say , disastrously managed recently , and this is good news for all citizens of Europe .
However , I should like to mention two points that the Commissioner has already raised .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is not right that the implementing agreements negotiated between certain Member States and the United States should at the moment be completely non-transparent .
That might not be surprising for the United States , but it is unacceptable for the Member States .
I am addressing my remarks particularly to the Czech Republic , which will shortly be taking over the Presidency of the Union and should be setting an example .
Although the negotiating mandate lays down very clear rules on data protection , I still believe that , on this sensitive issue , only a truly transatlantic agreement , and not just the setting of 12 principles , a truly transatlantic agreement , ideally , in my view , overseen by a joint data protection authority , can meet the requirements of both parties , and ours in particular .
( LV ) Thank you , Mr President .
I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude to the European Commission for representing the interests of the new Member States in the talks with the United States on the introduction of a visa waiver programme .
The Commission has consistently kept this issue on its agenda .
Following the talks between the European Union and the United States in March we can conclude with satisfaction that there has been success in defusing possible conflict situations with individual Member States beginning bilateral talks with the United States on the introduction of visa waiver programmes .
As we know , the United States maintained the position that it would remove visa systems only in bilateral talks with each individual Member State .
Therefore , we should welcome the results of the March summit between the European Union and the United States , in which agreement was reached on the twin-track approach .
In the current situation this should be regarded as an ideal solution , which defuses potential conflicting policies .
The Member States that are currently in the process of talks with the United States concerning the introduction of visa waiver programmes have a great deal of interest in the agreement reached with the United States in the March summit concerning the successful implementation , by June this year , of the electronic travel authorisation system and the coordination of its introduction with the planned EU system .
For these Member States , any delay would mean dragging out the introduction of visa waiver programmes with the United States . Thank you .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , my voters in the Czech Republic also wonder whether the amount of personal data and information required by the US for the proclaimed fight against terrorism in order to grant a visa is acceptable .
At the same time I would like to remind you that the European Union has not been sufficiently active in advocating the rightful interests of its new Member States regarding US visa exemptions .
The fear of complicating visa relations for the old Member States of the Union simply played into the hands of Czech officials looking after their own interests .
What is more , although the government in Prague denies this , it is a rather striking coincidence that the US are willing to waive visas for our citizens just when it is trying to get the Czechs ' approval to station the anti-missile radar base in the country .
Although it is clear that this is a pure coincidence and that the goodwill of the Czech Government is rewarded with reciprocal gestures from the US , suspicion of political trading in the country 's sovereignty logically follows .
( NL ) Mr President , this whole debate about visa exemptions between the United States and the European Union is gradually starting to seem like a hallucination .
A number of new Member States have managed to sign bilateral agreements with the United States .
For them it was quicker and obviously easier than waiting for a general agreement with the European Union as a whole .
America is attaching a number of conditions to visa exemption as part of the fight against terrorism .
Where is the problem ?
The Eurofederalists say that signing visa agreements is a European competence .
In the previous debate on that subject , a member of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats said that what is called European solidarity must take precedence and that that just has to be explained to the people of the Member States concerned who are the victims .
Ideology apparently has to take precedence over practicality .
It is the responsibility of the Member States and it must remain the responsibility of the Member States to decide for themselves who enters their territory and under what conditions , and the visa policy is an essential part of that .
- ( MT ) Thank you , Mr President .
The removal of the travel visa to the United States is a very important priority for our citizens and we are mistaken if we think that it is not .
It is an important priority , as travelling without a visa is easier and also cheaper - for all travellers .
It is also important because we can no longer maintain the unjust situation where half of the countries of the European Union do not require a visa to travel to the United States while the other half do .
You have to be in the position of needing a visa to go to the United States to appreciate just how important its removal is .
Thus , every effort , from whatever direction , to remove visas is good , positive and to be supported , not criticised .
What is important is not who manages to remove the visa for the 12 countries that still require it .
What is important is that it is removed .
Thus the childish games between the Commission and the Member States over who has competence to negotiate with the United States should end .
Aside from legalese there is one reality - the reality that the United States has old and strong bilateral ties with the Member States and it is obvious that discussions will be held with them directly .
On the other hand it is clear that the Commission has a role - yes , it has a role to continue to increase pressure in the right direction .
At the same time , however , we all know that the United States has so far preferred to speak to individual countries , and in fact the Commission has not yet managed on its own .
Thus , it is important that we do not keep arguing about who has the right to negotiate , because that way we will lose and be divided instead of being strengthened .
That is why I am in favour of a twin-track approach ; what is important is that we support one another so that the visa is removed , removed without delay and removed for all EU citizens .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , you have presented us with the infamous Twin-Track Visa Waiver Program .
According to it , the USA is to make visa exemption a privilege and will ratify the special requirements to be imposed on Greece and the new Member States , which will have to provide , with a European stamp of approval , of course , even more sensitive passenger data than universally required in theory by the PNR .
There will even be immediate access to citizens ' criminal records .
Your answer is that this is not a matter of Community competence and that each Member State should act as it wishes .
In other words , you are leaving half the Member States exposed to brutal threats for the surrender of personal data , which the USA does not require from the other half of Member States .
In any case , this has been said more plausibly but also more cynically by Mr Rosenzweig , the US Assistant Secretary involved .
He said in the US Senate on 28 February :
' The eight aspirant countries [ ... ] have strong incentives to commit to implementing the full suite of security standards ' .
In other words , these are countries are so desperate for visas that we can force them to accept anything .
Commissioner , according to the letter and spirit of Europe 's Common Visa Policy , however , the current visa or non-visa status does not merely have to be given to everyone ; all citizens have a right to it under the same terms .
The USA has been politically strong enough to remove the Common European Policy .
Unfortunately , at the Council and the Commission you have not had the political will to stop them .
( NL ) Mr President , when it comes to the Visa Waiver Programme , the statements are quite honestly not reassuring and a few enquiries had already confirmed that assumption .
Earlier versions of the Commission mandate have been further cut down .
In short , a poor result .
In any event six Member States , and possibly now Malta as well , have signed memoranda of understanding with the Americans .
The implementing provisions are not yet known and so the lines of the national policy are not at all clear .
I have the following question about this , together with the meagre mandate for the Commission : why do Member States really belong to the European Union ?
Is there still such a thing as Community spirit ?
We can only stand up to the Americans if the 27 Member States act in the same way .
We , as a Union , need to send a strong signal to the other side of the Atlantic .
We must have the courage to take advantage of our strong negotiating position .
With all due respect , I find the behaviour of some Member States on this point unacceptable .
The argument that the Commission has made too little progress in the last few years for the Member States concerned sounds all very well , but it is disproportionate when it comes to the behaviour that has been demonstrated .
It is high time to act for ourselves and not just to leave it to the United States .
This way , the EU is frankly making itself completely ridiculous .
( PL ) Mr President , I should like to express my thanks to the European Commission and in particular to Commissioner Frattini who unfortunately cannot be with us today .
Commissioner Frattini made it abundantly clear in the course of negotiations that visa issues are the competence of Brussels and that those countries negotiating with the United States are breaking the Union 's solidarity .
To date , 14 of the richest Member States of the Union together with Slovenia have availed themselves of this privilege , but all Member States of the Union are hoping to do likewise , notably those located in the part of Europe I hail from .
Unanimity is a sine qua non for the final settlement of visa issues to the advantage of all Member States of the European Union .
The best approach seems to be joint action through a single representative , namely Commissioner Frattini .
The latter has demonstrated his willingness to fight for equal treatment for all Union citizens .
This approach also shows that the Union is capable of speaking with a single voice .
It is nonetheless unfortunate that certain countries have been prepared to take independent decisions on this matter and to sign individual visa memoranda with the United States .
( EL ) Mr President , the signing of an agreement with the USA and a single country over the Visa Waver Program ( VWP ) will prove to be fraught with danger .
It will allow the US to access the EU 's databases containing travellers ' personal details , taxation data and even criminal records .
Member States ought to be particularly careful here , because matters of Community jurisdiction are affected , such as the Schengen Treaty and the Common European Visa Policy .
This is why I totally oppose the Czech Republic 's initiative to sign a bilateral Memorandum of Understanding ( MoU ) with the US .
Other countries have followed the example of the Czech Republic : Memoranda of Understanding ( MoUs ) have already been signed by Estonia , Latvia , Hungary , Slovakia and Malta .
I find the explanations and statements of the Commissioner unsatisfactory : he failed to answer what would happen if there are points conflicting with European positions in the agreements the above countries have already signed .
My country , Greece , is one of the EU 's 15 original members .
Although it is nonetheless lumbered with the visa procedure , it did not follow suit .
For if we really believe , Commissioner , that in the EU each Member State can do what it believes serves its interests , there is no union .
( HU ) Mr President , on behalf of Hungary and the other new Member States I have to object to the criticisms and accusations that have been heard here .
The older Member States of the European Union leave the new Member States to themselves .
European solidarity is not working - either towards the new Member States or towards Greece .
That is why all these critical remarks are beyond comprehension .
There is one particular area where solidarity within the European Union has not been working and is not working , and it is extremely important that this matter could perhaps be settled once and for all .
We need to be able to clarify what Member State competence is and what Community competence is , when negotiating visa-free regimes .
We hope that this year Hungary and all the other new Member States will finally enjoy the same rights , such as travel without a visa to the United States , as the old Member States do .
This current debate shows that solidarity within the European Union is not working . Thank you for your attention .
Mr President , for me it is obvious that the EU still has no say in the negotiations with the US .
The twin-track approach is just proof of the Council and Commission 's failure to protect European interests and citizens .
The fact that Member States are left alone to negotiate bilaterally with the US undermines our credibility and strength on the international scene and it might be to the detriment of our citizens whose data might be exchanged without any democratic scrutiny .
I believe that Member States should act in a European framework and I want the Commission to show determination and make our US partner understand that equal rights and equal treatment are not negotiable .
The ETAS that will be put in place could be a positive evolution as entry applications would be evaluated on the basis of each individual and not according to the country of origin .
This would be a first step for equal treatment .
No matter the nationality , we have to make Europe without internal borders a reality and ensure equal treatment for all Europeans .
( PL ) Mr President , the most important issue we currently have to deal with involves reaching an agreement on visas with the United States whereby all Member States of the Union will be treated equally .
This is an absolutely fundamental issue .
Poland is relying on common European policy where this matter is concerned .
I believe that the solidarity between all European countries represented by the European Commission is absolutely fundamental in this case .
Let us hope that such an approach will mean that a new visa regime allowing entry to the United States for all citizens of the European Union on the same conditions will finally be agreed at the summit on 12 June .
I should like to make one further point .
In developing policy linked to the visa regime , the European Commission must ensure that the basic principles of European rights are respected , so that the European Charter of Fundamental Rights is not infringed regarding the personal information related to the visa regime .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the main topic of today 's debate is equality , equal conditions and equal treatment .
As far as visas for travel to the United States are concerned , almost 20 years after the fall of communism and four years after the new Member States from Central and Eastern Europe have joined the EU , inequality still exists .
These new Member States , together with Greece , still need visas to travel to the United States .
Although I think that this is a shame , I also think that it is the United States that should be ashamed , not the European Union .
After all , here we have a democratic country treating Poland , the Czech Republic , Hungary and other countries like this and at the same time calling them its closest allies .
As far as the negotiating and negotiation methods are concerned , I fully agree with my colleagues that the European Union must speak with one voice .
This is the only way to achieve equality , both equality among the Member States of the European Union and mutual equality between the European Union and the United States , including in such areas as data exchange , personal data protection , etc .

( CS ) Mr President , I am glad that what we have always been saying here has proved to be true : no one has infringed obligations arising from their agreements , EU legislation or the competences of the Union , and bilateral negotiations can take place alongside multilateral or pan-European negotiations .
Ladies and gentlemen , I resent that my country , the Czech Republic , is accused of a lack of solidarity and transparency .
This is entirely untrue .
We fulfil the obligations arising from our agreements , Community legislation and the principle of subsidiarity , accurately and exactly as necessary ; no more , no less .
I would also like to ask some of my fellow Members not to lecture about Europeanism .
We are all equal Europeans : there are no greater or lesser Europeans .
( PL ) Mr President , it is indeed the case that visa policy is part of common European policy and it is my earnest desire that the Commission will prove itself to be effective in the framework of the negotiating mandate granted to it .
Let us hope that it will come up with a good agreement , as that would represent a joint success .
To date , however , we have allowed ourselves to be easily divided on this issue .
The United States has divided European Union citizens into two groups .
One may be termed the superior group , and those individuals are allowed to enter US territory without any difficulty .
The other group is deemed inferior , and these people have to go through what are often humiliating procedures in order to enter the country .
I should like to register my strong protest against this state of affairs , and also mention a situation that is gaining notoriety in the United States .
The visa issue is a factor in the US electoral campaign .
It is not right for one of the candidates to promise , for instance , lifting the visa requirement for my fellow citizens , namely Poles , thus targeting the huge Polish diaspora .
We should prevent this from happening .
Mr President , I want to know if the Commission and the Council will give an assurance that the EU will not , as part of the negotiations , allow access to EU databases like the Schengen Information System and the Visa Information System ( VIS ) .
As rapporteur on the VIS , I achieved a general ban on transfers to third countries from the VIS database , and I want to know if that is threatened in any way .
Secondly , do the Commission and Council accept that going down this blind alley of mass surveillance and collection of personal data on everybody - 99 % of whom will be completely innocent - risks being a distraction from trying to catch the 0.1 % who may be a terrorist danger or an organised crime suspect ?
Today , a top anti-Mafia prosecutor in Italy is warning that Mafia crime is spreading its tentacles across Europe because it is being neglected for lack of proper cross-border cooperation and criminal justice systems not working together .
Is that not our top priority ?
And it is not being done because it is a harder nut to crack .
( RO ) At present , the European Commission has increased power of negotiation following the mandate given by the Member States ' Ministers of Home Affairs last week .
Moreover , we come from a series of efficient meetings with American representatives , the latest of them being the European Union - United States Justice and Home Affairs Troika , on 13 March .
I believe we should insist as much as possible on the three principles adopted on this occasion , especially on the common objective of waving visas as soon as possible .
Although significant progress has been recorded , the refusal rates in some Member States continue to increase .
In Romania , the rate has reached 37 % , almost 10 per cent more than last year , although in the meantime our country has become a member of the European Union .
Unfortunately , this evolution keeps us from the 10 % objective provided by the Visa Waiver program .
At present , only a concerted action of all the Member States can solve this issue of reciprocity regarding visas between the European Union and the US .
We have to make sure that , by the next European - United States Summit , our position is uniform and categorical in relation to visa waivers for all European citizens , based on a well-established schedule .
Mr President , the intention of both the Council and the Commission in stressing their determination to negotiate with the US on the removal of visas on behalf of all European citizens , as well as the preparatory technical steps to be taken to that effect , are commendable .
However , a gap has already appeared between the multilateral negotiations the EU is preparing to initiate , which is likely to take time , and the concrete results already obtained by some EU countries through bilateral negotiations with the US .
After all , we are all aiming for the same result - the elimination of visas for travelling to the US .
It is just that we are confronted with an option - either to wait for the multilateral negotiations between the EU and the US to take off and get it later , or to enter bilateral negotiations with the US and get it much sooner .
To force the EU member countries to choose the less attractive option for the sake of a false solidarity , which is not respected by many EU member countries with regard to other , much important matters - like energy for instance - is at least morally wrong , all the more so since half of European citizens are already exempted from visa requirements through earlier bilateral negotations with the US .
( RO ) I believe there are special relations between the European Union and the United States .
Most of the Member States are a part of NATO and participate jointly in maintaining security in Europe and other countries when necessary , without differences among them .
Nevertheless , there are differences when it comes to granting entry visas for the United States , which relies on criteria that are insufficiently clear and transparent at present .
The main criterion , less than 10 % refused visas , is a criterion depending exclusively on American citizens and not on citizens requesting visas .
The European institutions have not yet managed to complete negotiations in favour of European citizens .
Thus , every Member State has to find independent methods for solving the situation .
The fact that these negotiations have intensified over the recent period and that they can be carried simultaneously by the European Union and the Member States is positive .
It is necessary for the negotiations to refer to the criteria for granting visas .
Only clear and in particular , transparent criteria will provide the citizens with the required information before submitting the visa applications .
( PL ) Mr President , the decision to deny a visa obviously depends on US civil servants .
Making the right of entry to the US conditional on the percentage of visa applications rejected amounts to reasoning as follows : let us do what we want , nothing depends on you , but we will use this process to subject you to humiliating treatment and procedures , and to force you to accept such a degrading system .
This is simply unacceptable , and proves that no partnership exists and that to all intents and purposes we are in a position where we cannot influence anything .
I do hope , however , that the Community approach to this matter and recourse to other instruments derived from the relationship between the European Union and the United States will result in some method of resolving the problem .
( SK ) We welcome the European Commission 's initiative and see it as a step towards making the citizens of all Member States of the European Union equal , including those who in spite of being part of the European Union for four years this May are still subject to strict US visa policy .
The Government of the Slovak Republic is among those conducting bilateral discussions with the United States , in the genuine belief that as a result of these discussions Washington will act more quickly and be more helpful .
I would thus be very happy if Slovakia 's bilateral negotiations were seen in European circles as a positive step : complementing the actions of the European institutions rather than replacing them .
I would also like to stress that this is not about our governments feeling wronged : we want the fundamental principles of the Community to be respected , and equality of all citizens is one of them .
( RO ) Romania is one of the European Union Member States whose citizens need a visa to enter the territory of the United States .
Contrary to the actions of other countries , until the present Romania has avoided initiating bilateral negotiations with the United States , although the partnership concluded with this country and the presence of Romanian troops in Iraq and Afghanistan would have entitled it to invoke the finding of bilateral solutions for solving the issue of visas .
I support a common approach by the EU Member States and mandating the European Commission to rapidly identify a solution for waiving the visa requirement in the case of the United States for European Union citizens , including Romanians .
A real , consistent and effective effort of negotiation is necessary from the European Commission .
Otherwise , eventually , on the background of the pressure placed by Romanian public opinion , which cannot be ignored , Romania will have to find a rapid solution with bilateral negotiations with the United States , just like other European Union Member States that have solved the problem of American visas without taking into consideration the common position of Brussels .
Finally , I regret Mr Frattini 's absence from the debate , since he would have had the obligation to fight for correct treatment and free movement of European citizens and Romanian citizens and not to promote discriminatory policies for Romanian citizens , Community citizens who live and work in Italy , most of them being correctly integrated into Italian society .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) I shall attempt to provide answers to certain dilemmas and issues which you have particularly highlighted .
First of all , I should like to say that it is extremely important that at the last Council held on 18 April a consensus was achieved , and that the Commission has been granted a mandate to commence with negotiations .
This is extremely important , so that we can work in such a manner , as you yourself have repeatedly expressed here today , in the spirit and in order that all European citizens have equal rights and , of course , equal obligations .
If I should touch upon some specific points that have been mentioned here earlier , I would like to say that , at the outset of negotiations , as one of the Members of Parliament has already mentioned , we have not been able to accept a strategy which has in a way been forced upon Europe .
I should say that , maybe under the initial pressure when this strategy was set up , we managed to resist it .
We have concluded the agreements , we have found a way of resolving this , we have achieved a twin-track cooperation approach for the future and therefore , in a way , we have made it clear , both to the United States of America and to the EU Member States , how we can cooperate and where the limits are of what is and what is not acceptable .
I should particularly like to touch upon the issues concerning fingerprints and , of course , the dilemmas that some of you Members of the European Parliament have , primarily as citizens of the EU .
It is imperative that we do not confuse the two systems , ESTA and PNR .
The PNR system will remain unchanged , the same as it is now , the same as it has been adopted and approved , and this is not about fingerprints being taken at travel agents ' or anywhere else .
This matter is as it is , and it is neither a subject for discussion nor a subject of any changes .
I believe this is extremely important indeed .
On the subject of data protection and concerning the activities of a high level team of experts , I have to say that ever since I have been heading the Council of Ministers and have been presiding the Council I have , in conjunction with the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , acted extremely transparently .
I have delivered two reports on this matter to the relevant committees , and today I have made a presentation about current affairs , also before Parliament .
I think that in this first stage we have acted in line with the principle that we find out where the difficulties are , where the common difficulties are , where the common principles are , if there are any , and where there are none .
On this basis we shall then be able to proceed with further activities .
Further activities and negotiations will begin in 2009 , and it is extremely important , provided they begin at all , that we , Parliament , the Council and the Commission , have common ground .
This is the only way we shall muster enough power to reach an agreement .
I believe that your Parliament too has decided that this agreement is extremely important for us , so that we have a data protection umbrella and , each time we negotiate an agreement , we do not have to raise this again , and this is our objective .
These were not some negotiations connected with the reaching of an agreement .
Certain principles have been studied .
On this basis we shall see , and we already know , that twelve principles are practically identical .
Should the negotiations begin , the principle that is not identical will , of course , be the subject of negotiation as well .
I hope that our negotiations will be successful .
I should also like to point out the matter concerning cooperation between the Member States , the Commission and the Presidency as regards the memoranda , the further talks and implementation programmes .
It should be clearly stated that memoranda are not agreements .
Memoranda of understanding are expressions of political will that a country would like to become a visa waiver country .
They do not contain any elements that would give this document the status of an international agreement .
As regards further talks and implementation agreements and / or implementation rules , we have very intense relations with the Member States .
Several days ago , for example , I had very open talks with Jan Langer of the Czech Republic , about these talks and how they are proceeding .
At this point there are no written documents yet concerning talks and implementation rules which the United States of America would give any of the Member States .
In my opinion it is most important that the work of the Member States , as well as that of the Commission and the Presidency , remains transparent .
Only in such a triangle , and of course also in some areas of cooperation with the European Parliament , can a suitable manner of addressing this issue be achieved .
However , I think that we shall let the Commissioner , the Vice-President , provide answers to several issues that fall within the competence of the Commission .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , we need to remedy a situation that is unfair .
It is not possible to have two categories of European citizens , one requiring a visa , the other being exempt .
I think that is a deeply held belief that we all share .
Secondly , I personally believe in the power of unitary negotiations .
Europe is much stronger when it speaks with a single voice , with all its members showing solidarity .
As Mr Mate knows , I ventured to point out that , on another subject that , relatively speaking , is in fact not at all similar , the Open Skies question , it was because the Commission had the mandate at a particular time that we were able to achieve the first stage of the Open Skies .
Well , in the same way I believe in the power of unitary negotiations and I must say that , with Mr Mate , we shall really work hard and with great determination .
I should add that the Commission has , all the same , established reciprocal arrangements with a number of non-member countries in the past .
Our arrangements have allowed us to achieve good results with Canada , Australia and other countries , so there is no reason why we should not be able to stop this discrimination .
I should explain that the Commission will already have representatives in Washington on Tuesday and Wednesday to start the negotiations formally .
In other words , that proves our determination to implement this mandate to the full .
That is what I am able to tell you on this first point .
I should now like to answer the questions raised by Mr Deprez in particular about the implementing agreements .
As Mr Mate has just said , we do not yet have the implementing agreements , so it is very difficult to assess them .
However , it will certainly be our responsibility then to assess them carefully in the light of the Community provisions .
I would add that we are going to be transparent , with Parliament in particular , on our negotiations with the United States , but the Member States - I am not accusing anyone , any Member State - but all the Member States that hold bilateral talks also have to fulfil that duty of transparency .
We need mutual trust if we are to be effective .
I must stress that .
Obviously if the implementing agreements later bring to light things that are not acceptable from the point of view of Community law , we shall see what needs to be done , but we shall do something .
Thirdly , some of you have raised the question of data .
I want to point out even so that the PNR exchange of data is governed by the 2007 agreement between the European Union and the United States .
Those provisions are there , they bind us at the moment and there is no reason to have to suffer any intimidation from our American friends .
That being so , I noted in passing the comments by Mr Deprez on the idea that ultimately , in a general transatlantic agreement , it would no doubt be useful perhaps for an independent authority to be set up to monitor the protection of the data .
Those are a few explanations , but I can really tell you that Parliament will of course be kept very much abreast of our negotiations , that our strength will come from a complete interinstitutional agreement that will show our American friends that the European Union fully intends now to demand fair treatment for all its citizens and will do so with unfailing determination .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the May part-session in Strasbourg .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - I welcome the presidency statement about the equal treatment of all EU citizens .
It is time to give a parliamentary mandate to the Commission to reach a comprehensive agreement on the EU-US visa waiver programme .
The aim is to provide for safe visa-free travel for all EU citizens without exception as soon as possible .
We also expect the Commission to provide the maximum transparency during the negotiations .
At this point we cannot see any reason from the USA side to insist on presenting additional data .
Also it is important that electronic means could be used by citizens to forward their visa applications and personal data .
Several colleagues have shown irritation about the moves taken by some Member States to speed up reaching visa-free agreements with the USA authorities through bilateral consultations .
This is not splitting the EU .
Let us not forget that practically all older Member States already enjoy visa-free entry whereas practically all new Member States lack this opportunity .
Memorandums of understanding signed by these states are to be seen as acts of political will on the way toward a visa-free regime ; they are certainly not separatist agreements .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.25 a.m. and resumed at 11.30 a.m. )

1 .
Protocol to the EC-Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia Stabilisation and Association Agreement ( Jacek Saryusz-Wolski ,
2 .
Application of Article 81 ( 3 ) of the Treaty to certain categories of agreements , decisions and concerted practices between liner shipping companies ( consortia ) ( codified version ) (
3 .
Mediation in civil and commercial matters (
- Before the vote :
rapporteur . - Mr President , there are no amendments to the common position .
That is thanks to the excellent work between the Parliament , Council and Commission and the work particularly of my shadows , Mrs Wallis and Mr Gauzès of the PPE-DE Group , who took a very strong line with the Council and Commission .
I think it has been over a year since we agreed this proposal but it is the mediation experts and professionals in this sector whose response to the Parliament 's first ever online consultation convinced us of the merits of this law .
I know that they will now welcome today 's vote in bringing these proposals into legislation .
Too often we see cases where a marriage or a relationship involving children goes wrong and constituents end up with years of court procedures and massive legal fees .
One of my constituents with a Greek partner amassed legal bills and had to go through the court system for three years to get her children back .
Mediation can therefore be a valuable tool for citizens to achieve access to justice and potentially reduce the cost of dispute resolution without the often acrimonious process of going to trial .
It has the added benefit of freeing up court time for cases that require a court judgment .
This new law should assist people across Europe in getting quick , affordable access to justice .
I therefore urge Members to support the second reading and open up new avenues of redress and remedies for citizens across the EU .
( Applause )
I would remind colleagues that in plenary the rapporteur is entitled to ask for the floor for two minutes , so could everyone please exercise the appropriate self-control .
I believe however that Mr Rack has called for the floor on a point of order .
( DE ) Mr President , normally , we would say that our machinery is not working , but in this particular case , it is the lifts which are not working .
Very many of our colleagues are waiting to make their way down to the Chamber .
That being the case , it would be sensible if , perhaps , we could consider bringing forward declarations such as these .
I guarantee that everything possible will be done to return the lifts to working order as soon as possible or to allow colleagues to vote in the lifts .
4 .
European satellite radionavigation programmes ( EGNOS and Gallileo ) (
5 .
Extension of scope of Directive 2003 / 109 / EC to beneficiaries of international protection (
6 .
The role of civil society in drugs policy in the European Union (
7 .
Adjustment of the multiannual framework (
8 .
Programming implementation of the 10th European Development Fund (
9 .
2007 progress report on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia (
- Before the vote :

rapporteur . - Mr President , the oral amendment by Mr Landsbergis obliges me to explain the complicated situation concerning a name .
' FYROM ' has never been the name of any country but can only be an abbreviation of ' former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ' .
In my previous report , adopted by the plenary meeting of this Parliament on 12 July 2007 , it was decided not to introduce the use of this abbreviation as a name but only to use those five words .
The conclusion was to replace all other terms included in amendments by ' former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ' .
I propose to maintain this line .
The oral amendment proposed by Mr Landsbergis is not in line with this decision .
I expect that during 2008 an agreement with Greece will solve the different views on the names of this state and that then the term FYROM will be forgotten forever .
Mr President , we are in a tricky situation with one of our neighbours when a normally existing republic on the European continent is officially called non-existent - only ' the " former ” Republic of M. ' - by decision of the UN .
Before Washington follows New York and demands that the Georgia in the Caucasus should be called the ' former Soviet Republic of Georgia ' , we could express our dissatisfaction with such practices and work to find a solution for ' M. ' .
That is my interim proposal - not to replace the name of someone ' former ' , but to correct the situation with the text of our report by inserting an additional explanation : ' the country under the name of FYROM ' .
Please have a little sense of humour and support .
We should help both Greece and ' M. ' .
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
10 .
China 's policy and its effects on Africa (
- Before the vote on Amendment 5 :
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Mr President , I wish to propose an amendment to Article 5 which involves a minor alteration to the text .
The current text reads :
' calls on the EU to encourage the creation of an African Partnership Forum engaging all major donors and investors ; '
( PT ) and , following the amendment that I propose , it will read :
' calls on the EU to ensure that the African Partnership Forum engages all major donors and investors , namely China ; ' .
( PT ) This amendment stems from the fact that we have realised that the African Partnership Forum has just been created and this is therefore a minor alteration which reflects the current situation .
It was communicated to all colleagues and shadow rapporteurs and I have not been informed of any objections .
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For the results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Formal sitting - Slovenia
Mr President , may we thank you very warmly for your European speech .
Your presence here and your speech have made it clear that Slovenia and the Slovenian Presidency under Prime Minister Janus Janša - and I see two ministers sitting here : Janez Lenarčič and Janez Podobnik - want to work closely with the European Parliament .
As the President of Slovenia , you convey that message with particular resonance .
Our experience here in the European Parliament has shown us that it is not the size of the country - small , large or medium-sized - that determines whether an EU Presidency will be successful ; it is the spirit guiding the Presidency that counts .
I think we can safely say that because Slovenia - and its President - are motivated by such a European spirit , this is a Presidency which will take Europe forward , and we would like to express our warm thanks to you for that .
( Applause )
We would also like to thank you for supporting the European Parliament 's priorities .
Let me mention just two that you have talked about .
The first is climate protection .
If we stick to the timetable , we will complete our work so that there is an EU position for the UN Summit in Copenhagen in December 2009 .
We would also like to thank you for your appeal for human rights , for if we , as the European Parliament , do not champion the cause of human rights , who will do so ?
So often , governments are guided by other interests - which is understandable - but we must find a way of dovetailing these interests and our values skilfully in a way which genuinely benefits people , and that is why human rights are at the heart of our policies here in the European Parliament .
Mr President , thank you for visiting the European Parliament .
You will be staying with us for a little longer .
Once again , on behalf of the House , may I express my sincere thanks to you personally and to the Slovenian Presidency .
We wish you every success for the rest of the six months during which Slovenia is at the helm of the European Union .
If you succeed , we all succeed , and by that I mean the European Union .
That is our common goal .
Thank you .
That concludes the formal sitting .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( CS ) Mr President , allow me to add a few words to my speech yesterday during the debate on the launch of one of the largest joint European projects , the Galileo navigation system .
I very much appreciate the work of the rapporteurs , who achieved a compromise solution both within Parliament and with the Council and the Commission , and thanks to whom we were able to conclude the drawn-out discussions today .
Now we have to decide where the headquarters of Galileo 's supervisory authority should be located .
Once again I want to stress that the Czech Republic is ready and is an ideal candidate .
I trust that the promise to locate new Union institutions in new Member States will at last come true .
Mr President , I voted against this report .
I listened to the same debate that the previous speaker listened to yesterday , and I can be nothing other than horrified by what I heard : a bizarre bidding war for an agency that does not need to exist .
We are inventing a new satellite system because the European Union needs some sort of fashionable item of jewellery - this Galileo project is like bling for the European Union .
It is expensive ; it is not particularly needed ; it is anti-competitive ; we had a deal with the Chinese , and there is a Russian system and a GPS system already in existence .
Europe does not need this system , yet we are going to pay for it .
As we saw from the discharge votes yesterday , we will not police how money on this particular system is spent and , therefore , we will waste millions upon millions of European taxpayers ' euros and pounds .
It beggars belief that we have gone into this bizarre system just because it is a kind of vanity cause for us .
Mr President , as I listened to the debate yesterday I thought of the Queen song Bohemian Rhapsody and those immortal words ' Galileo , Galileo ' .
And I thought of the words of the lyrics of that song .
' Is this the real life ?
Is it just fantasy ?
Caught in a landslide , With no escape from reality , Open your eyes , Look up to the sky and see ' .
The Chinese came .
They saw .
They walked away and are building their own system .
The Russians are modernising their own system , Glonas , and to top it all the American GPS , which we already use for free , is being upgraded to be even more accurate and more user-friendly .
We should not be wasting hard-earned taxpayers ' money on a fourth satellite system that offers no advantage over the others .
And if I may mix my metaphors , let us shoot this white elephant from the sky .
I voted against the report .
Mr President , I , too , voted against the Barsi-Pataky report .
This is simply a political vanity project , a bit like the euro , and like the euro it has no economic and no technical justification .
It is unnecessary ; it is redundant ; it is already becoming obsolescent .
As my colleague has already pointed out , the private sector came and looked at it and decided they wanted no part of it , because it did not make sense .
The Chinese came and looked at it , took the best ideas away and decided they would get a better result by doing it themselves and , considering the potential military applications of a global positioning system , the fact that the Chinese have gone off and done it should give us all pause and cause us considerable concern .
We should not waste any more taxpayers ' money on this pointless political gesture .
Mr President , when the Galileo project was conceived , President Chirac described it as necessary to combat US technical imperialism .
That , in truth , is the only possible argument for it .
I have no intention of reprising the arguments we have just heard from my three honourable friends : it makes no economic sense ; it makes no technical sense ; we are getting free use of the American GPS .
The point I really want to make - and I would appeal to my integrationist colleagues in this House , because I do not think you have to be a Eurosceptic to be worried about this - is this : look at what happened in yesterday 's debate , when my honourable friend , Mr Heaton-Harris , asked us what we were voting on and nobody in the Chamber was able to name the agency to which we had just voted through supply .
You are doing yourselves no favours , even as supporters of the European project , if you hand your taxpayers ' money to these schemes with a ' Europe right or wrong ' attitude , without stopping to look at whether it is being efficaciously spent or whether it is being lost or stolen .
I would appeal to all my colleagues to try and give their taxpayers some value for money from their own point of view .
Thank you .
There are no further calls for the floor or explanations of vote on this report , and before moving on to the next one I should like to take this opportunity to say farewell to Mr Lombardo and wish him all the very best in his new post .
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
I supported the report on the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , as it sends an important message to the Macedonian people .
The country has developed a lot since the 2007 report .
The economic results are good , and there is success in the area of legislation .
A consensus is developing in internal politics , the different national and ethnic communities are able to coexist .
With the consistent endorsement of the Ohrid Framework Agreement and the Badinter principle , political issues are imbued with a new spirit supporting proportional representation and the preservation of the identity of minorities .
The economic and social development of the Former Yugoslav Republic is a complex one , and 2005 marked its candidature for EU membership .
The negative message at the Bucharest NATO summit , where the petty-minded and illogical behaviour of Greece played a major role , was unfortunate .
I am sure that , for the EU , nomenclature will not be an obstacle to membership , and I am glad that Parliament has been able to come to an agreement on that .
Our decision will be a positive message , as the country is disillusioned by rejection and EU delays .
Now is the time to initiate real and genuine accession negotiations with the country . Thank you for your attention .
( HU ) It is with some misgiving that I voted on the Macedonian report .
It is true that we have set more and more requirements for the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , but are we really doing everything in the interests of Euro-Atlantic integration ?
In Kosovo 's evolution to independence and Macedonia 's NATO membership veto there may lurk potential dangers .
The minority separatists and the majority nationalists could easily upset the fragile balance in Macedonia .
The European Union and the United States often meddle in Macedonian politics , we expect and demand many unpopular measures from the Macedonian leadership .
This implies responsibility , we ourselves have a responsibility for the stability of the small country and Euro-Atlantic integration .
It would be desirable if everyone took that responsibility seriously .
( DE ) Mr President , today 's vote is a breakthrough for Macedonia 's early accession to the European Union .
This success is due to the efforts of the late President Boris Trajkovski , who was a personal and a pan-European friend and who charted this course , but it is also a major success for the current Macedonian Government under Prime Minister Gruevski and Foreign Minister Milososki , who have built friendships throughout Europe for this European country : a country which has an excellent minority policy , which is achieving excellent development , and to which we want to give massive support .
Let me send out a clear message : I call on our fellow Members from Greece finally to give ground on the name issue .
This House has said very clearly today that it rejects any blockade due to the name issue and that bilateral issues should not be an obstacle to accession .
That is the message that we have sent out with a massive majority of the House today , and it is a hefty shot across the bows of those governments which are blocking progress here .
I appeal to everyone to abandon this blockade in the interests of Europe .
Macedonia is a European country , and we hope that a date can be set before the end of this year for the start of accession negotiations .
( CS ) Mr President , allow me to respond to yesterday 's debate .
Most of us warned that the Chinese hunger for African oil , its exchange of weapons for oil , supports corruption and dictatorial regimes and exacerbates poverty .
What is more , billions of Chinese products are flooding Africa , making African products hopelessly uncompetitive .
This so-called unconditional policy is becoming a bigger and bigger obstacle to achieving the Millennium Goals of eradicating hunger and poverty in developing countries .
I was surprised by Commissioner Michel 's somewhat emotional statement that had the Commission had political powers it would join together with China , and by his defence of China 's right to carry out its distinctive foreign unconditional policy , in spite of the fact that China is a member of the UN Security Council and as such is responsible for world developments just like the Union .
I object to such sentiments from a member of the Commission .
( PL ) Mr President , China 's role in global economic development is a particularly important one .
China is also a success symbol for the people of Africa .
In the course of the last 25 years China has created opportunities for 400 million of its citizens , lifting them out of extreme poverty .
In addition , over 200 million Chinese have joined the middle class .
China therefore has a wealth of experience in generating economic development .
It is expected that this will also have a positive impact on African countries .
Trade between Africa and China is estimated to have increased from USD 4 million in 1995 to USD 55 million in 2006 .
Africa represents an important source of raw materials for China .
The Chinese economy requires ever-increasing supplies of energy and raw materials .
China is therefore doing all it can to establish a permanent presence in Africa .
Mr President , I have a particular interest in this report because in a previous professional life as an academic I looked at both Chinese foreign direct investment , inwards and outwards , and African investment and development .
Looking at the report , and it is actually quite a fair report , I think as EU and Member States of the EU we should welcome Chinese investment in Africa , particularly investment in infrastructure , because investment in infrastructure allows local entrepreneurs and local citizens to create wealth for themselves and to trade their way out of poverty .
At the same time we should also be aware of the Chinese thirst and hunger for natural resources - their sort of resource-seeking motives .
We should seek to work with China and to tackle those issues , particularly when dealing with unsavoury governments .
One of my concerns over Chinese policy is the fact that it destroys the EU 's attempts , and other aid donors ' attempts , to offer conditionality or put conditionality on aid .
We can suggest all the conditions on aid in order to ensure better governance , but the Chinese come in and destroy that .
Overall it is a fair report and I voted in favour .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the report by Mrs Geringer de Oedenberg , proposing that the proposal for a codified version of the Council Regulation on the application of Article 81 ( 3 ) of the Treaty to certain categories of agreements , decisions and concerted practices between liner shipping companies ( consortia ) be approved at first reading in the codecision procedure .
Since it relates to a codification procedure , this proposal did not have to be ' formally ' amended by the parliamentary committee and the latter did not do so .
Nonetheless , I am taking advantage of this explanation of vote to express surprise at the delay by the European Union in codifying texts which have been amended several times and are becoming increasingly complex to read and apply as time goes by .
The codification process is provided for by an interinstitutional agreement of 20 December 1994 resulting from a political intention expressed by the European Council in December 1992 , providing for an accelerated procedure for the speedy adoption of codified instruments .
I firmly support the need to codify the rules .
That is imperative for democracy , the rule of law , the training of students , proper application of the law by citizens and legal practitioners , etc .
in writing . - ( FR ) I welcome the adoption of the common position to resolve a very longstanding problem of mediation in civil and commercial matters , even if this directive will be restricted to cross-border cases , on the basis of a restrictive interpretation of Article 65 EC , but with a broader definition of disputes .
I regret , nonetheless , that the common position does not allow the directive to be implemented through voluntary agreements between the parties , even though it is true that the rules of the Member States on legal proceedings cannot always be amended by agreements between the parties .
Overall , this common position is to be welcomed .
It remains faithful to the original aim , which was to facilitate access to dispute settlement proceedings and to promote the amicable settlement of disputes by encouraging recourse to mediation and ensuring a satisfactory link between mediation and legal proceedings .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the report by Mrs Barsi-Pataky , which proposes , subject to amendments , that the amended proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the further implementation of European satellite radionavigation programmes ( EGNOS and Galileo ) be approved .
I congratulate Jacques Barrot , Vice-President of the Commission with responsibility for transport , on his firmness , lucid approach and his discernment and political conviction on this difficult issue .
The public sector has rescued the manufacturers , who were in a deadlock as to the strategy to be adopted , particular in relation to financial risks .
Thanks to the determination of everyone , particularly the European Parliament , it has been possible to raise the 100 % public funding to the tune of EUR 3.4 billion .
It is therefore representatives of the citizens who are responsible for the solution to this crisis , with an entry into service in 2014 and deployment of the satellites until 2013 .
This case demonstrates the need to think quickly about the European resources to be put in place to finance public investments when the private market is found wanting .
in writing . - ( SV ) We have accepted the proposal negotiated between the Council and Parliament regarding the EGNOS and Galileo satellite radionavigation programmes in which Parliament had already , contrary to our opinion , decided the budget issue .
We emphasise that we were against resources from the research budget being used for these projects .
In addition , we have sought an account from the Commission of how it intends to create commercial financing of the projects .
However , we welcome the fact that the negotiated proposal enables the European Parliament to evaluate and influence the projects .
in writing . - ( PT ) The European Global Navigation Satellite System ( GNSS ) , as the first Community infrastructure and due to its space-related and technological nature , can only be achieved through a common will .
The European GNSS is conceived to consist of two programmes : EGNOS and Galileo .
The importance of the GNSS lies in particular in the fact that it is an alternative and complementary system to the US and Russian systems .
This objective involves a strategic , economic , industrial and security space , plus a lot more interests , which no Member State can achieve alone .
As this will be the first programme involving Community financing and infrastructures , Parliament and the Council will bear increased joint responsibility for regulating the deployment and operation of the programmes .
For the above reasons and because completing this project will represent a historic and strategic landmark in the technological progress and independence of the European Union , the GNSS and the aforesaid report deserve my full support as they form a future solution .
in writing . - ( SV ) Galileo is an example of a large-scale technical project which no individual Member State can complete alone .
I was positive about the project being financed from the EU 's budget from the start .
Unfortunately , it has become evident that the EU has not been able to manage this enormous task in a satisfactory manner .
The rapporteur refers to ' internal disagreement ' as the reason for this .
In my view , this is deeply regrettable and I find it understandable that the Council has not been able to accept the huge increase in the budget .
It is down to the Commission to present a more satisfactory financing solution for this important project .
in writing . - I welcome the prospect of Galileo finally being launched .
Ms Barsi-Pataky 's report on the further implementation of the European satellite radionavigation programmes signals a development , the benefits of which will be felt in areas ranging from European space policy , research and innovation to the common foreign and security policy and the European security and defence policy .
I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( DE ) GPS currently already provides many of the services that would be offered by the European satellite radionavigation programme Galileo .
However , we should not allow ourselves to become dependent on a satellite-based radionavigation monopoly that is dominated by the US and was set up by the US military .
Even the routes of the GPS satellites are drawn in a way which ensures , first and foremost , that the areas in which the US is conducting military operations have good coverage .
Our own system will enable us to define the best possible constellation of flight paths for Europe .
In view of the strategic important of the project , I voted in favour of the report , although the issue of funding has not yet been fully resolved .
in writing . - ( ES ) Having had my speech interrupted by the President , who applied speaking time much more strictly to me than to the colleagues before me , I wish to add a few comments .
We certainly ought to be pleased with the determination of the institutions in overcoming all the ups and downs of the project .
We are finally in a position to initiate guaranteed planning for Galileo 's deployment phase .
We are also extremely pleased with the work carried out to make participation in the programme as broad as possible .
Having said this , I now wish to mention one vital point : the civil nature of the project , an essential condition to ensure the transparency of operations .
The European system 's independence will enable certification to be issued for the services supplied to users , and will furnish guaranteed quality .
These conditions are essential in the development of new commercial applications ushering in a wonderful opportunity for our SMEs , with huge environmental and social potential .
Navigation for the blind , planning the most accessible routes for the disabled , assistance for those suffering from Alzheimer 's disease , or rapid location of people in emergency situations are all examples of applications geared towards improving lifestyles .
The EP has always given its full support to Galileo through legislative and budgetary undertakings , and has clearly acknowledged it as a strategic project .
in writing . - ( FR ) It will have taken eleven years of painful indecision and political and administrative disagreements to arrive at a solution for the creation of a European satellite radionavigation system .
The delay resulting from the method chosen - including Public-Private Partnership , international cooperation outside the European Union , essential participation by all Member States , prescribed role of the European Commission - is estimated at five years .
If those principles and methods had been applied to technological and industrial ventures such as Airbus and Ariane , Europe would probably not have its own aircraft manufacturer or space launcher today .
Although the end result is not entirely satisfactory , there are many lessons to be learnt from it .
Large strategic projects can only be launched in new areas , where the private sector is unable or unwilling to take risks , if the public authorities are the sole decision-makers and financiers , because these are projects that involve political vision and not simply economic logic .
Secondly , in projects of this kind , the fact that they had to go through Community institutions and procedures proved a hindrance and a negative factor , adding to the ideological constraints , where intergovernmental cooperation turned out to be effective .
Let us hope those lessons will be taken to heart .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the report regarding the amendment of the Council Regulation on continuing to implement European satellite radionavigation programmes .
The Galileo project , a component of these programmes , will have multiple applications and will be used for traffic control , transport logistics , natural disaster prevention and response , commercial and governmental services .
Since the first debate on the Community budget for the year 2008 , the European Parliament has considered this project a priority and requested the allotment of the necessary funds and the review of the Interinstitutional Agreement to make this possible .
As of March 2009 , the EGNOS programme will become operational , and the Galileo programme must also become operational by the end of 2013 .
The necessary budgetary resources in order to achieve the Galileo projects are estimated at 3.105 billion euros for the 2007-2013 period .
The European Parliament and the European Union Council admit the strategic importance of this project and support its achievement .
Consequently , the European Commission must inform the Parliament and the Council regularly on the progress in implementing the project .
I congratulate Mrs Rapporteur Barsi-Pataky for the way in which she worked with colleagues from all political groups for this regulation .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Directive in question aimed to create a uniform status for third-country nationals residing legally in the EU territory , after a period of five years of legal , continuous residence in a Member State .
The aim of the present initiative is to extend the Directive 's scope to beneficiaries of international protection in order to offer them legal certainty about their residence and rights which are comparable to those of EU nationals .
However , there is still a gap as the Directive does not provide for mutual recognition and transfer of responsibility as regards international protection to another Member State .
This means that it will not be possible to grant third-country nationals rights of free movement and establishment within the EU as soon as their status is recognised .
The assessment of these transfer applications therefore continues to be governed by the 1951 Geneva Convention and by the Council of Europe 's European Agreement on Transfer of Responsibility for Refugees .
Given this situation , it is also vital to ensure that the second Member State in question observes the principle of non-refoulement , so that the person in question is not sent back to a country where he or she would be in danger .
At most this person should be sent back to the Member State that originally granted them such protection .
As regards all the other aspects , I believe that the same requirements should be met and that these persons must be subject to the same demands as laid down in the Directive .
in writing . - ( FR ) The report by Mrs Roure , like the Directive it is intended to amend , is not acceptable .
To allow beneficiaries to be granted the international protection of long-term resident status , even temporarily , without imposing any conditions for resources or minimal integration , even when that status can only be granted after five years ' residence , is madness .
Furthermore , the proposed provisions are tantamount to safeguarding these persons against any deportation , including deportation to another Member State , unless they have committed a serious offence .
Hence it would be impossible to deny these persons the right to reside in the Member State of their choice , regardless of their circumstances and their social attitudes .
That prerogative would take precedence over the sovereign right of states to choose who can live in their territory , with what status and in what conditions compatible with public order and security .
Finally , you all know that applications for international protection are used to circumvent the already weak controls and restrictions on immigration that is in fact purely economic .
You are aware that , in those circumstances , subsidiary protection is often preferred to refugee status , because it is shorter and more flexible .
If its beneficiaries can become long-term residents , it will further encourage immigration .
in writing . - ( SV ) The report contains many proposals on integrating people who have been granted international protection .
We would have supported these proposals if the vote had taken place in the Swedish Parliament .
In this context , however , the proposals are part of creating a common European asylum system .
This report itself is heading in a generous direction regarding asylum policy .
At the same time it forms part of building ' Fortress Europe ' .
The protection provided by the Geneva Convention is undermined by the EU taking upon itself responsibility for interpreting who is to be granted protection and the form this will take .
We see no other alternative than to say no to all forms of common refugee policy at EU level , as Member States would otherwise lose control of the direction policy is taking .
The UN 's conventions should remain the governing instruments for guaranteeing the rights of asylum seekers in international society .
in writing . - We abstained from voting on the Roure report today , though we basically support the idea behind the report : to make sure that refugees and persons authorised to reside in a country on the basis of a temporary or subsidiary form of protection enjoy the same rights as long-term residents of that country within the scope of Directive 2003 / 109 / EC .
However , we believe it is for the Member States themselves to decide on this matter , not the EU .
in writing . - I support Ms Roure 's report on the extension of the scope of Directive 2003 / 109 / EC to beneficiaries of international protection .
What the report sets out to achieve is to ensure that beneficiaries of international protection are entitled to the same rights as those we enjoy as EU nationals , after five years of legal residence in the EU .
I find this a logical amendment of the previous Directive and have voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( IT ) Thanks to the drugs strategy for 2005-2012 , the European Union has laid the foundations for combating a worrying phenomenon which is growing steadily , especially among the most vulnerable groups such as young people and women , namely the spread of drugs in Europe .
Nonetheless , the stated aims must be achievable and for this reason the EU needs a commitment from civil society , which plays a fundamental role in preventing the spread of drug abuse .
Psychological stability , patient follow-up after detoxification treatment , the creation of an alternative lifestyle in social and employment terms : these are just a few of the benefits afforded by the work of recovery centres , non-profit bodies and NGOs operating in the sector .
For this reason , I - like the rapporteur - hope that over and above direct financial aid for communities dealing with the problem , an appropriate fiscal policy will be devised for organisations performing so-called ' ergotherapy ' , in other words rehabilitation through work .
In particular , I expect the Member States to undertake to offer specific tax breaks or the removal of excessive red tape .
We must avoid a situation where national budgetary constraints or mere red-tape forces the closure of these bodies , which do an irreplaceable job in helping drug addicts return to a normal lifestyle .
in writing . - ( BG ) I supported Mr. Catania 's report and would like to add that there is no simple solution to the drug problem .
Drug abuse and drug trafficking destroy society through crime and corruption which accompany them , and drug-related transmissible diseases ( AIDS , hepatitis ) pose serious threats to public health .
That is why I believe that effective response should be an effort that should involve not only the institutions , civil society and the media but rather a comprehensive programme through which education , religion and sports could also make their contribution to solving this problem and serve as the barrier that should keep our children away from sin .
Encouraging sports and religious studies on the curricula at school and outside school can raise considerably the awareness of children of the deadly influence of drugs .
By joining the efforts of law enforcement and civil society , particularly at the local community level , it is possible to achieve better results in implementing and further developing the EU Drugs Strategy .
in writing . - ( SV ) The rapporteur requires that an organisation for actors from civil society at European level should have a clear added value compared with national , regional and local civil society organisations .
In our view this is completely unacceptable , as drugs policy is directly linked to the criminal law and attitude to crime and punishment in the individual countries .
Furthermore , the drugs policy must be designed according to the cultural and social aspects of each country in order effectively to help deprived people who need the aid of society in order to return to a functional life .
We therefore choose to vote no to the report in its entirety .
in writing . - ( FR ) Although it is true that , in combating drug use , information , prevention and awareness are essential to avert the risks of drug addiction for the physical and mental health of users , they are unfortunately not enough .
According to the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Addiction , over 70 million Europeans have smoked cannabis and 60 % of people that go to discos in France , Italy and the United Kingdom have taken cocaine .
It has to be concluded that European information and communication strategies are totally ineffective , since drug supply and demand is unfortunately on the increase everywhere in France and in Europe .
No compromise is acceptable where the use and sale of drugs is concerned .
Only zero tolerance works .
The harm caused to thousands of victims by experimental policies to liberalise drugs confirms that evidence .
in writing . - ( FR ) As shadow rapporteur for the Socialist Group , I have devoted a great deal of time and energy to this subject with a view , as far as the substance is concerned , to explaining the need for more dialogue with civil society on the fight against drugs and , as far as the form is concerned , proposing a text that can be read and understood by everyone .
With their first-hand experience and capacity for innovation , I think that the actors in civil society can really make a useful contribution to national and European policies on prevention and information as well as helping people out of their dependency and reintegrating them into society .
So many actions are needed at different levels : at work , at school , on the streets and in prisons .
I therefore welcome the adoption of this report , which salutes the creation of the Civil Society Forum on Drugs and underlines the importance of greater cooperation between civil society and all the institutions and agencies of the Union .
The fight against drugs concerns all of us and those who are in the front line of the fight , who work every day to help drug addicts and prevent more people sinking into dependency , must be particularly important partners .
in writing . - Drug abuse is a prominent problem in societies across Europe , and Scotland is no exception .
Mr Catania 's recommendations regarding the role of civil society in drugs policy in the EU rightly call for a more concerted European approach to this issue that knows no borders .
Civil society is a key player in tackling all facets of this problem and its initiatives should be benefiting from EU support .
The rapporteur 's recommendations need to be heeded if we are to construct an effective policy that fights drug abuse on all fronts .
I voted in favour of the report .
in writing . - ( DE ) It is debatable whether the illegal cultivation of poppies can be switched to industrial production of medicinal products , but it may be worth trying .
What is certain is that the US policy towards Afghanistan and the EU 's lack of action on increased opium production have exacerbated the problem .
A forward-looking drugs policy must be based on effective smashing of drug rings , instant deportation of foreign drug dealers and the adoption of targeted priority actions , along with the provision of better treatment services for drug users .
There are increasingly vocal calls for the legalisation or liberalisation of drugs , but even in Switzerland , after almost 15 years of handing out heroin , hopes that this would help addicts overcome their addiction have finally been dashed .
The report before us leans heavily towards liberalisation , and I have therefore voted against it .
in writing . - ( PL ) I welcome the discussion on drugs .
They constitute a serious problem but bureaucratic efforts have not curtailed the activities of dealers who sell drugs at schools , centres of higher education , housing estates and other public places , and it is unlikely that they will do so in the future .
In 1998 a special session of the General Assembly of the United Nations set itself the goal of creating a drug-free world in the course of 10 years .
Subsequent years saw the publication of many recommendations , regulations , decisions , reports and a Green Paper .
We have today voted on yet another draft resolution .
We would do well to reflect on what all this has achieved .
I am sorry to have to say that never in the history of mankind have drugs been as easily obtainable as they now are .
All that remains is for it to be possible to order them through the Internet .
I voted in favour of the resolution because I support any measure to combat drugs .
Nonetheless , I should like to point out that until we isolate producers from distributors and introduce radical changes to the penal code to create an effective deterrent for people who make a living out of drugs , this problem will not be reduced .
On the contrary , it will increase in magnitude .
in writing . - ( IT ) I believe that it is necessary , not just at European level but also nationally and locally , to promote a dialogue with and between the various civil society stakeholders so as to avert the terrible dangers represented by drugs .
Civil society must be regarded as a key ally of the Union and the Member States in achieving the goals set out in the EU drugs strategy .
Indeed , thanks to their experience in the field , therapeutic communities can support awareness-raising campaigns by providing more and better information about the risks inherent in drug abuse and about possible prevention programmes .
in writing . - ( SV ) No one questions the importance of the enormous , often successful work carried out by civil organisations to help people who have become dependent on drugs .
We need to gather together all the forces for good in the battle against harmful , addictive substances .
It was therefore gratifying to see a report which highlights the initiatives being carried out in Europe .
The reason why I abstained from voting today thus has nothing to do with the actual subject of the report .
Instead the reason can be read under the heading ' Civil society - the external dimension ' .
Some time ago , an agonising decision , I have to admit , I voted in favour of a report which supported facilitating a switch to legal poppy cultivation in Afghanistan , with production being used in pain-relieving drugs .
One of the reasons for this was the number of reports which had appeared on the negative consequences of spraying the existing crops using planes and the desperate situation of the Afghan people .
The report encourages both separate cultivation and spraying , which is inconsistent .
The report also grants support to organisations in Europe working to produce substances derived from coca leaves , for example , for therapeutic or other ' lawful use ' .
I am strongly against this .
As the main intention of the report is nevertheless good , I finally chose to abstain .
in writing . - ( SK ) The motion for a resolution on organ donation and transplantation is a part of a world-wide debate on child safety .
In order to help protect children effectively , I am working on a European campaign called ' Do you know where your child is now ? ' .
The chapter of this resolution dealing with organ trafficking is directly linked to it .
The call to Member States and to the Council to adopt effective measures to sever the links between the lack of organs and organ trafficking is therefore more than justified .
In order to combat organ trafficking , a long-term strategy must be adopted with a view to eliminating the social inequalities at the root of such practices .
We must combat trafficking in organs and tissues , which should be universally banned , in particular where it concerns the transplantation of organs and tissues from minors .
I am deeply disappointed that Europol has not carried out a survey of organ selling and trafficking , citing the absence of documented cases .
On the contrary , reports by the Council of Europe and the World Health Organisation clearly prove that organ trafficking is a problem in Member States of the Union , too .
We ask the European Commission and Europol to improve the monitoring of organ trafficking and draw the necessary conclusions .
I hope that Slovakia can make use of its EU Presidency to move this very important agenda forward .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the proposal for a decision of the European Parliament and of the Council amending the Interinstitutional Agreement of 17 May 2006 on budgetary discipline and sound financial management as regards adjustment of the multiannual financial framework , on the basis of the report by Mr Böge .
That adjustment had become unavoidable because of the delay in adopting certain operational programmes under headings 1B and 2 , EUR 2 034 million at current prices of the appropriations set aside for the Structural Funds , the Cohesion Funds , rural development and the European Fisheries Fund which could not be committed in 2007 or carried forward to 2008 .
It was therefore becoming sensible for that amount to be transferred to subsequent years in accordance with paragraph 48 of the Interinstitutional Agreement on budgetary discipline and sound financial management , increasing the relevant expenditure ceilings for commitment appropriations .
in writing . - ( RO ) I voted for the report regarding the adjustment of the multiannual financial framework , presented by our colleague Böge .
The amounts not used in 2007 from the commitment appropriations for the Structural Funds , the Cohesion Fund , the Rural Development Fund and the European Fund for Fisheries should be carried forward for the upcoming years .
Thus 2.034 billion euros will be transferred , according to 48 of the Interinstitutional Agreement , for 2008-2013 .
The amounts will be allocated mainly in 2008 ( approximately 56 % ) , and during 2000-2013 the influence of this transfer will be insignificant .
We have to analyze the reasons that have led to a lack of use of these funds .
First of all , there are 45 operational programmes that were submitted late to the European Commission for approval .
72 % of the reprogramming required is due to delays in rural development programmes .
Some were sent to the Commission in December , thus making it impossible to adopt the programmes in 2007 .
National institutional constraints and a lack of previous programming experience are some of the causes for these delays .
Most of the 45 delayed operational programmes come from the new Member States .
I request the Commission to assist them more in acquiring the new procedure and training the personnel assigned to the use of these funds .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the own-initiative report by Mrs Carlotti on the implementation of the programming of the 10th European Development Fund ( EDF ) and , as the report indicates , I regret that the fund has not been incorporated in the Union budget , which would have allowed democratic scrutiny .
Let us hope that the subject of the inclusion of the EDF in the budget will come up again in the mid-term review of the financial perspectives in 2009 .
As regards the EDF and its role in the eradication of poverty and achievement of the Millennium Development Goals ( MDGs ) , it is becoming urgent to programme it and hence to finalise the political agreements needed for its implementation .
Priority will need to be given to improving health care and basic education and , I would add , subsistence farming .
At a time when the Doha agenda of the World Trade Organisation ( WTO ) is at a virtual standstill , it is becoming urgent for the European Union to use its development instruments to participate in this ambitious , just and commendable plan to eradicate world poverty .
in writing . - ( ES ) I voted in favour of the report , since I feel it is most important to stress the need for EDFs in ACP countries .
It is essential that documents such as the Paris Declaration of March 2005 be taken seriously and periodically revised to produce the net aid figures .
It is nevertheless true that a dreadful lack of coordination between the Member States led to cutbacks in their official development aid , from 0.4 % of GDP in 2006 to less than 0.38 % in 2007 .
This tiny percentage represents a loss of 1 700 million euros .
The worst thing of all , though , is that partner countries are in a constant stop-and-go situation , with no chance of making plans for the long term , since they have no idea whether they will have sufficient funds to do so , even though this has been promised by the Member States .
The saddest aspect of all this is that we demand they keep their side of the bargain when we forget to keep ours .
We cannot work together like this .
in writing . - I welcome the Carlotti report on the implementation of the programming of the 10th European Development Fund ( EDF ) .
To ensure that the EDF 's goals of poverty eradication in partner countries and regions and the pursuit of the Millennium Development Goals are achieved a stronger parliamentary scrutiny of its delivery instruments is required .
I further agree with the idea that the programming of the Fund should pay particular attention to MDG-related areas such as health , education , respect of the environment and encouragement of good governance .
The current ratification difficulties the 10th EDF is encountering need to be addressed in order to facilitate swift implementation of the Fund .
I voted in support of the report .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for this report by Mrs Carlotti on the implementation of the programming of the 10th European Development Fund ( EDF ) .
The EDF is the main Community instrument for development cooperation aid to the ACP ( Africa , Caribbean , Pacific ) countries .
It works in particular on achievement of the Millennium Goals set in the United Nations in 2000 .
However , the 10th EDF ( 2008-2013 ) has at the moment come to a standstill .
Since the revised Cotonou Agreement has not been ratified by some of the ACP countries , the EUR 22.7 million budget available since 1 January 2008 is still not being used .
The text adopted by Parliament therefore calls urgently for an end to the deadlock and outlines a number of issues : priority for the reduction of poverty ( and health and education in particular ) , specific attention to the gender dimension and a sustainable development strategy for the countries concerned .
Finally , Parliament would like to see the EDF incorporated in the general budget of the Union , in order to make European policies more coherent and improve democratic scrutiny of its management .
in writing . - ( PT ) The implementation of the budget of the 10th European Development Fund must not be assessed in purely accounting terms .
This is not the function of this Parliament , as duly noted by the report in question .
Rather than discussing the integration of the EDF into the Commission 's budget or the rules on using the balance remaining from each financial year , what concerns us is the coherence between the use of these funds and the political goals of the European Union with regard to the ACP countries .
In this respect , it is striking that the current situation on the ground is quite different from what existed when these instruments , and their framework , were created .
In addition to the China factor to be taken into account in many of these countries , consideration must be given to the effects of changes in the agricultural and food markets , climate change and the new approach of the United States towards Africa .
In light of all this , it is felt that the road followed so far is no longer totally appropriate and this , I would stress , is our main concern .
in writing . - ( SV ) When the EU , the world 's largest donor of aid , operates in the developing world , our values must be clear .
Human rights must be our watchword , not just in theory but also in practice .
Saying , therefore , that the EU should not use the European Development Fund to promote democracy and human rights by being able to demand development in this area conflicts with our desire to achieve real results .
Aid does good only if it benefits the citizens , therefore we as donors must be able to set criteria to encourage the development of democracy , human rights and a functioning civil society .
Creating development sometimes also requires direct help through peacekeeping operations .
These should also be able to be covered by the European Investment Fund , as such operations reduce human suffering and prevent catastrophe in a very real way .
Naturally , we in the rich world must not impose a particular way of living on other people .
However , we have a responsibility to enable choice where today there is no choice .
Therefore , I was disappointed that what is otherwise a good and important report calls into question what is for me a fundamental principle of something being done in return in terms of free and human rights , and the opportunity for peacekeeping operations within the European Investment Fund .
in writing . - The Green Group will not vote in favour of the Meijer report on Macedonia .
Although the report contains many parts that clearly set out the progress Macedonia has made , it is totally unacceptable how , at the very last minute , Greek politicians have lobbied against the paragraph on the name issue .
The most notable expression of this was the wish to delete the reference to the 1995 Interim Accord in which Greece gave its assurance that the name issue would not be an obstacle to Macedonia 's membership of international institutions .
Greece not only calls into question its commitment to international law but is also interfering in the sovereignty of another state in an unprecedented way .
This behaviour by an EU Member State is not acceptable .
in writing . - ( CS ) FYROM is one of the few countries in the world whose name has not been officially recognised by all other countries .
Although this republic has introduced various ethnic and religious holidays , the abnormal bilateral agreement on the status of US citizens still exists .
Among the successes are the measures taken against organised crime and corruption , achieved by the government in spite of the powerlessness of the occupation forces in Kosovo to do anything about these problems .
I find it incomprehensible that to date no united position has been agreed on giving citizens abroad the opportunity to vote .
In the referendum in Montenegro these citizens were discriminated against ; in the case of the elections in Macedonia the EU is hesitant .
Article 31 welcomes the police raid on a weapons cache .
I consider the information in the second part of the paragraph about terrorists being maltreated when arrested to be a poor joke .
I do not know of any cases of policemen politely asking terrorists to give themselves up .
Apart from the unusual situation concerning the name of the country and the agreement with the US that flies in the face of international agreements . One of the unusual aspects of the FYROM issue is its disputes with its neighbours .
The way I see it , we must insist on these disputes being resolved before the country joins the EU .
Since some of the amendments can change the meaning of the report , our vote on the final ' product ' will depend on whether or not the amendments are adopted .
in writing . - Mr Meijer 's progress report on the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 's movement towards accession is a balanced report on a divisive issue .
FYROM must continue with a reform-driven agenda in order to ensure that accession negotiations can be started as soon as possible .
To preserve a negotiating position on the name issue we must avoid any temptation to use FYROM 's naming as a hurdle to its involvement in international institutions .
I therefore welcome the report and the rapporteur 's efforts in ensuring that the naming issue did not dominate the document .
in writing . - British Labour MEPs are pleased to have voted in favour of this resolution , which marks a genuine effort to maintain the progress of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) towards EU membership highlighting positive movements in combating corruption and protecting the freedom of media as well as pressing for the further actions necessary towards the opening of accession negotiations .
We note that there has been considerable progress , and look forward to the possibility of opening accession talks with FYROM .
In relation to amendment 13 on the name issue negotiations , we voted against this amendment .
Although we fully support all the work being done to find a resolution to the name issue , we do not believe that this should be linked in anyway to FYROM 's membership of international organisations .
Each should be decided on its own merits .
Secondly , we abstained on the vote on amendment 7 discussing the issue of visa liberalisation .
As the UK is not a party to the Schengen Agreement under which this issue rests , it was not appropriate for us to support this amendment .
in writing . - ( EL ) Today 's success is due to the coordinated and effective efforts we have made together with many other fellow Members throughout the spectrum of the European Parliament .
This attempt was successful thanks also to the shift late in the day in the official Greek line in favour of finding a genuine compromise solution by means of a composite name acceptable to all .
We must work hard to capitalize on this progress and arrive at a solution through a fair compromise .
This must be achieved under the same UN auspices before the end of 2008 .
It is in the interests of Greece and of the peoples to maintain peace and stability in the region , so another impasse lasting many years must be prevented .
Public life must be rid of the Skopia syndrome .
in writing . - ( EL ) The MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece ( KKE ) have voted against the report .
We are opposed to a capitalist , warmongering EU , and hence also to any enlargement of the EU .
The root cause of the Balkan problems is imperialist schemes , EU , USA and NATO interventions , and border changes .
The accession of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia ( FYROM ) and other Balkan countries to the EU and ΝΑΤΟ involves their peoples in the imperialist standoffs between the USA , the EU and Russia over the control of energy sources and transport channels .
Those living in the wider region are being put at serious risk .
The Communist Party of Greece is not concerned with name issues .
It supports a mutually acceptable solution about the name , which must represent a purely geographical definition divorced from divisive nationalism and enslavement .
Those who have felt the need to excuse themselves in front of the Greek people because of their last-minute volte-face on the Macedonian name issue , and who belong to the EU , the New Democracy , PASOK , the Left-Wing Coalition ( SYN ) and the Popular Orthodox Rally ( LA.O.S. ) , are rubbing their hands with glee .
They voted in favour of the adoption of the supposedly positive amendments of the name in a bid to divert the people from the main point , which is imperialist intervention and schemes for the Balkans .
This diversion is designed to conceal their subjugation to imperialist aims and the appointment of the EU , the USA and NATO as arbiters .
All this exposes our country to threats and pressure designed to extort money in exchange for full participation in the imperialist schemes , which have been becoming even worse since the NATO Summit in Bucharest .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted for the excellent own-initiative report by Mrs Gomes on China 's policy and its effects on Africa .
Although the fact that China is ready to cooperate with African countries in a concrete and pragmatic way is to be welcomed , there are a number of areas of concern , such as the cooperation by China with repressive regimes in Africa , the failure to respect social and environmental rules , the supply of arms to repressive and undemocratic regimes .
I support the proposal that the African Union , China and the EU should set up a standing consultative body to improve the coherence and effectiveness of their respective cooperation activities and to establish a global framework for concrete operational projects on common challenges such as adaptation to climate change , renewable energies , agriculture , water and health .
I also support the idea of a dialogue between the Chinese People 's National Congress , the Pan-African Parliament , African national parliaments and our European Parliament , with the aim of fostering sustainable development and enhancing their capabilities for scrutiny of the executive in peace and democracy .
in writing . - ( NL ) The Gomes report rightly points to various unacceptable Chinese practices in Africa , and sometimes gets down to the nitty-gritty .
The ethnocide in Tibet might be receiving a lot of attention at the moment , but Chinese policy in Africa is at least equally indicative of a regime that could not care less about human rights and other rules of the game .
The Chinese do business with anyone as long as it satisfies the thirst for oil .
Chinese firms and businessmen create extraterritorial Chinese islands that are protected by corrupt rulers , who are in turn protected by Chinese vetoes in the Security Council .
Europe is no match for the Chinese , and slowly but surely we are being driven out of Africa .
Europe must in the end just realise that , as the Chinese gain the upper hand in Africa , our constantly repeated message of democracy , freedom and good governance , not to forget sustainability , is becoming completely meaningless .
It is time for a different strategy .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the Gomes report on China 's policy and its effects on Africa because I consider that , in light of the growing Chinese presence in Africa , the European Union must try , by adopting a common position on dialogue , to encourage China to base its political and economic actions in Africa on criteria which will not prevent the promotion of peace , human security , rule of law or sustainable development .
I also endorse the call for the European Union to persevere in promoting respect for the principles by which it is governed , regardless of the success of its dialogue initiatives .
in writing . - The report by Ana Maria Gomes covers many important aspects , not least the fact that the involvement of the EU and China should be in the interest of the African countries and people , and that external investors operating in Africa should respect social and environmental rules .
This is why we chose to support the report .
However , we do not support the phrasing in the first paragraph highlighting the importance of the Treaty of Lisbon in enhancing effectiveness and coherence in the EU 's external relations .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Committee on Development has drawn up a very balanced report on China 's policy and its effects on Africa .
I have all the more satisfaction in voting for it in that I had a very unfortunate experience at the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
In my report on the impact of foreign direct investment , I made a few critical observations on Chinese investments in Africa .
The ACP delegates , with the connivance of the Socialists , Communists and Greens , succeeded in removing all of them from the report .
Why were they unwilling to state that Chinese FDI is concentrated on the extractive industries and often supports ACP governments in policy orientations that are not in the interest of democracy , rule of law and poverty eradication in those countries ?
Why did they remove the finding that Chinese FDIs are invested in certain multinationals that inundate African markets with low quality goods , especially textiles ?
I welcome the reference in the report 's explanatory statement to the fact that the Chinese scramble in Africa is reaping African national resources for Chinese profit and undermining sustainable development .
There is also concern about the risk that China might export some of its worst home practices to Africa ...
( Explanation of vote cut pursuant to Rule 163 of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( DE ) I would like to take the opportunity afforded by this explanation of vote to express my warm thanks to the rapporteur , Ana Maria Gomes .
The report being voted on is a very successful one .
I would also like to voice my thanks for the fact that numerous aspects of the opinion of the Committee on International Trade have been incorporated into the report .
In my view , it is very important to assess China 's policy in Africa fairly without generalised condemnation of its engagement there .
Instead , the EU 's own engagement should be stepped up via the approach centred on ' More Europe in Africa ' .
This could improve European visibility and achieve a stronger European presence , thereby strengthening the contacts between the EU and Africa .
Closer economic ties between the two continents could be of great benefit to both sides .
in writing . - Ana Gomes ' report on China 's policy and its effects on Africa highlights both the positive move Beijing has made by engaging with Africa , while also making the point that China 's policy requires improvements .
On the one hand the EU must welcome China 's development role in Africa though , worryingly , through its aid China is exporting some of its worst home practices including corruption and disregard for labour rights and environmental standards .
Indeed , engagement with China , on these issues and its relationship with repressive regimes such as Sudan and Zimbabwe , requires a common EU approach .
It is with these views in mind that I voted in favour of the report 's recommendations .
in writing . - The report by Ms Ana Maria Gomes covers many important aspects .
Not least the fact that the involvement of the EU and China should be in the interest of the African countries and people , and that external investors operating in Africa should respect social and environmental rules .
This is why we chose to support the report .
However , we do not support the phrasing in the first paragraph highlighting the importance of the Treaty of Lisbon in enhancing effectiveness and coherence in the EU 's external relations .
In terms of any reform of the Common Agricultural Policy , Sinn Féin stands for real reform which would allow for farming and rural life to become sustainable in Ireland , Europe and in the wider world .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the Gomes report because it provides a very detailed analysis of the causes and consequences of Chinese domination in Africa from both an economic and a political perspective .
China 's impressive economic rise in the past 20 years has led to an increase in the demand for oil and other raw materials .
China today imports 30 % of its oil from Africa ; that figure will reach 45 % by 2010 .
China also invests massively in infrastructures in Africa .
These commitments are without preconditions concerning human rights or social and environmental conditions .
Europe must sit up and take note of this situation and it must try to define a strategic partnership with both Africa and China to ensure the sustainable development of the African continent .
in writing . - ( PT ) The report in question correctly defines the current state of Chinese policy in Africa , describing in detail the investments , financing and political consequences .
Unfortunately it is unrealistic in its proposals , repeatedly suggesting that the EU should be urged to encourage China to adopt ideal behaviour in the area of human rights , workers ' rights and respect for the environment and , finally , to do in its external policy what it does not do in its internal policy .
In the chapter on what should be done with regard to the ( correct ) portrayal of Chinese policy in Africa and its consequences , there is no guidance on what the EU 's strategy should be , in partnership with countries such as India , Brazil and ( an unacceptable omission ) the United States .
The current global situation is nothing like the models that have framed geostrategic thinking in recent decades .
The emergence of new economies which differ greatly from each other , the generalised and globalised increase in consumption , the competition for essential goods and raw materials , the threat of social revolt , the risk of preference for muscular political regimes , all these new realities require analysis and , in particular , a more strategic proposal with a different view of the future .
That is why I abstained from voting on this report .
in writing . - ( IT ) The report by Ana Maria Gomes on ' China 's policy and its effects on Africa ' highlights the primordial role now occupied by Beijing in Africa 's diplomatic , economic and political equilibrium .
It is vital in my opinion that , even though China has turned its spotlight on the hitherto forgotten continent of Africa , its conduct must be kept within limits so as not to slip into a potential new form of colonialism , which has after all marked and written shameful pages of our own , European , history .
To this end I hope the EU will draw up a coherent strategy to ensure that China shows respect for issues such as governance , the fight against corruption , the protection of human rights , employment and the environment , and in order to guarantee clear , transparent agreements between the two countries .
in writing . - ( SV ) Africa is a continent in need of aid , stronger trade links and increased participation in the globalisation which is creating greater welfare for all .
China has quickly come to be an important partner on the African continent , with a huge appetite for raw materials , not least the oil which several African countries possess .
The fact that more and more countries are interested in Africa boosts its development .
However , we must state that China 's uncritical approach when it comes to obtaining access to these raw materials , with little or no consideration for human rights , corruption and undemocratic regimes , poses a challenge for the EU , which has long insisted that trade and aid must go hand in hand with demands for democratic development taking into account free and human rights .
The European Parliament clearly urging China to take human rights and development for the people of Africa into account is an important signal .
Development is a broader concept than economic progress alone and I therefore wholeheartedly support the view that human rights and democracy must be an important aspect of international relations , including China 's relations with Africa .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.50 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Situation in Burma ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the situation in Burma .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) The European Union is closely following the situation in Burma , or Myanmar .
We are actively supporting efforts , made primarily by the United Nations , to accelerate the transition to democracy , reconciliation and the country 's development .
We are also consulting our Asian partners about all these issues .
The special envoy , Mr Fassino , reported to the European Parliament on the situation in Burma / Myanmar .
He also informed Parliament about the alignments taking place with Burma 's neighbours and other ASEAN members .
As we know , the United Nations Special Envoy , Mr Gambari , visited the country at the beginning of March .
I must stress our disappointment that his visit did not have any obvious results .
Most of all , we had the impression that the Burmese authorities were not prepared to cooperate with the international community .
The European Union would like to see the authorities accept Mr Gambari 's proposals for a further political process .
The entire international community agrees with these proposals , which are not too far-reaching .
The EU and Mr Gambari are pointing to similar problems .
In addition , the EU regularly sends key political communications to Burma / Myanmar .
One of those key communications is the recent European Parliament resolution regarding the situation in that country .
Our central joint message is principally that national reconciliation , stability and prosperity will only be possible through a credible and inclusive process of democratisation .
This is why the European Union is keenly following the response of the opposition to the coming referendum on the constitution .
We are calling on the authorities to allow an unimpeded and open debate about the constitution before the referendum , to stop persecuting political activists and to repeal laws that limit the freedom of expression .
Regardless of the current situation , the European Union has not lost hope that the Burmese authorities will guarantee a free and fair referendum and allow the presence of international observers .
It is prepared to support observers from ASEAN countries .
In addition to allowing correct conduct of the referendum , we are calling on Burma to release political prisoners and cease arrests .
The Council joins the European Parliament in appealing to Burma not to extend Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi 's house arrest .
We hope that China and ASEAN countries will also continue to support Mr Gambari 's mission and the position of the United Nations Security Council in the future .
We sent this message through diplomatic channels and via our special envoy .
At the session of the General Affairs and External Relations Council to be held next week , the European Union intends to extend the validity of the Common Position on Burma .
In this way humanitarian activities , albeit limited , will still be possible while sanctions remain in force .
We are calling on international partners to secure more aid , which the citizens of Burma urgently need .
The European Union will continue to provide such aid .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Ferrero-Waldner is unable to attend this meeting .
On her behalf and on behalf of the Commission , I would like to say a few things about Burma .
In a couple of weeks , on 10 May , the Burmese people will be asked to approve or reject a constitution .
The European Union and its partners believe that in the preparation of the draft constitution there was insufficient involvement of the various political forces and ethnic groups that exist in the country .
The ruling junta has done exactly as it pleases in this process .
As a consequence , the constitution stipulates that 25 % of the members of parliament will be appointed from the military while the remaining 75 % will be elected .
It is possible that Aung San Suu Kyi may be able to vote in the elections scheduled for 2010 , and perhaps even stand as a candidate , but the regime seems to want to prevent her from becoming President of the Union of Myanmar some day .
China , India and ASEAN have some influence : their main concerns are the country 's stability as well as trade relations and investment .
With the assistance of discreet Chinese diplomacy , Mr Gambari , the UN Special Envoy , was unable to open up the political process any further and he stated that he was going to concentrate on economic , social and humanitarian issues .
Given the absence of tangible projects , on 29 April the General Affairs Council will discuss all the possible operations the European Union could carry out to influence the situation in Burma .
I would like to stress that the European Union 's aim is to promote a balanced approach to the Burmese issue ; above all we want objective results .
On 19 November 2007 the Council adopted a version of the common position which introduced new sanctions .
The EC Regulation entered into force on 10 March and its annual review is due to take place at the end of this month .
The European Union 's sanctions reflect our dissatisfaction with the slow rate of progress towards democracy , the persistent detention of numerous political prisoners and the violation of fundamental freedoms .
Nevertheless , the impact of the sanctions must be examined regularly to ensure that they are having a direct impact on the members of the regime and their resources .
The Commission has established assistance programmes under the general cooperation policy and these focus on health and education .
I am pleased to note that the European Parliament has expressed its support for these measures under its right of scrutiny .
This is in addition to ECHO 's humanitarian aid to assist neighbouring countries and the Burmese refugees in the region .
We continue to support Mr Gambari 's mission .
The European Union is part of the ' Group of Friends ' , which brings together in New York the five permanent members of the UN Security Council , the ASEAN Chair , India , Japan and Norway , which are all involved in monitoring the situation in Burma .
The EU Special Envoy for Burma , Mr Fassino , plays a key role in supporting Mr Gambari 's mission .
That is the information I wanted to pass on to you on behalf of Mrs Ferrero-Waldner .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , we are discussing Burma today , because the European Union 's targeted sanctions are due for renewal in five days ' time and the Burmese authorities are pressing ahead with a referendum on their sham constitution in just over two weeks .
We want to make a sincere appeal to the Burmese regime to take a step that is very much in its own interest as well as the interests of the Burmese people : to take the necessary action to rejoin the international community of nations .
The policy of suspicious isolation has been tried for almost the whole of Burma 's life as an independent state and it has failed .
It has harmed Burma and it has harmed the Burmese people .
In 1948 , Burma was the world 's largest exporter of rice , the producer of 75 % of the world 's teak and the wealthiest country in south-east Asia .
It was believed to be on the fast track to development .
Today , it has a GDP per capita lower than Rwanda or Bangladesh .
The Burmese economy urgently needs assistance from international financial organisations , yet , ever since Burma turned in upon itself and away from democracy , the Asian Development Bank , the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund have all , quite rightly , refused to extend any further financial help .
The refusal of the Burmese regime to engage with external realities has led countries across the world to impose economic sanctions .
Burma needs friends to help protect its national interests on the global stage , but even ASEAN has now declared , again quite rightly , that it will no longer defend the Burmese authorities in any international forum .
We say to the Burmese Government : the world is not against you if only you will stop turning your back against the world .
You do not need to be frightened of the international community any more than you need to fear your own people .
You do not need the ninth largest army and the fifteenth largest military budget in the world .
You do not need to live in a bunker .
Recognise the democratic aspirations of your people , cease the political repression and enable opposition forces to engage fully and freely in a fresh constitutional process .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , first of all we want to call on the Burmese regime : to release political opponents and the more than 1 800 political prisoners , including Aung San Suu Kyi , the leaders of the ' 88 Generation Students and the leaders of the Shan Nationalities League for Democracy arrested in 2005 ; to account for all the casualties and missing persons from last September 's crackdown on protests by Buddhist monks and democracy activists , including the whereabouts of missing monks and nuns ; to secure access to Burma for the incoming UN Special Rapporteur on the situation of human rights in Burma and to permit opposition political parties to meet with the Special Envoy .
There are real concerns about the so-called referendum : there is a danger that the referendum under current repressive conditions will only cement in place continued military rule .
Since announcing the referendum , the government issued Law No 1 / 2008 , which denies voting rights to members of religious orders , including monks and nuns .
It also imposes a three-year prison sentence on anyone found ' lecturing , distributing papers , using posters or disturbing the voting in any other manner in the polling booths or at a public or private place to destroy the referendum ' .
We seek guarantees from the Government to convene independent election commissions , compile a proper voter registration list , lift longstanding restrictions on the media , permit freedom of association , expression and assembly in Burma , and revoke new regulations that criminalise legitimate debate about the referendum .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner Barrot , you referred to a balanced approach .
I must say that I fear the approach is overly timid , first and foremost because there is information that this House needs to know , namely that the EU possesses instruments for the promotion of democracy and human rights .
These are new instruments , and now it is not even mandatory to have authorisation from a country 's dictatorship to be able to disburse the funds .
Therefore , either we discuss what is happening as onlookers or , alternatively , we discuss it as people who are wondering what can be done .
If that is the case , we need to know - today - how we are disbursing these funds , whom we are able to help , and how we are managing to get information into and out of the country .
For example , we need to consider how money is being spent in the so-called war on drugs , money which in Burma goes straight into the Burmese regime 's coffers so as to be better able to repress its own people , courtesy of the United Nations Office .
We in the European Union should also confront this problem .
As for the referendum , it is not so much that it did not sufficiently involve all parties , as you said : the referendum is a cover-up so that the regime is better able to carry on wantonly flouting human and civil rights in Burma .
I wished to say to the Council representative , Mr Lenarčič , that since the monks were heavily involved in the non-violent struggle and even paid with their lives for that struggle , I think your announcement that you intend not to invite the Dalai Lama to Brussels for much-needed political dialogue with the EU countries will symbolically have - and has already had - a negative impact on the non-violent struggle of the Burmese people , especially the monks .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( GA ) Mr President , in October last year , the world was witness to thousands of Buddhist monks and members of the public marching through the streets of Rangoon demanding freedom and reform from Burma 's unjust and violent military regime .
This was the largest anti-government demonstration since the bloody suppression of the first democracy movement in 1988 .
If anybody thinks that the situation could have been worse than it was last year , all we have to do is look at the evidence : poverty , food shortages , continuing oppression , the elimination of political opponents , the continuing incarceration of a Sakharov and Nobel Peace Prize winner , the continuing oppression and suppression of any alternative viewpoint being brought forward .
It is incumbent on us within the European Union to continue the strong messages of support that we gave in September 2007 to the people who are campaigning in Burma .
Now we are being faced with a situation whereby a new constitution is being put to a referendum and this constitution is being labelled by some as the next step towards the restoration of democracy , yet it allocates a quarter of the seats in the parliament to the military ; it forbids Ms Aung San Suu Kyi from standing as a candidate for that election because she is married to a foreigner , and it forces those to abide totally by the diktat of the junta .
China must now be involved in bringing pressure to bear on the junta in Burma to ensure that proper representation is given to the people , but Bangladesh and Thailand must also be given support to allow them to encourage the Burmese authorities to look anew .
We must redouble our efforts in sanctions and in taking strong political action , not just at European level , but throughout the world , and in particular at the United Nations .
All Member States of the European Union should be speaking with one voice at the United Nations to put pressure on the authorities to take action at that level .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , as has just been pointed out , the humanitarian and human rights situation in Burma is deteriorating and it is up to the next General Affairs and External Relations Council to acknowledge this loud and clear and to redefine the action implemented under the European policy .
What seemed initially to be a positive sign , the famous constitutional reform , quickly became an utterly Machiavellian project .
The presence of military personnel in government is thus going to be included formally in the constitution , in violation of all international standards and in the absence of any observers , while all those who oppose the current regime are excluded from electoral representation .
This is a complete farce and it will plunge Burma even further under the junta 's iron rule .
It has to be said that this represents a failure of the inclusive strategy , within Burma itself and at regional level , implemented by the European Union and the United Nations .
Our Envoy has not even managed to set foot in Burma .
Today our double-sided strategy - sanctions / incentives - therefore has to become more effective and more focused .
In other words , we need better , more insightful and more regular implementation of the criteria already laid down in accordance with the stated objectives .
Our financial measures must isolate completely the companies that are linked to the junta or that , in one way or another , help to fund it , as well as the people in power who can swan off to other countries to go shopping and send their children to schools abroad .
The same applies to the banking sanctions imposed on them , which at present do not prohibit transfers via European banks .
As far as ASEAN is concerned , the negotiations on the free trade agreement must be seen as an opportunity to ensure that the neighbouring states refrain from implementing any strategy that might offset the sanctions against Burma .
The second aspect relates to incentives .
At the same time , we must support the life blood of the country : on a humanitarian level , which goes with saying of course , but also on a political level .
That means publicly condemning the Burmese authorities , denouncing the content of the referendum and the procedures used , and promoting with conviction the rule of law and fundamental freedoms via EIDHR projects .
It also means supporting and protecting human rights activities , combating the impressment of children into armed factions and protecting children from violence .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , please do not think me Chinaphobic because I often criticise China 's position in my speeches .
However , I think there can be no doubt when it comes to the situation in Burma and the well-known responsibilities of the Chinese Government , which backs the Burmese Council of State .
These are moreover the same responsibilities that China has in Darfur , in Tibet and in many other parts of the world where human rights violations are being perpetrated , not least in China itself .
Obviously , then , I can join in with and endorse the expression of indignation , abhorrence and condemnation customarily contained in our resolutions , but I remain sceptical as to how effective it can be .
I back the clear condemnation and deplore the fact that in 45 years the Burmese regime has made no progress on respect for human rights and freedom of conscience .
How could I fail to condemn the political and ethnic repression of the Burmese people ?
Indeed , I would take this opportunity to recall in particular the case of the Karen people who have been proudly holding out for decades in defence of their identity , and I would just as resolutely condemn the referendum mechanism enshrined in the constitution which the regime is seeking to impose on Burma .
Of course , ladies and gentlemen , on a sentimental level I agree with everything stated in the resolution , but given that - as usual - everything emanating from EU acts remains at the level of sentiment I think it is utterly useless .
As the resolution says , not even the renewed targeted sanctions have had the desired impact .
Consequently , it is certainly worth calling for the sanctions to be tightened , but similar pressure should above all be used against states such as China , Russia and India , in order that , by virtue of their economic and political influence over the Burmese regime , they cooperate with the European Union in this area and stop supplying weapons and strategic resources .
Basically I also agree with the points put very cogently by Mrs Flautre .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in a few days ' time , the Council will decide whether to maintain its common position on Burma and whether to maintain sanctions .
In Burma , there have been no substantive changes with regard to democracy , the rule of law or respect for human rights .
Almost 2 000 political prisoners are being detained there .
Opposition leader Aung San Suu Kyi has been under house arrest for years .
In short , there is not the slightest reason to ease the sanctions .
Admittedly , a constitutional referendum has been announced and a draft constitution has been published , but this lacks any democratic legitimacy .
The public has not been consulted , and neither has the democratic opposition .
The draft constitution is full of democratic shortcomings .
It is absurd that a quarter of the seats in parliament will go to the military .
It is absurd to exclude candidates who are married to a foreigner or have children who are foreign nationals .
All this testifies to a lack of democratic progress .
What is to be done ?
I endorse the appeals voiced by previous speakers , especially the measured comments of my colleague Geoffrey van Orden .
However , we cannot address the issue of Burma on our own .
Without the support of the Chinese , the junta would not survive .
That is why the Chinese also have a responsibility for what is happening there .
China has moved in to fill the economic vacuum created by the West 's sanctions and is reaping the benefits .
That is why an approach must be made to China if we want to see any change in the situation in Burma .
I would also like to appeal to my friends in ASEAN .
I know that my ASEAN friends regard any comment about Myanmar as interference in their domestic affairs , but I am also aware that the situation in Myanmar makes them uneasy .
My message to them is that Myanmar is blighting ASEAN 's image in the world , so ASEAN too must bring pressure to bear .

Mr President , I welcome the statements of the Council and of the Commission this afternoon , but with 700 political prisoners detained following last year 's demonstrations and General Than Shwe having refused to meet UN Special Envoy Gambari , renewing our common position six months later is necessary - but it is not enough .
Why not extend sanctions to oil and gas , where the regime is making its core funding ?
If the United States imposes sanctions on finance and banking , denying foreign currency to the regime , why does the European Union not do so ?
What steps can be taken to enable humanitarian access to eastern Burma , where 3 000 villages are reported razed to the ground and where European aid agencies are ready to act ?
Buddhist monks have written ' no ' on their monastery walls to send their message to Burmese civilians for the constitutional referendum in May .
Europe 's message to Burma must also be a resounding ' no ' to dictatorship and ' yes ' to democracy .
( FR ) Mr President , it is now six months since the demonstrations in Rangoon revealed to the world the serious human rights violations taking place on a regular basis in Burma .
It seems , unfortunately , that international public opinion has already forgotten about this country in crisis .
The reality is that we must provide unfailing support for the people of Burma and adopt a coherent long-term strategy to guarantee , finally , respect for democracy , for the freedom of the press and for the freedom of religion , expression and association .
In spite of the diplomatic pressure , in spite of the exemplary action of Aung San Suu Kyi , who , I must remind you , was awarded the Sakharov Prize in 1990 , and in spite of the efforts of international civil society , the situation has not improved : because they do not have the right to vote , 400 000 Buddhist monks will not be able to take part in the referendum .
This unacceptable situation is proof that the pressure applied to date has been inadequate .
The sanctions against the Burmese regime must be extended and must target the political elite rather than the population .
Above all , I hope that the EU 's action will be strengthened .
In order to raise awareness among the public , I ask , we ask , that Aung San Suu Kyi - who embodies this fight - be given the freedom of all the European capitals , thereby demonstrating our determination to see to it that human rights and freedom in Burma are promoted effectively .
( ET ) When I enter the Parliament building in Brussels in the mornings , Aung San Suu Kyi looks down at me with her sad eyes from a great placard and I must confess that every morning I feel embarrassingly powerless .
The resolutions which we have adopted almost unanimously have had no effect whatever .
Today when I heard both the Commission and the Council representatives speaking here I noticed the rhetoric : ' We hope , we wish , we consider , we are concerned ' .
Is this not too demure an attitude to take in respect of a regime like this ?
We must clearly speak with one voice , and do so much more forcefully .
How do we move forward ?
We always come back to economic sanctions .
In my view this is clearly , however , the only way to influence this regime ; we must of course monitor very carefully where our development aid goes .
Our money must be conditional upon very specific reforms in this society .
Mr President , I have been in Burma and seen the misery and the oppression under which the Burmese people live .
Disgracefully , Europe has not done enough to help the Burmese - their courageous monks , their political prisoners , their brave leader Aung San Suu Kyi - to get freedom and to get rid of the junta oppressors .
Europe has not done enough to mobilise influential neighbours such as Thailand , Malaysia , Singapore and especially Indonesia to come in support for those who fight for human rights and democracy in Burma .
Europe has not done enough to press China and India to stop supporting in one way or another the Burmese oppressors .
Europe has not done enough to prevent and punish European companies such as the French Total who keep doing business in Burma , thus helping pay the drug mafia and the oppressors who form the Burmese junta .
Europe must act now and refuse to accept the farce of a referendum .
Mr Barroso and his Commissioners heading to Beijing today must talk firmly and clearly about Burma and Beijing 's responsibilities and its sad state .
The current and the next Council presidency must act decisively to make a difference for the people of Burma , namely by strictly implementing the sanctions decided and by pushing the UN Security Council to act against the Burmese oppressors .
Mr President , this House is becoming habitual in passing resolutions , resolutions which are totally ineffective to a very large extent .
Also , we are used to applying sanctions , which are also totally ineffective , because they are not directed at those who are responsible for really changing things , but are , as in this case , directed at the ordinary people of Burma , whose lives we are making even more miserable .
It has already been mentioned that the real culprit in this case is China .
Are we directing any sanctions against China ?
No !
The EU market is flooded with defective goods that we are purchasing from China .
Why are we not applying any sanctions to China in order to see how that affects the situation in Burma ?
Mr President , I agree with my colleagues on this matter .
It is not only a case of there being no change over the last number of months , but of there being no change for 50 years .
There are breaches of human rights on a daily basis .
Religious communities do not come onto the streets unless they believe that there is something radically wrong with a country .
We saw that a number of months ago , when the monks came onto the streets , because they felt that they could get their message across .
The reaction of the junta was otherwise : it made sure that their protests on the streets were immediately stopped and quelled , and the murders that occurred immediately thereafter are outrageous .
And this government has continued to remain in power .
The main culprits here are the companies and the countries that deal with Burma : those that are supplying arms and buying its products .
I agree with my colleagues that we should be more proactive in forcing China to take a very different course of action in dealing with Burma .
That is the only way we can get change .
We also need to take action and talk to those European companies that are helping this junta .
Unless we take action ourselves , it is going to be very difficult for us to force change on other countries .
I support this motion for a resolution .
Mr President , Burma is one of those issues which quite properly generates considerable input into MEPs ' mailboxes .
I see parallels between Burma and Zimbabwe .
Both were once thriving economies .
Both then turned from democracy to oppression and all that goes with it : the denial of basic freedoms , extreme poverty and oppressive militarism .
But I also see a parallel in the EU 's response to both Burma and Zimbabwe .
Both , frankly , are far too timid in that regard .
We heard from the Commission and the Council today , but what really had they got to say to us ?
Very , very little .
I say we must be much more robust .
We must step up the economic and the other sanctions and we must put in place a proper and total arms embargo .
We must apply pressure where maybe it will have the most effect : on those regimes , those sympathisers , like China , who are propping up this junta .
Only then , particularly when we deal with those who have an attitude of ambivalence to the military junta , can it change .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) I have already mentioned that at its next session the General Affairs and External Relations Council will debate the question of Burma and is likely to adopt some conclusions .
I will address this matter later , but first I would like to respond to some comments .
Firstly , Mr Cappato .
I would like to stress that so far the Council has not at any time debated the possibility of inviting the Dalai Lama to a meeting with the General Affairs and External Relations Council .
Nor do I believe that such a meeting could ever happen .
If it did happen , it would revolve around Tibet and not Burma , which is the topic of debate at this moment .
However , I would like to say this : What is needed to improve the situation in Tibet is not so much a dialogue between the European Union and the Dalai Lama , but more a dialogue between the Chinese authorities and the Dalai Lama .
The Slovenian Presidency has already called for that several times .
Now something about the next session of the General Affairs and External Relations Council .
We expect the Council to reach conclusions and decide that it will reiterate its deep concern about the situation in Burma and call on the Burmese authorities to act urgently to bring about a transition to legitimate civilian rule and national reconciliation .
We also expect the Council to call for an open debate on the referendum , which should be conducted freely and fairly .
In addition , as Mrs Flautre mentioned , we expect the Burmese authorities to invite international monitors to oversee the referendum .
I am in no doubt that the Council will call for the immediate release of all political detainees , as pointed out by Mr Howitt .
Nor do I doubt that at the same time it will appeal for the release of Mrs Aung San Suu Kyi .
We also expect sanctions , which , as Mr Van Orden correctly remarked , are due to end , to be extended for a further 12 months with the possibility of modifying them , that is to say tightening or relaxing them , at any given time according to the situation .
As regards weapons , and in response to Mr Romagnoli , the European Union has prohibited the export of any kind of weapons or associated materials to Burma .
That is part of the European Union 's sanctions and we expect that to be extended together with the sanction system or mechanism .
We are trying to get other Member States to join us in this .
Finally , I should add that one could say , as Mrs Flautre said , that the United Nations ' strategy towards Burma has failed .
However , one could also say that it has not yet borne fruit .
My inclination is towards the latter .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , I have listened carefully to all the comments , which reflect the fact that Burma still has a long way to go before it finds the road to democracy , and we are all too aware of that .
We must continue to strengthen our policy , and in this regard I would like to point out that we recently stepped up the sanctions targeting the regime and the leaders in particular .
The Council is currently looking into the possibility of broader financial sanctions .
I would add that , as far as the political prisoners are concerned , the General Affairs and External Relations Council on 29 April will be an opportunity to send a message to the regime once again to ask it to put an end to the intimidation and imprisonment .
We are extremely committed to maintaining solidarity with Aung San Suu Kyi .
I should point out that we cannot contact her directly but we are in contact with members of her party .
Over and above the sanctions , some of you obviously mentioned cooperation with neighbouring countries , which must help us to influence the Burmese regime , and Mrs Ferrero-Waldner will raise the Burmese issue in China this week .
The Commission has also made approaches to the Thai Government while Indonesia appears to be preparing a new initiative .
However , you are entirely right to emphasise the importance of action by the other countries in the region .
I now come to the problem of assisting the population .
The Burmese people must not pay the price for the political stagnation the leaders have brought about in the country .
As far as Europe is concerned , condemnation and the simple isolation of Myanmar are not enough .
I want to point out that when providing assistance we endeavour to take every opportunity to stress that it is only through better governance by the regime that this assistance will be as effective as we hope .
Mr Cappato , in particular , expressed concern about the way in which the international aid is monitored .
I must point out that the international aid is provided via the UN agencies and NGO partners , and I can tell you that we monitor it very closely .
However , you were right to raise this issue .
Therefore , I believe that what we want is to apply as much pressure as possible to ensure that Burma moves towards democracy at a faster pace .
At the same time , we must see to it that the people of Burma do not have to suffer even more as a result of total isolation , as this would probably not be the appropriate response .
To conclude the debate I have received six motions for a resolution pursuant to Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Thursday , 24 April 2008 .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - I sincerely welcome this resolution which demonstrates Parliament 's continued concern with the situation in Burma .
We have a responsibility to ensure that events in this country do not ' fall off the radar ' .
It is a well known fact that despite plentiful resources and fertile land , Burma remains one of world 's poorest countries .
It is also widely accepted that the military junta are responsible for a catalogue of human rights abuses , including the brutal treatment of Buddhist monks who protested against the regime .
In light of recent developments , notably the military junta 's intention to force through a wholly undemocratic and illegitimate constitution , it is high time that the European Union exercises all its influence in order to attempt to improve the situation .
The time for simply debating the situation in Burma within the international arena is over .
Negotiations between the UN and the Burmese authorities have proved to be entirely ineffective .
Targeted sanctions on the junta and businesses connected to it are now urgently required .
I fully support this resolution which calls on Council to put into force broader and tougher sanctions on the Burmese military regime .
In this regard , I sincerely hope that our words are followed by actions .
Illegal immigration , external action of the European Union and Frontex ( debate )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on illegal immigration , external action of the European Union and Frontex .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) By way of introduction I would like to emphasise that the challenge of immigration requires a comprehensive approach .
The European Union must develop an effective migration policy and legislation and at the same time continue its efforts to combat illegal immigration .
We need measures at European Union level as well as at the level of the Member States and we need the cooperation of third countries .
One of the most important aspects of the struggle against illegal immigration is effective control of the European Union 's external borders .
A great achievement in this field is without doubt the recent inclusion of nine Member States in the Schengen area .
Following their entry into the Schengen area , the Slovenian Presidency started work on the introduction of the second generation Schengen information system , known as SIS II , as soon as possible .
This is one of the European Union 's priority projects at the present time .
All the necessary activities should be carried out in a way that would facilitate completion of the transition from the first generation of the Schengen information system to the second generation by September 2009 at the latest .
Because of frequent incidents in the Mediterranean Sea and on the North African coast , the Commission and some Member States proposed some initiatives , in 2007 , for improving the management of illegal immigration .
As part of those efforts , in March of this year the Slovenian Presidency hosted a conference at Ministerial level on the future challenges for management of the European Union 's external borders .
The three reports presented by the Commission in February were debated for the first time at the conference .
The participants at the conference debated the evaluation and further development of the Frontex agency , as well as further measures for the management of the European Union 's external borders .
It was agreed that , in future , border controls should be strengthened and the reliable identification of individuals should be facilitated .
At the same time we must strive to make the European Union open and accessible .
In addition , Ministers discussed the proposal to establish a European border surveillance system , or EUROSUR .
The Presidency is already preparing further guidelines on this subject and the Council will debate them as part of judicial and internal affairs at its June session .
The fight against illegal immigration will also be made more effective by a directive on common standards and procedures for returning persons who reside illegally in the territory of the European Union Member States , or so-called Return Directive .
The Presidency has already begun the second round of negotiations with the European Parliament , which was very constructive .
We think that , with a joint effort , we could adopt this directive at the first reading .
Regarding the directive 's proposal concerning sanctions against employers of citizens from third countries who are illegally in the European Union , the Council is waiting for a proposal for changes and amendments from the European Parliament .
Another constituent part of the development of a comprehensive migration policy is a visa policy .
In this matter the Slovenian Presidency has achieved progress by discussing two very important dossiers , more precisely the changes to common consular instructions and the visa code .
In further work on both dossiers we are looking forward to creative cooperation with the European Parliament .
At the informal January session the Council debated asylum issues and practical cooperation among the Member States .
This month the Council adopted appropriate decisions .
As I said in my introduction , a comprehensive view of migration policy is necessary to manage and fight illegal immigration .
Combating illegal immigration also requires cooperation with the countries of origin and transit .
It additionally requires elimination of the reasons for migration , that is to say the stimulation of development in the countries of origin .
The purpose of the global approach adopted by the European Council in December 2005 was to initiate a comprehensive discussion on migration policy , as well as strengthen and deepen international cooperation primarily with the countries of origin and transit , and establish a partnership with those countries .
Many activities are taking place right now within this global approach .
They are focused mainly on the most critical regions , particularly Africa and the eastern and south-eastern regions bordering the European Union .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Mr President , the main factor that attracts illegal immigrants today is illegal work .
Migrants will continue to come to Europe as long as they believe that the financial benefits they can gain from working illegally outweigh the risks of being arrested by European law enforcement bodies .
We need a common will at European level to implement an effective strategy against illegal work .
That is the key to this strategy and it depends on us , on the Member States and on our common political will .
This is the context surrounding the Commission proposal on sanctions for those who employ third-country nationals residing illegally in the European Union , which is currently being examined by this Parliament and by the Council .
This proposal seeks to ensure that all the Member States adopt preventive measures and similar sanctions and actually apply them in the fight against illegal work .
I would like to encourage Parliament to continue its examination of this proposal so that we can establish a Community instrument that requires the Member States to take all the necessary measures to ensure that the rule of law is respected throughout the European Union .
Having said that , I do not want to underestimate the challenges posed by illegal immigration across the European Union 's external borders .
It is very likely that this year , too , many people from the African continent will be tempted to come to the EU by sea : some will come individually , some will come in small groups and others will be exploited by criminal organisations demanding large sums of money to bring them to Europe .
Considerable efforts have been made at European level to provide the Member States with the financial support needed in 2008 .
The budget of the Frontex agency has practically doubled in 2008 compared with 2007 .
This year it totals EUR 70 million , including more than EUR 31 million for operations at the EU 's maritime borders .
As regards the operations in these high-risk zones , Frontex has organised four large-scale operations : Poseidon , Hermes , Nautilus and Hera .
The information on their exact dates and duration is not yet in the public domain but , thanks to the increase in funding , they will last longer than they did in 2007 .
It is also important to point out that an agreement has been reached between the Member States and Frontex on the procedures and conditions for using the technical equipment contained in the Central Record of Available Technical Equipment ( CRATE ) database .
At present , 18 aircraft , 20 helicopters and 105 vessels are made available by the Member States on a voluntary basis .
For its part , Frontex provides the human resources needed to help the Member States to prepare and evaluate the maritime operations .
In its evaluation report on Frontex , the Commission recommended that the potential of CRATE and the commitments made by the Member States should be exploited to the full to ensure the availability of the necessary equipment for sea border operations .
The Frontex agency must report regularly to the European institutions on the actual use made of the equipment and the extent to which this use is adequate in relation to the needs , and it must inform them about a future mechanism to ensure the availability of the equipment offered by the Member States .
The agency could also increase the potential of CRATE by acquiring or leasing its own technical equipment .
Through these efforts , the Member States and Frontex will help to reduce , as far as possible , the disappearance at sea of those who to reach Europe in makeshift vessels .
As a result , the Commission welcomes the bilateral agreement between Spain and the West African states , as well as the contacts between Italy and Malta and Libya .
To date , the contacts with Libya have not had the desired result ; all the more reason to pursue them .
In its report on the future development of Frontex , the Commission emphasised that cooperation with third countries is a key element in improving the joint operations carried out by the agency in the long term .
As such , consideration should be given to whether Frontex should have the possibility of carrying out pilot projects with third countries as beneficiaries .
Of course , the agency must ensure coherence between its activities and the overall framework of the Union 's external policy .
Such projects could significantly strengthen the impact of cooperation launched under the current working arrangements , where the latter can serve to identify concrete needs for capacity building with regard to border management in specific third countries .
Finally , the Commission sees 2008 as a test year .
Frontex has a larger overall budget , the CRATE database is fully operational and the rapid intervention teams are in place .
We will of course evaluate the results of these measures and , where necessary , it may be appropriate to explore other options , such as the establishment of a European border surveillance system , as indicated in the Commission 's evaluation report .
That is the information I wanted to pass on to you today and I look forward to listening to the comments here in this House concerning these difficult problems .
At this time of year we start to hear of tragedies in which hundreds of migrants have drowned and since we well know what happens , it is good to ask whether we are better prepared this year to meet the challenge of illegal migration .
Frontex is only part of the solution - it is a deterrent , as the Commission said , in the fight against illegal migration , and this year will be a trial year for Frontex .
As Commissioner Barrot rightly said , this year we have doubled Frontex 's budget , we have given it a rapid intervention team and it also appears that it has enough means to carry out its missions .
Therefore , we will be monitoring Frontex 's work closely and we hope that this year it will be more effective than it has been so far .
If Frontex wants this Parliament 's support it has to show that it deserves our support .
Mr President , as I said , Frontex is but part of this solution ; whether or not we want this solution , there also need to be serious discussion about how the burden will be shared between the Member States - discussion that so far the Council has evaded .
We need to remove the hypocrisy whereby on the one hand we are scandalised when emigrants drown and on the other hand we leave the southern Member States to bear the burden by themselves .
In the Mediterranean , the need to share the burden could not be clearer .
Last year we already had incidents where emigrants found in Libya 's rescue zone were capsized or hanging onto tuna nets .
Libya did nothing , while the European countries stood around pointing the finger at one another .
I would like to ask the Commission and the Council what they are going to do this year - there is no doubt , Commissioner , President-in-Office , there is no doubt that we all have a duty to save people 's lives .
However , the time has come for both the Commission and the Council to have the courage to reply to these questions .
Is there a single country that is obliged to take in emigrants or should they be shared between everyone ?
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , my thanks go to you , Madam President , Mr President of the Council and Commissioner .
We welcome the Council President 's proposal of an integrated approach to immigration . This attempt to combine the various aspects of the problem and handle them together has to begin with the acknowledgement of a fact known to us all : 60 % of migrants arriving in Europe come by sea , and ' Fortress Europe ' has issued an approximate estimate , by default , that 12 000 human beings have drowned or otherwise gone missing over the past ten years .
The Mediterranean has become the largest open-air common grave anywhere .
In my opinion , even though Frontex was not established for humanitarian reasons , it cannot be dissociated from this context ; it cannot be dissociated from the fact that we are facing a major humanitarian problem .
Where do the difficulties and ambiguities of this project lie ?
The Member States have until now interpreted Frontex as serving to lessen their own responsibilities , and yet it is a coordinating agency based on a spirit of solidarity and reciprocity which cannot operate in isolation from the Member States .
Indeed , the Member States are primarily responsible for managing both land and sea borders .
Another significant point is that Frontex has not so far been adequately resourced ; now that we hear it is to have funds , structures , men and practical resources at its disposal , we shall need to verify their operational reliability .
It is not enough simply to list vessels and helicopters : we need to see how this stock of resources and tools can in actual fact be put at the service of the Agency .
My third point is that Frontex has still not solved one problem which you , Commissioner , raised when you said that we should contribute to bringing down the number of dead and missing persons .
How can Frontex undertake to do this ?
We believe that there is only one way : by ensuring that its remit includes sea rescue operations .
In other words , besides the rules governing immigration into the European Union , maritime law , humanitarian law , should also be included , setting out the need to save every human life whenever there is an imminent risk of lives being lost .
That is the message we leave you with , Commissioner , and those are a few points on which we should like some clarification from you and from the Council .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , let us be frank and open : as Frontex is a coordinating agency , we cannot expect it to stop the influx of irregular migrants in itself and of itself , nor to put an end to the trafficking in human beings .
Frontex is not , and never will be , a panacea to all the problems caused by irregular migration .
At the very end it is simple : EU border security is the ultimate responsibility of all Member States , and border controls must be operated in a spirit of sharing responsibilities and solidarity between Member States .
Over the past years , we have been facing a genuine paradox .
One could hear Member States inviting Frontex to stop the flow of irregular migrants immediately and to deploy as much equipment as possible .
However , the centralised record of available technical equipment , as you know , is just a virtual record .
The assets on this list belong to the Member States and they are subject to their will to deploy them .
Clearly , we could debate the will of a number of Member States .
As for the financial perspective , if Frontex were to deploy all the equipment at once , its budget would evaporate immediately .
Therefore , the main question still to be answered - and I am addressing the Council - is whether the Council is ready to extend the principle of compulsory solidarity , obliging all Member States to deliver , i.e. a mandatory solidarity mechanism .
Over the past years , Member States have repeatedly reaffirmed the importance of ensuring full respect for international human rights obligations in managing migration .
Member States underlined the importance of European solidarity in burden-sharing as the founding principles .
Yet , too often , effective decision-making is hamstrung by the inability of these Member States to work together in their mutual interest .
Would the President-in-Office agree that the time for words is passed and the time for action has come ?
Would you not agree that in a world marked by increasing regional conflicts and a growing gap between rich and poor , mobility will increase rather than diminish ? Is it not high time that the Member States put themselves in a position to respond to that challenge with a radical , yet responsible , revision of their views on what is supposed to be a comprehensive package on a common - and I repeat , common - migration policy ?
Unfortunately , I have to leave the Chamber now , as I am taking part in the ongoing high-level trialogue on the Return Directive .
However , I look forward to receiving your detailed reply at your earliest convenience .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Frontex initiative deserves support .
It represents the boundary of European civilisation in the face of an onslaught of illegal immigration which is deliberate , very often entails highly distressing humanitarian tragedies and represents big business for Mafia-type criminal organisations .
That is why it must be countered as energetically as possible .
We believe that some very effective measures have been adopted by countries like Spain , whose SIVE system has erected a highly sophisticated high-tech wall against illegal immigrants .
There is no point crying crocodile tears over deaths and humanitarian incidents when we do nothing to defend our coastline .
My own country did nothing for a long time - one need only think about the Lampedusa situation - but all we have to do is prevent the vessels carrying illegal immigrants from reaching Member States ' territorial waters .
As for the legal state of affairs , the reasons still being put forward against making illegal immigration a crime are utterly unfounded : the arrest and detention of illegal immigrants are fully covered by Article 5 ( f ) of the European Convention on Human Rights , which clearly states that one exception to the prohibition on depriving people of their liberty concerns people effecting an unauthorised entry into another country .
Finally , Europe cannot shirk from examining the results of full implementation of the Schengen Agreement , which are in front of our eyes .
Schengen was supposed to promote freedom of movement for workers and students but has in actual fact created a kind of green card for the free movement of criminals .
Is that what we want on our land ?
Certainly not .
We therefore need to take urgent action : the 2004 Directive must be revised in the light of these results .
The Member States were supposed to establish income thresholds and an obligation on anyone entering our countries to demonstrate that their funds are legal .
They have not done so - Italy , for example has not - and so we find cities , such as the capital of Christianity , invaded by Roma and Romanians who commit crime , rape and other unlawful acts but are not thrown out .
Let us give due consideration to these results .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , since the establishment of the European border security agency , Frontex , the implementation of the European work programmes has been proceeding effectively and according to plan .
Nonetheless , my Group has been extremely concerned , since the adoption of the Frontex Regulation , about the serious incidents in the Mediterranean area , in which people who have set out in search of a better life often lose their lives in the attempt .
We therefore have some questions which we would like to put to the Council .
One of these questions is this : has Frontex fully incorporated human rights obligations into its existing regulatory provisions and practices ?
Or , to be a little more precise and candid : can the Council and Commission guarantee that the EU Member States which receive the support of Frontex are meeting all of their obligations under international law and the international convention in relation to the security and monitoring of their external borders ?
The published statistics from Frontex relate solely to the number of migrants who have been prevented from entering the European Union .
There are no statistics concerning the number of asylum seekers apprehended , and nor is it clear how they have been treated .
We would like to know whether there are any statistics on the number of asylum seekers apprehended .
If so , why have these figures not yet been made public ?
Finally , if an asylum seeker is apprehended , what role does Frontex play in relation to the coordination of the asylum application ?
Where are these applications examined ?
Which mechanisms are in place to guarantee that an application is thoroughly examined before the asylum seeker is sent back ?
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Madam President , the European Union and its institutions always claim that the struggle for human rights is of key importance .
However , this does not seem to apply to the EU 's own Frontex agency and the policy behind it .
The EU wants to use Frontex to ward off people coming in from outside ; it does not want to save lives .
Aid organisations believe that more refugees are dying since Frontex was established as they now have to travel further .
Frontex is militarising the EU 's system of repelling refugees .
The question is this : why do the refugees want to come in the first place ?
This has a great deal to do with the prosperity gap , and something needs to be done .
Climate change will exacerbate the situation , with even more refugees attempting the journey to Europe .
Frontex is exempt from all parliamentary control .
I recall a hearing organised by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs , when the Executive Director of Frontex did not consider it necessary to turn up .
The EU 's strategy is clearly to ' cherry-pick ' the best of the migrants and refugees and keep the rest at bay , using Frontex , among other things .
Overall , Frontex is worsening the situation of refugees .
My Group 's position is therefore very clear : Frontex must be dissolved , and instead , more must be done to provide practical help to refugees .
That would be the right approach , not ever more isolationism and constant reinforcement of Fortress Europe .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , the question of cross-border agreements is not an abstruse matter like reading texts by Lysias or Cicero .
On the other hand Frontex will do nothing to solve all the problems we believe there are between Europe and those unfortunate enough to seek refuge there .
These poor wretches are Asian victims exploited by neighbouring countries which cooperate with Europe but never see the consequences from a European angle .
Now if there were adverse effects , and Frontex , for example , had both to carry out its rescue function and inform us about where they come from and which states allow this unlawful trade in unfortunate people , who often end up at the bottom of the sea , then the EU would be able to take its own measures against such countries and cut the subsidies lavished on them today .
( NL ) Mr President , in itself we can of course only welcome the extension of the tasks of Frontex that has been announced , the plans to set up a pan-European border guard and the creation of a centralised European databank .
It is also a good sign that Frontex has been given the green light to open negotiations on cooperation agreements with a number of departure or transit countries to ensure joint action against illegal immigration .
On the other hand , this agency naturally stands or falls with the technical assistance and political support of the Member States , which has all too often in the past proved problematic .
For instance , France , Germany and the Netherlands have been much more active than Belgium , which only took part in three operations .
All the same , we cannot pin too much faith on the strengthening of external borders and we should certainly not be blinded by the telegenic Frontex operations in the Mediterranean .
Most illegal immigrants arrive in Europe legally , but simply disappear into illegality when their visas expire .
There are hundreds of thousands of them .
From that point of view , the 53 000 arrests that the Commission proposed a few months ago will therefore not do much more than ' cure the symptom ' .
The core issue is still that both the European Member States and the European Union are responsible for the uncontrolled and illegal immigration , with all its catastrophic effects on society .
I am talking about not only the flexible visa policy and the lax tracing and repatriation policy , but also about the irresponsible waves of regularisation in some Member States , which have been an enormous draw .
The extension of Schengen to the east is for the moment the latest of these damaging decisions .
You might therefore ask whether Frontex is not just having to act as a lightning conductor to appease the citizens of Europe .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , Jacques , ladies and gentlemen , we are currently examining very significant texts that should lead to a real change and , dare I say , a real evolution in the management of migratory flows .
I am thinking in particular of the return directive , the Blue Card directive , the directive on sanctions against employers and the directive on a common set of rights .
The current legislative work must be completed as quickly as possible if we want effective results that are visible to our fellow citizens and third-country nationals .
We have to send a clear message .
As parliamentarians we are giving the question of immigration serious attention and dealing with it head-on .
We need to look at the management of our external borders and Frontex 's role in that regard .
Frontex was not created to recover drowned bodies in southern Europe .
It was not created to recover starving children in Eastern Europe , led by their parents on a never-ending voyage of migration .
Frontex has a clear mission : to protect our borders in order to protect our fellow citizens .
The Member States must therefore face up to their responsibilities and fulfil their commitments by providing Frontex with all the resources it needs to carry out its missions under the best possible conditions .
We have to stop thinking of Frontex as a temporary or isolated measure .
It must be able to tackle , and keep up with the pace of , the phenomena that fall within its remit : migration and illegal immigration , organised crime , smugglers , trafficking in all its forms .
The Frontex agency must be at the heart of the wider border security project and , in this respect , there must be closer cooperation with the senior authorities responsible for these issues .
As usual , it is the overriding principles and the political will that threaten the smooth running of the agency : each Member State must be reminded of its commitment to the principles of responsibility , solidarity and respect .
I hope that the Commission and in particular the Council will take our requests and concerns on board and that they do not ruin the success of an agency that we need at European level .
( ES ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , as you said , Frontex works .
Last year , for example , joint operations reduced the numbers of illegal immigrants arriving in the Canary Islands by 61 % .
Mafia organisations , however , are investigating new routes in order to foil security operations .
Their activities represent the hare , and our responses the tortoise .
We all know La Fontaine 's fable , and how it ends : we will win the race , certainly , but how many lives will be lost before that happens ?
Ladies and gentlemen , we must be clear and concise with one another and with the general public .
Do we really wish to deal with the problem of illegal immigration on a joint basis , or just make it look like we are dealing with it ?
Frontex offers added value in terms of reducing the number of illegal immigrants , saving lives and combating trafficking in human beings and acts as a considerable deterrent in the areas being monitored .
However , ladies and gentlemen , it is important to go that extra mile and secure an integrated European system to deal with all the EU 's external borders .
Frontex needs the appropriate mandates and resources .
The Commission 's proposals are heading in the right direction , but we want to know how united and committed the Member States are in the fight against illegal immigration , a phenomenon that affects all of us , not just countries at out southern border .
How do the Member States view the idea of introducing a European Border Surveillance System ?
Elaborating on Frontex 's operational capacity , how does the Council feel about creating regional centres in sensitive areas , particularly at the southern maritime borders ?
Also in relation to the key aspect of border surveillance , what will Frontex 's role be in Iconet and what has the Council 's response been to the proposal to establish EUROSUR ?
Finally , I wish to say I agree with you , Commissioner , that cooperation with third countries is a vital component of the fight against illegal immigration .
What steps will Frontex take to facilitate the development of the agreements concluded by Member States such as Spain ?
I think that the answers to questions like these may be the first indication as to how and when we will win the race .
Madam President , Member States have both a right and a duty to control their borders properly , to manage immigration and to cooperate between themselves and through the European Union , whether or not they are in Schengen , which , sadly , my country is not .
That means that they must cooperate with Frontex and through Frontex , insofar as they are legally allowed to do so , and must support the so-called RABITS - the mobile border guards - and make sure that Frontex is properly resourced .
But well-managed borders should not mean the inhumane treatment of migrants or negligence of the need to respect refugee law by giving access to an asylum determination procedure .
Therefore , we should parallel having mobile border guards by having asylum expert teams , who could be deployed at short notice to deal with large influxes of would-be migrants , and making sure that they individually assess any potential claims .
Frontex cannot be a substitute for a comprehensive migration system - which we still do not have - which covers illegal immigration and legal migration and which has proper legal migration channels , as well as preserving the asylum channel .
Lastly , I am wary of the trend to mix immigration and criminality .
The term ' border security ' , which is often used , tends to suggest automatically that immigrants are a threat .
Most of them are not .
They may not have a legal entitlement to come , but that does not necessarily mean that they are criminals .
( ES ) Madam President , we see the harshest and most dramatic face of illegal immigration when good weather arrives at the shores of the Atlantic and the Mediterranean .
Mafia groups operate much more frequently now that there is apparently less risk .
That is why this debate is so necessary : to support , facilitate and encourage any initiatives to prevent and neutralise a criminal scourge that puts so many lives in jeopardy and breaches our frontiers with frequent impunity .
External action by the European Union is becoming a vital component within such a context .
This is borne out by the Montavia and Cape Verde pilot projects .
The House recently allowed the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs to take part in this task by authorising two trips to Senegal and Mauritania , prime examples of countries of origin and transit for illegal immigrants .
EU external action on immigration must henceforth be more active and more visible and focus on much more relevant countries , primarily Guinea-Conakry .
Frontex has made good progress in a short period of time .
It has funds , EUR 70 million to be precise , and well-designed capacities for coordination , but we need the unambiguous assistance of the Council , for example , to make the CRATE database more than a catalogue of means or a declaration of offers .
The problem is persistent and dramatic , and requires us to pursue our efforts and maintain our systems of prevention , assistance and supervision , with resources and staff deployed on a permanent basis and in a timely manner , in the Canary Islands and the Mediterranean .
During the first quarter of the year 1 702 immigrants reached the Canaries , as against 1 425 over the same period of the previous year .
Now more immigrants are arriving , but they are using fewer boats .
In three years 48 305 immigrants arrived in the Canary Islands .
It is true that the numbers fell between 2006 and 2007 , from 31 000 to 11 000 , but the harsh truth is that increasing numbers of immigrants are arriving at Canary Island ports and every day we find bodies in the Mediterranean , either near the coasts of Oran or the Canaries themselves .
Moreover , Madam President - and I am finishing up now - between 15 % and 20 % of repatriated immigrants try again .
The problem is thus a persistent one .
This is why we need more common global willingness and less common rhetoric .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , Madam President of the Council , Malta , Spain , Italy and France are all countries particularly affected by migratory flows , but they are not the only migratory routes .
I should like to draw the attention of the House to the European Union 's eastern border and in particular to the borders of my country , Poland .
The events of recent months indicate that migratory flows are also passing through that border too , and that human tragedies are taking place there too .
I would remind the House that two Chechen children died of exhaustion as they attempted to cross into Poland with their mother .
In addition to illegal immigrants from Ukraine and Belarus , Poland 's secure centres for refugees contain inmates from Pakistan , Korea and Vietnam .
Migration , notably illegal migration , is a Union-wide problem , and it is therefore regrettable that the European Union does not have a common approach to illegal migration .
The principles applied by Member States regarding asylum and deportation differ widely .
I therefore wish to take this opportunity to emphasise that we need a single legal framework .
It would then be possible for us to at least treat illegal immigrants in a similar manner across the Union .
Clearly , the only alternative to illegal immigration is legal migration , and European Union citizens should not fear the latter .
It represents an opportunity for ageing Europe .
That is why I welcome the approach taken by the Slovenian Presidency , because I too consider that closer cooperation between customs and border control authorities is required to improve the existing method of managing the Union 's borders .
In addition , Member States must become more heavily involved in joint Frontex actions .
They cannot continue to be as selfish as they have been to date , and should instead be more generous when it comes to equipping this important agency .
I do not just have experts in mind , but also and most importantly vessels , aircraft and other equipment that will ensure effective protection of the Union 's borders .
After all , the lives of many individuals on the seas and in the mountains are at stake , along with our common security .
( PT ) Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , we are facing a crisis of mass illegal immigration which has consequences for the security and cohesion of the whole European Union .
Immigration is a phenomenon of huge dimensions which , particularly in a space without internal borders , requires a European approach .
I therefore support the creation of a European Border Surveillance System , Eurosur , streamlining and interlinking the border control systems of the Member States in order to increase the EU 's internal security , fight illegal immigration , prevent cross-border crime and terrorism , and strengthen the Member States ' capacity for rescue operations .
I also support the central role that Frontex must play in controlling and monitoring the external borders .
I agree that Frontex must facilitate the application of current and future Community provisions and also make this application more effective in terms of managing the external borders and ensuring the coordination of Member States ' actions and , in particular , the technical and operational assistance to be provided to Member States requiring this .
However , I would warn the Council and the Member States that these objectives will only be achieved if we equip this agency with the necessary human and financial resources , which until very recently was unfortunately not at all the case .
As for the entry / exit system , I believe that we should be more cautious .
I am concerned about this succession of proposals on the monitoring of individuals , which are multiplying at an alarming rate .
It seems that we are unable to complete what we have already agreed and we are flying forward , without taking care to avoid any overlaps or duplication of functions , to assess the impact of these issues on the fundamental rights of individuals or to establish safeguards where appropriate .
In my opinion , instead of proposing new mechanisms , the Commission should concentrate on making up for the delays that have already occurred and on bringing into operation , as soon as possible , systems such as SIS II ( Schengen Information System ) and VIS ( Visa Information System ) .

( ET ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in a European Union without internal frontiers cooperation and solidarity to protect our external borders is of great importance , as is further improvement in the activity of FRONTEX .

But in addition to immigrants who cross the Mediterranean by boat , of whom much has been said here and of whom we are all undoubtedly aware thanks to the media , there is also a huge problem with people who enter from third countries with visas and who have no intention of departing once their visas expire .
These are primarily immigrants from the east .
Here a single visa information system is of great importance , and increasing the responsibility of one nation state or Member State is not enough on this issue . Increasing cooperation between countries is very important .
Furthermore , there has been much talk of a common migration policy .
In certain respects this is clearly important .
However , certain issues must also remain within the purview of the Member States , for example the issue of quotas , because on matters such as this each country must assess its own scope for integration .
Such issues cannot be resolved from above .
( EL ) Madam President , I do not think it is necessary to repeat what we have just heard from Members who have already spoken .
They have anyway covered almost all aspects of the problem , which all think is complex , difficult and very acute .
Let me say here and now about the statements by the Council and the Commission that we must avoid hot air and get down to action .
What the EU has to do must be governed three principles .
Firstly , the message has to be clear and the problem of immigration has to be recognised not merely as a national problem , but a European one .
Secondly , the principle of solidarity must apply here in a practical way .
Thirdly , a holistic rather than fragmented policy must be implemented .
We have created Frontex and that is excellent .
The Commissioner says that it has been organised , staffed and reinforced with all the necessary resources .
Can Frontex solve the problem , however ?
I have my doubts .
My fellow Members have talked about matters such as the reasons for immigration .
We certainly need to reinforce Frontex .
Above all , however , we need to turn our attention to the Mediterranean states .
Land and sea enterprises must be strengthened so that we can at least withstand the massive influx of illegal immigrants .
Cyprus is a case in point .
It has recently been a targeted by illegal immigrants coming from the Middle East through Turkish-occupied territories .
The EU has the ways and means to intervene with Turkey to stop this from happening .
As well as what we have all been discussing , however , there is also one more subject for debate : the issue of human rights , which is an important subject .
In order to stop illegal immigration and immigration in general , we cannot allow for human rights to be forfeited .
In treating and dealing with immigrants we must apply the human rights principles and values of the EU . This is what I urge the Commission and the Council to do .
( EL ) Madam President , Now that the summer is here and weather conditions are good , particularly in Greece and the Mediterranean , illegal immigration will unfortunately assume major proportions .
Illegal immigrants will arrive at both the sea and land borders of Greece .
My country is doing its level best .
It is taking all possible measures , but they are not sufficient to stem this tide .
Frontex was established five years ago .
Are we pleased with its results ?
I daresay we are , bearing in mind its meagre technical resources and restricted competence .
If , however , we want to take a real political decision , then we must strengthen Frontex further with a logistical infrastructure and proper jurisdiction .
This is the only way to fulfil our obligations .
Finally , we must also establish a coastguard for the sea borders of the Mediterranean .
Madam President , the problem of illegal immigration is a very complex one .
It only partly involves the defences around the borders of a country and of the European Union in general .
We have to examine the reasons and the drive that bring these people into Europe .
They risk their lives and the lives of their loved ones .
They travel for thousands of miles .
They endure atrocious conditions but still continue to come .
So it is my premise that , even if we build a six-metre wall around the whole of the European frontier , they will still come .
The Commissioner said something else which is very wise .
These people come because we need them .
There is work for them in our Member States .
So why can we not find a system where we can legalise the illegal immigrants ? Why can we not find a management system whereby these people can be channelled into our countries through legal and safe means ?
( FR ) Commissioner , Minister , I believe that it is deeply shocking to suggest that our security is threatened by the starving people who come her to seek work so that they can support the families they have left behind .
I would remind my fellow Members of the speech Mr Kofi Annan gave when we awarded him the Sakharov Prize .
He asked us to do the exact opposite of what we are doing : he asked us to open our borders .
When we look into the future slightly , we can see only too well that we will need these workers because we are going to have a shortage of labour in the European Union .
What are we doing then ?
We are building walls and we are going to choose who is allowed to enter : we are going to choose the people we need .
That is totally unacceptable .
We need a different policy ; a policy that is open to all these people .
However , what I want to know is what Frontex hopes to do , for example , in the countries of transit ?
In this respect , I will mention Mauritania , which I am familiar with since the European Union sent me there as the head of the election observation mission .
We made a commitment to this poor country to help it with its transition to democracy .
It has to manage the flows of immigrants travelling through the country on their way to the Canaries .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we are here to discuss Frontex and that is what we should be focusing on .
Frontex must of course be viewed in the context of a comprehensive migration strategy which on the one hand manages legal immigration but , on the other , combats illegal immigration .
In this overall context , Frontex is the security instrument on which the campaign against illegal immigration and human smugglers depends , and it is being deployed in those areas where the Member States are finding it difficult to cope .
That is why we must ensure that Frontex can indeed evolve into a successful security instrument .
Parliament has managed to achieve a doubling of the budget , with the timescale for joint operations being greatly expanded .
I am pleased that the Hera and Nautilus operations have already begun and that Poseidon will start in the next few days . However - and this point is directed at the Council - any operation will only be successful if the Member States put the requisite conditions in place and make the requisite instruments available .
This , then , is my request and my urgent appeal to the Council : please do your utmost to ensure that we do not have the same situation as in previous years , when the Member States dragged their feet .
They should understand , at long last , that we need this security instrument and that we are enabling it to function effectively through the requisite supply ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) It was exceptionally interesting to be present at this dynamic debate .
I think one thing was clear to everyone during the debate : legal immigration is the kind of immigration which the European Union needs , but the other kind , illegal immigration , should be fought .
This was a topic on the agenda of today 's debate .
In any case , the Presidency is among those who believe that illegal immigration is a phenomenon which should be fought because it usually has a criminal background .
Behind it is a society of organised crime which is not interested in what has to be endured by the people they are trying to get into the European Union , in this case .
I must say that I do not agree with those Members of Parliament who are of the opinion that the Council is trying to avoid these debates .
Nor can I agree with those who think that we are still just talking .
The Council is not avoiding this debate .
It was the Slovenian Presidency which , in March this year , organised the conference on the future challenges of controlling the European Union 's external borders , and all or most of the issues mentioned in today 's debate were a topic of that conference , which was conducted at Ministerial level .
In any case , I agree with Mrs Hennis-Plasschaert that now is the time for action .
Her absence is proof that we are taking action .
She is attending a very important event , namely the concluding phase of the tripartite discussion on the Return Directive , which is , I hear , proceeding well and may successfully reach its conclusion today .
The Return Directive is an important aspect of the fight against illegal immigration .
If it is adopted at the first reading , which is the hope of the Slovenian Presidency and the ambition of the European Parliament , then we will obtain a new lever to help us face up to the phenomenon of illegal immigration more successfully .
The question of solidarity carries a significant political charge regarding the problems of illegal immigration .
However , we must appreciate that some elements of solidarity already exist : we had the Schengen resource , or ' Schengen Facility ' , for new Member States , we have Frontex , and the Commissioner has listed important capacities which the Member States have voluntarily contributed to the agency in the name of solidarity .
Therefore I cannot agree that there is no solidarity in the European Union .
There is , but there is room for improvement .
We must take into account - and I think Mr Fava was among those who pointed it out - that control of the external borders comes under the competence of the Member States .
Why ?
Simply because most of them want it that way .
Solidarity therefore has its limits .
The majority of Member States want external border control to come under their competence .
Mrs Saks mentioned that the Member States do not want the immigrant quota to be forced on them from outside or from the top .
They want to decide these things for themselves .
This is the framework in which we are operating and in which the Slovenian Presidency is searching for possible ways forward .
I think we have already managed to achieve a number of measures , but we still have to work on others .
I would like to say a few words about reception centres , as initiated by Mr Moreno Sánchez .
A very difficult debate on this topic is still taking place .
It is a politically sensitive issue and not a simple topic .
The Council will be occupied by it for some time to come .
Mr Özdemir raised the question of asylum .
Asylum statistics do exist .
The asylum system is effective at European Union level .
However , we are still trying to improve its efficiency .
The first step was the publication of the Green Paper on the future of asylum , presented by the European Commission , and the Council 's decisions on improving practical cooperation , which were adopted at the last session of the Justice and Home Affairs Council .
I would like to end here , although I could say more on this interesting and topical subject .
Ladies and gentlemen , let me assure you that your opinions count and that we will bear them in mind when we continue this debate .
The Slovenian Presidency is relying on your cooperation to make progress in this dossier .
Vice-President of the Commission . - ( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to get back to the main topic of this debate , Frontex , and clarify a few points .
Mr Fava , in particular , wanted to know if the equipment used by Frontex was fully operational .
It is true that Frontex depends on the Member States for the technical equipment needed for the operations it coordinates and , until now , the agency has been satisfied with the way in which the Member States have provided the equipment available in the CRATE database .
Of course , an additional step would be to put in place a compulsory system for the Member States by amending the agency 's basic Regulation .
The Commission mentions this in its evaluation report , and the discussions with the Frontex agency and the Member States on this matter will continue .
Frontex has concluded technical agreements with most of the Member States on the conditions of use of the equipment .
Obviously , it is unable to purchase equipment that is very costly , but in its evaluation report the Commission recommended that Frontex should buy or lease equipment that is frequently used : night vision goggles , small radar equipment , thermal imaging equipment , etc .
I also wanted to say , since Mr Moreno Sánchez raised these points in particular , that there are some places that are particularly at risk , and perhaps we could envisage setting up permanent operational centres in such cases .
Frontex is currently looking into this .
There are many other questions and I apologise for not mentioning all the Members although I took precise notes .
Many of you asked about Frontex 's ability at present to assist people whose boats have been shipwrecked .
It important to remember that it is the Member States that are responsible for looking after or saving those involved in such accidents : Frontex has no mandate in this area .
Having said that , I believe that it is true to say that numerous lives have fortunately been saved as a result of the operations coordinated by Frontex .
More and more people must be saved because what we have realised from these terrible shipwrecks of poor people , who have often also been exploited , is that this is a major concern in these operations .
I would briefly like to reiterate what the President and the Minister have just said , and Mr Gaubert too : when it comes down to it , Europe has to begin to manage migratory flows , and migratory flows cannot be managed effectively without Frontex , without surveillance of our external borders .
There is no doubt that we need a legal framework that will gradually allow Europe to provide a truly European response to all these migratory problems .
I must say , too , that one of the major tasks awaiting my attention is the preparation of a new communication on this overall approach to migration , which should take into account all the aspects that you have raised .
I would add that a migration policy cannot succeed in the absence of close cooperation with the countries or origin and , indeed , what has been said on this subject is that all efforts are welcome to strengthen this cooperation with the countries in question .
Minister , you pointed out just a moment ago that the trialogue on the ' return ' text seems to be progressing .
It is also one of the cornerstones of this overall immigration policy , which must of course be an overall policy , but which must also be a united policy , too : solidarity is crucial .
There has been much mention this evening of rescues at sea , but we must not forget Europe 's borders to the east .
Evidently - and I will finish with this point - the treatment of illegal immigrants must respect fundamental rights , to which Europe is firmly committed .
All of this means that we need a genuine overall approach , an approach that is human but is at the same time extremely serious and rigorous .
This is essential if we do not want Europe to be a fortress and if we want it to be open , but open within the framework of rules that we believe to be reasonable , that respect individuals and , at the same time , that focus on ensuring that the integration efforts succeed in the various Member States , for the immigration policy cannot succeed without integration .
That is all I wanted to say and I apologise to the Members for not having responded to all the questions raised .
Please be assured that I am willing to listen to Parliament in order to try to lay the foundations for this overall immigration policy .
The debate is closed .
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) The European Union 's external borders , either land or sea borders , protect all Member States from possible threats caused by illegal immigration , trafficking and organized crime .
The instruments proposed by the European Commission in the development of the Frontex Agency , namely state-of-the-art border surveillance systems , technical equipment and rapid intervention teams , are undoubtedly opportune .
Nevertheless , the effort of strengthening borders should be a joint European effort and not a single effort of the countries situated along the borders .
Moreover , it is necessary to take action not only on the European Union borders , but also on the borders of the countries neighbouring the European Union .
I remind you of the fact that political stability , the development of democracy , economy and increase in the living standard in third countries bordering the European Union will considerably diminish the pressure on the borders ; for this reason , cooperation with the relevant authorities of these countries represents a major priority .
The projects submitted by the Commission need adequate financing urgently , so that they can be implemented as soon as possible .
European strategies on biological diversity ( COP 9 ) and biosafety ( COP-MOP 4 ) ( debate )
The next item is
the oral question by Miroslav Ouzký , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , to the Commission : on the Commission 's strategy for the ninth ordinary meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity ( COP 9 ) and the fourth meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety ( COP-MOP 4 ) - B6-0017 / 2008 ) ;
the oral question by Miroslav Ouzký , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , to the Council : on the Council 's strategy for the ninth ordinary meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity ( COP 9 ) and the fourth meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety ( COP-MOP 4 ) - B6-0016 / 2008 ) .
author . - ( CS ) Madam President , Minister , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , first of all I would like to mention something that has nothing to do with my question , to express a complaint .
While the police in all countries make sure , as part of their duties , that politicians or members of parliaments can carry out their work , the French police tries to prevent the Members of the European Parliament from working .
At the entrance to this institution a policeman banned me from entering , even after having seen my permit , allegedly in order to protect a demonstration taking place outside the entrance to Parliament .
I think that this is scandalous and I hope that this matter will be debated in Parliament .
Of course this is not relevant to my question but let me tell you that I would not be speaking here now had I not run around to another part of the building .
I was entitled , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , to put a question to both the Council and the Commission concerning the forthcoming meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity and Biosafety in Bonn .
The basic question , both for the Council and the Commission , concerns clarification of the objectives for this Conference .
We also want to know whether the Council and the Commission are planning to involve the Members of the European Parliament in the Conference .
I must say that our committee wants more than resolutions and individual agreements to be adopted : it wants to know how they are executed and implemented , i.e. how they are put into practice .
I want to ask whether the European Union and the European institutions understand their leading role in this area , in the fight against the loss of biodiversity .
If we want to be a leading force , we should make it absolutely clear .
I want to ask whether we understand that financing all these programmes and decisions is a vital necessity and that they cannot be implemented without proper financial support .
I also hope that both the Commission and the Council understand the impact of water scarcity in the Mediterranean region , and the impact of droughts and climate change on biodiversity as such .
The committee would like to hear whether special attention will be paid to marine and coastal biodiversity and whether the Commission and the Council understand the importance of involving regional and local governments as well as businesses in this matter , in the fight against the loss of biodiversity .
It would like to hear whether we understand the importance of sustainable forest management and crop production , with special emphasis on the sustainable production of biofuels , which is becoming a very hot topic .
As you know , biofuel production is part of the climate package we are debating now , and the sustainable use and development of biofuels are very important issues .
On the other hand , we know that it has a very negative impact on biodiversity .
Thank you .
I will pass on your complaint , and then perhaps you will be contacted about the matter .
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) Allow me to thank the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and its Chairman , Mr Ouzký , for his oral question to me , the Council and the Commission .
With this question you are placing great importance on the very sensitive problem of biodiversity .
Together with climate change , biodiversity is the Presidency 's main priority among environmental tasks .
The ninth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity ( COP 9 ) , which will take place in Bonn in May , is therefore an important event for the European Union in general , as well as for the Slovenian Presidency .
Within the framework of the 18-month programme of the German , Portuguese and Slovenian Presidencies , the Council has made intensive preparations to make this important meeting successful in terms of better protection and sustainable utilisation of biodiversity at the global level .
The Council has pointed out that the European Union is committed to fulfilling the global aim within which it intends significantly to slow down the rate of loss of biodiversity by 2010 .
It is also committed to achieving the EU target of stopping the decrease in biodiversity in Europe by 2010 .
Therefore my answer to your question is : yes , the European Union wants to and must preserve its role as world leader in this field .
The Council has stressed that the European Union strives to take an active and constructive role and that , at the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity in May , it will strive for far-reaching but realistic outcomes of the meeting .
The Council has also stated that , to achieve the global biodiversity target by 2010 , it is urgently necessary to persist with further concrete measures at all levels .
We must implement the Convention at national and EU levels .
The European Union has made a political commitment to reach all three targets of the Convention on Biological Diversity , that is to say protection and sustainability of use of biodiversity , access to genetic resources , and the sharing of benefits arising from their use .
The decisions defining the European Union 's priority tasks for the ninth Conference of the Parties were first adopted by the Council in June of last year and then again in March of this year .
Allow me to list some of the priority tasks .
We need to emphasise the importance of accelerated implementation of all the work programmes of the Convention on Biological Diversity and improve the synergy between climate change policies and biodiversity in order to obtain as many common benefits as possible .
The Council keeps pointing out the necessity for cohesion at all levels in the implementation of international agreements on the environment .
We must emphasise that it is important for the ninth Conference to discuss the problem of production , trade and use of biofuels and biomass and their effect on biodiversity and on ecosystem services .
In this respect it is even more important clearly to determine sustainable criteria for biofuel production .
We should stress the importance of implementing the programme for forest biodiversity and reduction of deforestation and degradation of forest ecosystems .
The Council underlines the importance of forests in the adaptation to and mitigation of climate change and in the preservation of biodiversity .
We must ensure fast and comprehensive implementation of the work programme for protected regions .
Within this framework we must provide technical and financial support - you asked about financing - that is to say financial support to establish protected regions throughout the world .
The ninth meeting should adopt ecological criteria to determine marine regions in the open sea that need protection .
It is important to emphasise the role of the private sector , especially small and medium-sized companies , in implementing the Convention .
Lastly , the European Union has firmly decided to continue its active involvement in planning and negotiating the international procedure for access to genetic resources and the sharing of benefits arising from their use .
The European Union will strive to conclude negotiations before the tenth meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention .
To conclude , more than 20 different topics will be discussed at the meeting .
I have only talked about those which the Council considers to be of crucial importance for achieving the targets of the Convention , especially the 2010 biodiversity target .
This will be the last meeting before the 2010 deadline , so it will be a cut-off date for the adoption of concrete measures .
Because this meeting will take place in Europe , it is of even greater importance for the European Union to promote its priorities and endeavours .
I have also familiarised myself with your proposal for the resolution on which you will be voting in the European Parliament tomorrow .
In our opinion the resolution is a good summary of the main priorities and targets to be achieved by the European Union in Bonn .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank Mr Ouzký for this very important question .
I think we all noticed how , in 2007 , environmental issues rose to the top of the political agenda .
Climate change grabbed the headlines and popular imagination .
But the loss of biodiversity is a global threat that needs to be faced with the same urgency , and they are linked .
Climate change and biodiversity are linked .
A failure to recognise this relationship may undermine our efforts for improvements in both areas .
How do we halt the loss of biodiversity ?
Well , I believe that Europe made some progress in this area by implementing the activities covered by the communication of 2006 from the Commission ' Halting the loss of biodiversity by 2010 - and beyond ' .
However , more efforts are needed .
In particular we need a stronger buy-in of sectors other than nature conservation , such as agriculture , fisheries and energy .
Effective international cooperation is also essential and we are firmly committed to working through the Convention on Biological Diversity to protect global diversity worldwide .
The ninth Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity , which will be held back-to-back with the fourth meeting of the Parties to the Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety , offers a remarkable opportunity to step up the protection of biodiversity and , since these meetings will be hosted and chaired by Germany , Europe has a particular role .
We will push for the acceleration of international efforts towards achieving the global target of significantly reducing biodiversity loss by 2010 .
At the beginning of March , the Council adopted conclusions that set up the broad political mandate and the main priorities for the EU at these meetings .
They can be summarised in seven points .
First , we want to agree on new commitments to enhance implementation , in particular as regards the execution of the Convention on Biological Diversity 's programmes on protected areas and forest biodiversity .
Secondly , we want to ensure that climate change adaptation and mitigation measures also support the 2010 biodiversity target .
The decisions to be taken in Bonn should contribute to the post-Bali debate on reduced emissions from deforestation and forest degradation .
Thirdly , we will promote the adoption of criteria for the identification of vulnerable marine areas to be protected .
In addition , we also intend to commit all the contracting parties in terms of how to apply these criteria .
Fourthly , we want to develop international guidance for promoting biodiversity-friendly ways of enhancing the production and consumption of biomass , including biofuels .
Fifthly , we aim to identify the main components of an international regime on access to genetic resources and the sharing of benefits arising from their use .
Sixthly , we want an agreement on the establishment of an international mechanism on scientific expertise on biodiversity .
And seventhly , and finally , we will promote a decision in the field of liability and redress for damage resulting from transboundary movements of living modified organisms .
So the Commission always facilitates the inclusion of Members of Parliament in Community delegations negotiating multilateral agreements .
I have , myself , very positive experience of doing this .
I welcome the participation of Members of the European Parliament at COP 9 and MOP 4 , as they are called in the language we use in this context .
I am , of course , interested in hearing your priorities and expectations for these meetings .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , this afternoon I am speaking on behalf of Mrs Gutiérrez-Cortines .
My first point is that the EP clearly and unconditionally supports the UN Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity .
In relation to this , the resolution to be voted on tomorrow is an attempt to reinforce the main objectives and intentions of the international conference , as follows : firstly , ensuring the best possible protection for fauna and flora resources ; secondly , encouraging sustainable use of land for the conservation of species and nature ; and finally , preserving our natural genetic capital .
In this respect , a number of conservation programmes ought to be taken into consideration , particularly the models already applied in the EU .
Specifically , I mean Natura 2000 and Habitats , which have proved extremely useful .
I also think that we should adopt a comprehensive approach to our work , using integral flexible models , because at the end of the day nature is a dynamic system in constant evolution that is affected by all the requirements placed on it , both for agriculture and other functions .
I also feel that more criteria based on science and training ought to be used , and that all economic and feasibility-related aspects should be taken into consideration .
The opinions of owners and incentives for owners are also important issues , and so I have two questions for the Commission .
How does it view the application of scientific methods in the cataloguing and identification of varieties of species or spaces to be preserved ?
How does it view incentives for owners at all levels ?
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , we are all aware that the loss of biological diversity is having widespread environmental , social , economic and cultural effects , further exacerbated by the negative influence of climate change .
The consequences of this situation hit the poorest even harder .
The Convention on Biological Diversity is the world 's most important legal instrument for combating the loss of biological diversity .
There is , however , a problem here : the lack of financial resources is a major stumbling block in achieving the Convention 's goals .
I therefore call on both the Council and the Commission to promote funding for the preservation of biological biodiversity in all the relevant budgets within their remit .
I wish to highlight certain aspects on which the motion for a resolution places particular emphasis : acknowledgement of the constant loss of biodiversity in the European Union , which is now a given ; the move to adopt a fair , equitable and legally binding international regime on access to genetic resources and sharing of the benefits arising from them ; and encouragement of the application of the existing commitments to better sustainable management and conservation of marine biodiversity , with a view to protecting it against destructive practices and unsustainable fishing activities affecting marine ecosystems .
I wish to finish by saying that it is time to take firm action and strive to solve all these problems since : although I believe there is still time - and we all know this - time is working against us and against the biodiversity we wish to protect .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , the ninth COP meeting on biological diversity could hardly have come at a better time .
In recent weeks , much has been said and written about biofuels , and let it be very clear : biofuels must not be produced at the expense of biodiversity .
We are of course currently considering the Commission 's proposals for a directive that will promote the use of sustainable energy , including biofuels .
Parliament must ensure that strong criteria are established in connection with environmental sustainability for the production of such biofuels .
We will not achieve anything in the fight against global warming if we reduce CO2 emissions from cars and at the same time increase CO2 emissions by cutting down forests and plants to produce petrol , thus releasing large quantities of CO2 from the ground .
The meeting in Bonn will be a good opportunity to emphasise the importance of the production of biofuels in line with sustainability requirements both within and outside the EU .
In 2002 the parties made a commitment to significantly reduce the loss of biodiversity by 2010 at global , regional and national level .
It is important that the parties continue to work towards this goal .
The United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity represents the global framework for the protection of biodiversity .
Unfortunately , many international agreements are ending with the lowest common denominators .
This is unacceptable when it concerns the protection of nature .
The EU must set high standards for itself and try to raise the standards in international agreements .
The EU must also do better with regard to the protection of biodiversity .
At the moment , we are sometimes saying one thing and doing another .
This could weaken our credibility .
Nevertheless , the Commission and the Member States must push for greater protection of biodiversity , particularly in forested and agricultural areas , as these areas are coming under particular pressure as more and more biofuels are being produced .
How can we ensure that biodiversity and biofuels do not become an either / or situation ?
We can do this by imposing stricter requirements .
It will then perhaps be possible to achieve both .
COP 9 will help to ensure this .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the preservation of biological diversity represents a challenge for the contemporary world .
It is not only beauty that is at issue , but also the balance of nature and the good of mankind .
For many years now we have been aware of the problem of chemical contamination and of other detrimental effects of civilisation , such as the deterioration of the environment , climate change , pollution , deforestation and damage to habitats .
The greenhouse effect has become a topical issue of late .
Unfortunately , the problem of biological contamination caused by genetically modified organisms has been disregarded , and we have all been complicit in that .
We have overlooked the fact that whilst chemical contamination can be reversed over time , biological contamination is often irreversible .
We must therefore take an unambiguous decision as to whether we are in favour of biological diversity or in favour of GMOs .
We have to decide what we care about most : human beings and their environment or the interests of Monsanto and similar companies that are deriving huge profits from GMOs .
If we wish to preserve biological diversity we must also ensure that the most seriously threatened natural species are identified .
It would then be possible to set targets for their protection and prevent the extinction of other species in the future .
We should remember that it is easy to cause damage but often impossible to reverse it .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , this is obviously not the first time that we have discussed biodiversity and that we have asked the Council and the Commission to defend biodiversity .
That we have managed to make climate change an EU priority is a positive step , but we must realise , however , that the Conventions on biodiversity and desertification are somewhat eclipsed by this climate change .
We know how important biodiversity or , when it comes down it , nature protection is for our own survival because we can see that , despite the measures taken at European or global level , the erosion of biodiversity is continuing ; the extinction of species is continuing .
We must face the facts : although we might try to curb climate change , the same cannot be said for the species .
Once a species is extinct , that is it : it is gone forever .
This issue , this evidence must be fully integrated .
When we know , for example , that we have excellent tools such as Natura 2000 and the Birds and Habitats Directives to combat the degradation of biodiversity in the European Union , and when we see today that there are still certain Member States that are reluctant to implement Natura 2000 , that are reluctant to pay for Natura 2000 , it is very clear that we still have a long way to go .
As a result , I genuinely hope that the Commission will continue to support Natura 2000 and continue to support these two Directives .
I would also ask that in the framework of the Bonn Convention you establish criteria for biofuels but also demand and obtain agreement on the creation of a group of intergovernmental experts on biodiversity , like the IPCC for climate change , because we could help others to put in place tools that we ourselves are introducing but they have not yet introduced .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) There are an estimated 14 million different species of animals and plants on the earth .
This goes to show what a fantastic planet we have and the responsibility we bear for its stewardship .
However , this biological diversity is under threat .
Over 30 000 species are currently threatened with extinction .
The main threat is us humans and the economic system we have built up , which is based on constant growth and consumption .
We believe this can be achieved through competition instead of planning , and through transport instead of local production .
No wonder that we are facing a climate catastrophe and biological impoverishment .
We could turn this trend around .
The fact that the EU and its Member States have signed the UN Convention on Biological Diversity is of course good and it can act as an important tool .
We thereby undertake , for example , to draw up action plans to protect biological diversity and establish a global network of protected areas on land and at sea , just as one example .
However , most of the work remains to be done at EU level .
The fundamental basics must be tackled , otherwise we will never be able to solve the environmental problems we face .
I would like to highlight three areas .
Transport insanity - the EU is based on no barriers being introduced between Member States .
A good must be produced where this is cheapest .
Between 1993 and 2000 alone long-distance lorry transport therefore increased by a whole 30 % .
When the EU and the Member States subsidise infrastructure , motorways always receive far more than sustainable means of transport do .
In the former Eastern Europe , the new Member States , the EU is pursuing a veritable asphalt policy with gigantic motorway subsidies .
It is railways which should be stimulated , not motorways .
Therefore , I say to the Commission : Take a look at subsidy policy .
Talking of subsidies , an incredible amount could be done about agricultural subsidies , EUR 55 billion each year .
Subsidies which have a directly negative impact on the environment should not be paid out , and aid to agriculture should be earmarked for environmental measures and organic farming .
Biological diversity and climate-smart solutions should be written in as the main objectives of agriculture policy , not maximum yields .
A third basic problem which must be tackled is the internal market .
I know that saying so is tantamount to sacrilege , but the EU simply cannot continue to allow the market to take precedence over a progressive environmental policy .
Some weeks ago , EU Commissioner Verheugen answered me saying that in the past five years the Commission had taken individual countries to the European Court of Justice 19 times in cases concerning the environment or public health .
What is really frightening is that in all of these 19 cases the court followed the Commission 's line , in other words , that the Member States were not permitted to implement measures to protect the environment or public health .
If we are really serious , we must have an environmental guarantee worthy of the name .
We do not have one now and unfortunately the Lisbon Treaty will not give us one either .
Market policy will be upheld there too .
To sum up , in our resolution we demand sustainability standards for biofuels .
I would like to take the opportunity to put the following question , maybe especially to the Council : Are you prepared to draw up not only environmental criteria for biofuels but also social standards for biofuels , for example , guaranteeing acceptable pay , union rights , etc. for the biofuel we buy in to the Union ?
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , two weeks ago I represented the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and the Temporary Committee on Climate Change at the informal Environment Council in Slovenia .
There were two main topics : dealing with climate change and the protection of biodiversity .
The emphasis was on biodiversity , biomass and biofuels in relation to biodiversity in forests .
The discussion covered the potential of biomass from forests for energy supplies , particularly the second generation of biofuels , and the sustainability criteria for the use of biomass from forests .
It was a successful conference , for which thanks is due to the Slovenian chairman , Mr Podobnic .
We can see that many species are at risk of extinction due to deforestation and illegal logging .
They are facing a radical change to their environment and therefore cannot survive .
Forests support a wide variety of plant and animal species .
It is therefore vital to call a halt to deforestation as far as possible in order to protect biodiversity .
That applies not just to countries outside the European Union , but certainly also to the European Member States .
Good forestry has to be encouraged , especially since forests are also very valuable in other areas .
Deforestation also causes serious soil erosion , certainly in mountain regions , and disturbs the water balance , which has a major impact on biodiversity , too .
Global warming can also affect the number of species .
The range of distribution of species is changing considerably , as a result of which some species are at serious risk , especially in the northern regions .
Logging in tropical regions only seems to increase warming , partly because it significantly reduces CO2 storage capacity .
However , studies published in the last few years , in Nature and Science for instance , show that if forest land is increased the result is higher emissions of methane , a greenhouse gas that is 23 times stronger than CO2 .
More methane is emitted as the temperature rises and there is more sunshine .
In the tropical regions particularly , considerably more methane is emitted . When more forests are planted , CO2 absorption capacity is increased , but some of the CO2 absorption is thus cancelled out by an increase in methane emissions .
Nonetheless , the balance is in fact positive , certainly in the non-tropical regions .
Finally , the factors I have mentioned that are negatively affecting biodiversity are unfortunately aggravated by the current production of biofuels , which is having an adverse effect on the tropical rain forest in particular .
Forests that are home to a wide range of species are replaced by plantations housing very few species .
These are , furthermore , having adverse effects in terms of greenhouse gas , absorption capacity and food prices .
I am pleased that that has been brought out in the resolution .
In any case , we have to be vigilant with the second generation of biofuels .
Just because you have written it down does not mean to say that you have to read it out if the time does not allow for it .
Mr President , in the light of this debate and of Earth Day yesterday , I would like to highlight the urgent need for greater understanding of the concept of biodiversity and its implications for our society .
It is a very poorly understood concept .
Virtually all of Earth 's ecosystems and their services have been dramatically transformed through human action .
The current rate of loss of biodiversity is now faster than ever before in human history and there is no sign of this process slowing down .
2010 - how are you !
Many animal and plant populations have declined in numbers and geographical spread .
While species extinction is a natural part of the Earth 's history , human activity in recent years has increased the extinction rate by at least a hundred times compared to the natural rate .
Within well-studied groups , between 12 % and 52 % of species are threatened with extinction , according to the IUCN Red List .
In general , the most threatened species are those that are higher up the food chain , have a low population density , live longer , reproduce slowly and live within a limited geographical area .
Within many species groups , such as amphibians , African mammals and birds in agricultural lands , the majority of species have faced a decline in the size of their population and in their geographical spread .
Exceptions are almost always due to human intervention , such as protection in reserves , or to species that tend to thrive in human-dominated landscapes .
People need to be made aware of their growing ecological footprint , that it reaches far beyond the borders of the EU and that our lifestyles have direct consequences on indigenous people in the developing world .
Whilst most of us now have at least some understanding of the extent of the problem of climate change , many have not made the connection between climate change and biodiversity loss .
Indeed , in this area , I think we need to link up the work of the Convention on Biological Diversity and the Conference of the Parties on Climate Change .
In fact , I would go so far as to ask whether we still need a stand-alone COP on biodiversity .
The question should be faced , and I attended the COP last year in New York .
Yes , I agree that climate change mitigation and adaptation measures , including deforestation , must support biodiversity .
I welcome Commissioner Wallström 's comments in relation to marine biodiversity issues .
We must include here cold-water corals and seamounts , which shelter rich and often unique ecosystems .
There are huge gaps in our scientific knowledge on the impact of climate change in marine areas .
We must remember that more than 70 % of the world 's surface is covered by oceans , 97 % of all the planet 's water is contained in the oceans and oceans provide 99 % of the Earth 's living space .
I will conclude , Mr President , not to raise your blood pressure any further .
Let us be honest with one another .
The goals established in Johannesburg six years ago will be impossible to achieve .
Let us stop fooling ourselves and stop the talk .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on the Environment has adopted a very good resolution and I hope that the European Commission and the Member States will take account of the various recommendations it contains , notably the call for leadership and conviction at the Bonn Conference , but also for efforts within its territory to halt the loss of biodiversity in the European Union by 2010 .
I would like to talk about three of the points raised in the resolution .
The first is the issue of biofuels , and some of my fellow Members have already mentioned this .
They have a considerable environmental impact on forests and on agricultural land , and the impact of their development on food resources will continue to grow .
There should be no competition between agricultural products intended for food and those intended for industry , be they for the production of biofuels or for the agrochemical industry .
The link between food and agriculture must be clearly established .
The next point relates to marine biodiversity .
We have been very slow in dealing with this issue .
I fully support the calls in the resolution for rapid action , notably to establish marine protected areas .
The final point concerns GMOs .
We now have studies that demonstrate their negative impact on the environment and on the soil in particular .
We know that dissemination of GMOs results in pollution of traditional crops , which hinders the preservation of biodiversity .
In addition , the industrial concentration in the seeds sector and the fact that they are controlled by a few multinationals are a cause for concern .
This is a situation that the Commission and the Member States must not neglect .
Finally , the Conference of the Parties in Curitiba , Brazil in March 2006 decided to maintain the moratorium on terminator seeds .
That was an excellent decision , but now we might want to consider whether the moratorium is sufficient and whether we should perhaps prohibit the use of these types of single-use GM seeds .
What do the Commission and the Member States intend to do in relation to these points at the Conference of the Parties in Bonn ?
Have you already an idea of the sustainability criteria concerning biofuels that could be presented in Bonn ?
Mr President , like Ms Doyle earlier on , I thought I had a longer time , but taking advantage of your generosity , I will settle for a minute and a half .
Biodiversity is essential in order to safeguard the survival of the Earth 's ecosystems and to maintain an invaluable genetic pool of distinctive species-specific characteristics .
This Parliament has reiterated its concern on biodiversity loss through its relevant resolution of 22 May 2007 , but one of the main obstacles to halting biodiversity loss is , I am afraid to say , the lack of effective action by both the Commission and the Council , both of which give the impression that they care about the matter largely only in theory and that , in practice , they suffer from lack of will and determination in making sure that , in real terms , there is full implementation of relevant directives and that both international and internal commitments are fulfilled .
Let us hope that , even at this late stage , the Commission and Council will act decisively and constructively in helping , partly through their firm stance at the forthcoming conference in Bonn , to protect biodiversity effectively .

Mr Matsakis , in fact , both Ms Doyle and your group had given the times I gave , so it is your group 's submission and their bad communication to you , because I have always applied the rule that , if a Member speaks in a language other than his own , I always give him extra time - and not just in English .
( DE ) Mr President , all those of us who have spoken here have voiced our commitment to more species protection and more biodiversity .
We know that the nature conservation Directives and the network of nature conservation areas created by Natura 2000 are a success story for the European Union .
However , all these fine words and all these commitments must not distract attention from the fact that - as you have said , Commissioner - it is not only the climate issue that has dominated the headlines ; so , too , has species and nature conservation , unfortunately .
All too often , endangered species are portrayed as nuisances which halt or obstruct building projects .
That is why I think it is shameful that in Germany , of all countries , which will be hosting the Conference of the Parties , conservative-led Land governments such as Hesse and Lower Saxony have launched an initiative in the Bundesrat which constitutes an assault on this EU success story .
It lacks all credibility for Germany to call for more nature conservation areas and more protection for endangered species in poorer countries while attempting to water down nature conservation in the European Union .
Unfortunately , it is not only Germany !
Quite suddenly , the Liberal Group in the European Parliament also held a seminar on this issue .
Mr Stoiber 's attack on nature conservation in Europe was conducted in exactly the same way , under the guise of ' simplification ' .
I expect you , Madam Commissioner , to give a clear commitment once again to the European Union that any attempts ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) Thank you , Mr President .
Mr Matsakis has already mentioned the problems of implementation , and I would simply like to give a couple of examples .
In Europe and the Carpathian basin the protection of our forests is presenting more and more of a challenge .
In some places forests are set alight , in others they are obliterated or they are quite simply stolen .
In the Carpathians or , for example , in Sajólád , 30-40 % of the forests have already been stolen .
Illegal felling reduces biodiversity , causes erosion , and contributes 20 % of greenhouse gas emissions .
To call a halt to this , four of our fellow MEPs sent a written statement to the Commission about a law to allow only timber and products from trees from legal and controlled felling to be sold in the EU .
I would ask my fellow MEPs to sign in support of the statement of the 23rd .
Preserving biodiversity is an important national objective .
The Hungarian Government 's position on neglect of the Natura 2000 sites is such that this week , when we are celebrating the Day of the Land , the Central Europe Rally , part of the Dakar Series , was organised , unimpeded , through areas of enhanced environmental protection , and even through Natura 2000 sites .
There was no environmental impact assessment , no plans for rehabilitation or protection , and there was not even a licence for organising the competition .
There is no income that can compensate for the environmental damage this causes .
But we do not manage any better with our birds either .
It was only two weeks ago that the European Commission sent Hungary a final written warning .
It did this because Hungary had not brought in any national measures to protect wild birds .
But I do not want to give only bad examples .
Recently a unique , voluntary agreement in Europe was signed in Hungary too , thanks to my initiative , on halting the loss of birdlife caused by overhead electricity cables .
Under this project for an obstacle-free sky , the general public , the electricity industry and the state agreed that , by arranging cables , insulation and so on , there would be a safe ' sky corridor ' in Hungary for birds by 2020 .
This is a ground-breaking agreement , of major significance , and deserves Europe 's attention and support . Thank you .
( RO ) At the Bonn meeting of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity , the issue of forest biodiversity will also be discussed .
This is a sensitive subject to which no sustainable solution has yet been found .
Forest biodiversity is threatened by illegal deforestation carried out globally .
Their effect is the substantial , mostly irreversible , reduction of biodiversity .
Moreover , deforestation represents the third major factor of global warming .
PECH expressed its position regarding the significant impact of deforestation on the climate , the long-term economic advantages and the importance of preserving forests intact , in the Resolution of November 2007 on trade and climate change .
I also appreciate the EU initiative of the Action Plan for Forest Law Enforcement , Governance and Trade .
I have mentioned European actions that , unfortunately , do not bring the intended results .
For instance , in implementing the Action Plan , 70 % of the EU countries did not manage to carry out any actual action until April 2007 .
We need to find a global solution as soon as possible .
I encourage the EU delegates to the Bonn conference to support the drafting of a standard definition of what illegal cutting means and that would support the rational use of forests .
Moreover , I encourage the start of discussions regarding the launch of a global mechanism supervising wood cutting and trading .
( DE ) Mr President , the European Union 's motto is ' unity in diversity ' but , as we know , in the natural world this diversity has decreased alarmingly over the last 150 years .
Loss rates currently amount to between 1 000 and 10 000 times higher than the average during the earth 's history .
The World Conservation Union ( IUCN ) currently lists around 15 600 species at risk of extinction worldwide .
The Food and Agriculture Organisation ( FAO ) estimates that the main producer countries of wheat and maize have lost more than 80 % of their original varieties , and these figures are just the tip of the iceberg , for we know that to date , only around 1.7 million of the world 's estimated 13 million living species have been identified and described .
We also know that climate change is exacerbating the situation .
However , we are equally aware that this loss of biological diversity reduces our ability to respond to climate change in particular , so we really face a difficult dilemma .
Unfortunately , then , I must ask the Commission this : why are we not mainstreaming sustainability and species diversity in all areas of our policy ?
Why are we not undertaking more research and development on the coexistence of species , and , indeed , humans ?
Anyone following this debate could get the impression that the establishment of a few Habitat sites and the protection of birds are enough .
However , these are just the tip of the iceberg .
Why do we not get our citizens on board in tackling these tasks , which we all have to play a part in resolving ?
The Commission has some homework to do here , and the same applies to us here in the European Parliament , and the Council .
Just going off to conferences and signing declarations is really not enough .
It is time to act , and that means acting together !

Mr President , I think that if there is one thing to do to try to halt the loss of biodiversity , it would be to halt the destruction of tropical forests .
Every year , 14 to 15 million hectares are gone .
We have been discussing this issue for years and with no real progress .
The real problem is that ecosystem services , whether we are talking about carbon sinks , biodiversity or regulation of the regional climate or hydrological system , have no real value on the market .
It is a shortcoming of our economic model , and as long as we do not compensate forest owners for those values - so that it is not more profitable to log forests but keep them there - this rate of deforestation is going to continue .
There is a solution : include forests in the emissions trading .
The Commission , however , is against this , and you have your reasons .
The problem is that you provide no alternative , and we all know that there are very limited financial resources in the Biodiversity Convention - and there are not likely to be any in the future either .
I know that the Commission cares as much about deforestation in the tropics as the rest of us do , but the problem is : where is your alternative ?
We need a package .
We need a comprehensive approach addressing climate change , carbon sinks , biodiversity and protection of livelihoods of the poor .
It would require DG Environment and DG Development to work closely together .
So far that has not happened .
Please give us an alternative so that we have something on the table and can discuss , otherwise I am afraid deforestation will continue and so will biodiversity loss .
( PL ) Mr President , agricultural production has become more intense in order to meet the increased demand for agricultural products and for raw materials produced for uses other than consumption .
This intensification is due in particular to the production of biofuels and biomass .
We know that intensive farming is detrimental to biological diversity .
Against this background the question arises as to how to reconcile the preservation of biological diversity with intensive development of the economy and infrastructure .
Modern management of biological diversity calls for increased monitoring of the processes being developed and suitable investment in scientific research .
We have benefited from economic development and should therefore devote part of its benefit , that is to say , part of the profit gained , to maintaining biological diversity .
Essentially , we need to understand that preserving and protecting the environment requires action at both global and local level .
Each of us needs to take action as an individual and so too do whole sectors of the economy .
This is a challenge for us all .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would be interested to hear whether the Commission , in respect of the CAP Health Check , has already given some thought to how we can go forward here , especially in the next financial perspective .
The fact is that renewable energy and biofuels are of course major challenges for us , and they should be incorporated into the financial framework of the health check .
This will play a major role in relation to CO2 developments as well , which of course we are obliged to reduce under the Kyoto Protocol . My specific question is this : which proposals will the Commission be making here ?
( DE ) Mr President , we are debating how to preserve biological diversity for the next generation , yet at the same time we are adopting measures which are completely counterproductive .
After the initial euphoria surrounding the production of agro-diesel , we now know that it has counterproductive effects , not only because it takes 9 000 litres of water to produce one litre of agro-diesel and that it causes nitrous oxide emissions , which are far more damaging than CO2 .
We also know that the cultivation of energy crops jeopardises and even destroys species diversity .
In light of these new findings and in the interests of conserving biodiversity , are you considering suspending the decisions that we have taken on the admixture of agro-diesel in conventional fuels ?
Are you considering investing in new research , and perhaps developing an alternative strategy , since we now know about the negative impacts and outcomes ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) I would first like to thank you for you very involved debate .
I agree with you that it is a real art to talk succinctly , synthetically and simply about such a serious and complex problem as biodiversity .
That was one of the reasons , Mr President , why you had problems trying to fit everything into the time allowed for the debate .
Allow me to comment briefly on your debate .
I will open with the first assertion , in which you confirmed the Council 's position that climate change and the effect on biodiversity are related and interdependent .
Your debates were wide and touched on numerous issues covering the narrower content of the meeting in Bonn .
They also concerned the lifestyle of modern , 21st century man , starting with waste and transport policy and touching on the question of sustainable production , sustainable consumption and so on .
I can assure you with personal conviction that the European Union has good mechanisms and that we have the measures .
I have already said in my introduction that our key aim was to be present in Bonn and strive for implementation , move towards reality and continue on our path from words to action .
You asked about financial resources .
We have defined and agreed on financial mechanisms at the European level .
I would like to stress that in Bonn the Council will work for new and innovative financial resources .
I mean globally and not just at the European level .
I would like to point out the need to link the sectors that affect biodiversity .
I would especially like to emphasise the role of the private sector .
The three Presidencies , namely Germany , Portugal and Slovenia , have endeavoured to ensure that the issue of private-sector involvement in the biodiversity problem will be raised in Bonn .
The Conference on Business and Biodiversity held in Portugal was very successful .
We hope that in Bonn we will build on the solutions proposed in Portugal .
I would like to thank Mr Blokland , who mentioned the informal meeting of Environment Ministers held in Ljubljana .
Mr Blokland took part on behalf of two of your committees and I would like to thank him for that .
We addressed the issue of forests , sustainable exploitation of forests , the influence they have on biodiversity , and the possibility of using them for biomass and second generation biofuels .
I would like to inform you that the Council is aware of the seriousness and complexity of sustainable criteria in the production of biofuels and biomass .
That was also the reason why we agreed with the Commission and cooperated with it to form a working group which , at COREPER next month , will propose good solutions for sustainable criteria in the production of biofuels .
They will then become a constituent part of both the directives that are now in the process of being adopted .
My special thanks go to all those who , in addition to social effects and adverse effects in the production of biofuels , also mentioned their influence on biodiversity .
Sometimes we forget about that .
I would like to conclude this brief comment by reiterating that , at the global level , we are working on establishing a network of protected regions on land and sea .
The European Union possesses a good and effective instrument called Natura 2000 and it is significant that it is being consistently implemented at national and European levels .
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I think that this lively and knowledgeable debate reflects the interest of this House in these issues .
I thank you for that .
I definitely know that I speak on behalf of Commissioner Dimas when he wants to thank you for the interest Parliament takes in relation to these issues .
I recognise some old colleagues in the fight for environmental protection and biodiversity .
Homo sapiens as a race is an interesting thing , because we can fly to the moon , we can do mass communication through information technology and we can definitely talk .
But we cannot create the rhinoceros or an eel or a little blue flower , and , when these creatures are gone , they are gone for ever , as you have rightly pointed out .
Let me just comment on a few things which I think are of principle interest .
I would like to start with the issue of biofuels , because this is also a very lively debate right now in all the media and a big problem and challenge for all of us .
As you know , the European Council agreed this 10 % biofuels target subject to very clear conditions , and our position in the European Union is that we want sustainable biofuels that have no negative environmental or food production impact .
We in the Commission consider the long-term benefits of biofuels in terms of less CO2 emissions because , remember , the alternative today is oil .
Security of supply and agriculture : new opportunities can be obtained thanks to the principles that were established .
A limited target of 10 % , robust sustainability criteria and also aiming at second-generation biofuels - this is the real challenge : to make sure that we can move as quickly as possible into the use of second-generation biofuels .
But we will also have to act internationally on these issues and make sure that there are sustainability criteria and that this does not add to the food crisis .
Let me also say , in response to Mr Wijkman , that this whole issue of deforestation will be addressed in a communication , as I understand this summer or early fall , so this issue will also be addressed in the negotiations .
At the same time it is necessary to catch the whole debate that is going on right now and make sure that we prepare properly a good discussion and a good decision on deforestation .
That must also be prepared for the climate change negotiations .
I would also say to Ms Doyle that maybe the main thing is not to try to merge the negotiations between the different Conferences of Parties but rather to make sure that we maximise the co-benefits when we implement both the measures on fighting climate change and making sure that we can keep up our biodiversity targets .
So I think this is what has to be done now , especially when it comes to protecting tropical forests and to ensuring that we have these sustainability criteria for biofuels .
So I think we should not aim for what we know is already impossible or would bring us into an administrative and otherwise impossible political situation but look for the implementation .
This goes for the whole debate on legislation and regulation and ambitious targets .
We have them .
We have them already , but now it is a matter of implementing them and , of course , working , as I tried to tell you , on the seven points that we aim for in the negotiations , to make sure that we also work internationally with partners to ensure we have a good scientific basis which we will move into very concrete implementation .
That is what I can say in general .
Finally , the action plan that was established is exactly about mainstreaming , including making sure that we also look at the common agricultural policy .
So I think from this point of view , again , it is about making sure that we convince both Member States and all our institutions to do everything to implement our targets .
I will not take more time .
I am very aware of the need to stick to our timetable , so may I say thank you once again for the debate and also assure you that Commissioner Dimas personally intends to attend the ministerial segment of COP 9 . I am sure he looks forward to seeing some of you there and I anticipate your support towards a successful outcome of these important meetings .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( PL ) I fully support the resolution in question .
The Ninth Conference of the Parties to the UN Convention on Biological Diversity is to be held in Bonn in May 2008 .
Representatives of various countries will be assessing the loss of biological diversity that is taking place the world over .
Participants will also consider a fair and honest way of sharing the benefits derived from exploitation of genetic resources .
Loss of biological diversity in forests has particularly negative consequences .
It affects the rate of deforestation and accelerates the climate crisis .
I share the concern that climate change will lead to even further deterioration of biological diversity in the world , and will result in degradation of the environment and the extinction of certain species .
This will in turn have a negative impact on human development and the fight against poverty .
It is already known that deforestation and degradation of forests are responsible for 20 % of the world 's carbon dioxide emissions .
Against this background , the European Union 's credibility is being seriously compromised due to ineffective implementation by Member States of legislation concerning biological diversity and Directives such as those concerning birds and habitats .
The resistance to certain political action is causing similar negative effects .
By way of example I could mention the insufficient effort to implement commitments aimed at halting the process of loss of biological diversity on EU territory by 2010 .
There is also an unwillingness to enter into negotiations regarding the instrument allowing benefits to be accessed and shared , and an unwillingness to allocate additional targeted funding to implement conventions in developing countries .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0019 / 2008 ) .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Subject : Expansion of the Schengen area
Has the Council assessed the political consequences of the recent expansion of the Schengen area and its repercussions on relations between the EU and the neighbouring countries , whether or not EU Member States , which will now border on the expanded Schengen area ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) Four months have passed since the last expansion of the Schengen area on 21 December last year .
As you know , the process of expansion was not actually concluded until the end of March , when the border controls at airports were removed .
Therefore , there has not been a lot of time or opportunity for assessment of the general political effect of the expansion and its impact on relationships between the Member States of the European Union which apply the Schengen rules and the neighbouring countries .
However , some Council working parties are already discussing issues such as the reorganisation of the border authorities of some Member States following the expansion of the Schengen area , and the changes and trends in illegal immigration that could be a consequence of the expansion .
Undoubtedly , the expansion of the Schengen area had a very positive effect on the European Union 's visa policy , especially for the citizens of third countries .
They can travel throughout the whole of the Schengen area with a visa issued by a new Member State , which was not previously the case .
In addition , the European Union has already concluded agreements with eastern European countries and the countries of the Western Balkans on simplifying the issuing of visas .
( ES ) Madam President , Minister , many thanks for your reply .
Since you are from a country which is in this very situation , I feel sure the Slovenian Presidency is following the matter with great interest .
I have personally taken the trouble to visit some of the countries in this situation : on the one hand I hope we do obtain a guarantee on our borders , but on the other we have no wish for the EU to build a new wall , new ramparts .
What guarantees do we have that expansion of the Schengen area will not create difficulties , for example , for cross-border workers or for those used to entering countries that now form part of the Schengen area without any problems , and this applies notably to Slovenia , which has a neighbour applying for accession to the European Union ?
( SL ) Thank you , Mr Medina Ortega , for your supplementary question .
As has already been mentioned , the Council has not yet had a discussion at the highest level and has not made a comprehensive assessment of the effects of the expansion of the Schengen area on individual countries .
You asked about the Slovenian experience and I will say this : it is most certainly not a question of building new walls , but of shifting the European Union 's external borders to new borders .
It means that the external borders of the Schengen area have moved to incorporate a larger number of European Union Member States .
It was a demanding project for the States whose borders are now partly new external borders of the Schengen area .
They spent many years preparing for it .
This project was very challenging and the European Union recognised it by setting up a special source of financing called the ' Schengen Facility ' , which helped to establish appropriate controls at the new external borders of the Schengen area .
You also asked about the border between Slovenia and Croatia .
It is a fact that this was an invisible border in the past .
It is also a fact that it was a provisional border at the time we gained independence .
In cooperation with our partners in the European Union , we actually managed to organise border controls that do not make it more difficult for citizens of the Republic of Croatia to cross .
We also managed to preserve all the elements required by the Schengen standards and regulations for effective border controls .
( DE ) Madam President , the expansion of the Schengen area in December last year has led to more , not less , security .
This is borne out by the statistics , and we should be pleased about that .
In the next stage , Switzerland and Liechtenstein are now to be included in the Schengen area , but I hear that there could be problems because some Member States may wish to enter reservations about the accession of Liechtenstein .
I have heard various comments from the Czech Republic to that effect .
I therefore have a question for the Council : are you aware of these possible reservations , and what will you do to avoid any problems associated with the non-accession of Liechtenstein ?
My question refers to the Schengen rules and their contribution to climate change and increased carbon dioxide emissions .
Last Wednesday I had the pleasure of flying from Brussels to Ljubljana to be a guest in your lovely country for two days as part of the PPE-DE Bureau .
Having landed in Ljubljana , we all disembarked from the plane and were pushed into a bus , as happens at many airports .
We were crammed into a bus .
It took 22 minutes .
Then the bus took off for what we thought was clearance through passport or clearance to the baggage .
It moved exactly 20 yards , Madam President - from where I stand to where you are - and we all disembarked and went in the gate .
I joke not .
When I questioned the nonsense of this procedure , I was assured that it was required under Schengen rules .
Explain please , Minister !

( SL ) In answer to Mr Pirker : it is a fact that procedures to include the Swiss Federation and the Principality of Liechtenstein in the Schengen area have already begun .
At the moment these procedures and the evaluation procedures are still ongoing .
The Presidency 's opinion is that the entry of these two countries into the Schengen area depends exclusively on the results of these procedures , especially the evaluation results .
We do not know of any objections raised by any of the Member States regarding the procedures envisaged for the entry of any individual country into the Schengen area .
In answer to Mrs Doyle , I must admit I am not convinced that those are Schengen rules .
They most probably concern airport safety regulations .
In any case I could not explain here the reasons for the 20-metre ride on the airport bus .
I presume there are regulations covering movements at airports which are not part of the Schengen rules but probably relate to airport security .
Thank you , Minister .
Perhaps you will be able to investigate on your way home tonight .
Subject : Retaining the economically active population in mountain , difficult-to-access and island areas
A high percentage of human resources often decides to abandon the regions of the EU because of the dearth of job opportunities , leaving those regions depopulated and inhabited only by the elderly .
In the light of this trend and the acute demographic problem facing the EU , will the Presidency propose measures to retain the economically active population in mountain , difficult-to-access and island areas so that all the regions of the EU develop in a balanced way and the EU maintains its competitiveness ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) In response to Mrs http : / / www.europarl.europa.eu / members / expert / alphaOrder / view.do ? language = SL & id = 28571 " \ o " PANAYOTOPOULOS-CASSIOTOU , Marie " , I would like to say this : In addition to four other regulations in the field of cohesion policy , the Council adopted the Regulation on the European Regional Development Fund , the European Social Fund and the Cohesion Fund in July 2006 .
In accordance with Article 3 of this Regulation , the aid from these funds was also intended for certain islands and island Member States and for mountainous areas .
At the same time the Council and the European Parliament adopted a Regulation on the European Social Fund .
This Regulation gives the following definition of the role of the European Social Fund : improving opportunities for business and employment , encouraging a high level of employment , and creating new and better jobs .
These two regulations are harmonised to secure support for specific areas .
In accordance with them the Member States can , in their operational programmes and projects , pay special attention to stimulating development and employment in the regions mentioned by the honourable Member in her question .
Therefore , it is up to a Member State to decide for itself which of these operational programmes and concrete measures from these programmes satisfy the criteria listed in the question .
The Commission evaluates proposed programmes , points out any inadequacies for reaching the targets of the cohesion policy and satisfying the provisions of particular regulations , and , if all the conditions are satisfied , approves these proposals .
When it comes to the shaping of any new legal measures in the area of cohesion policy , the duty of the Commission is to make decisions that enable the targets of the cohesion policy to be met .
The first opportunity for the period 2007 to 2013 will be the debate on the first interim report on the implementation of the cohesion policy .
We expect the Commission to present the report in June .
( EL ) Madam President , I thank the minister for repeating all the measures envisaged under the Structural Funds and the European Social Fund .
I wanted to know whether the Presidency and the Council are aware that certain regions of Europe remain uninhabited .
They do of course belong to national states , but this impoverishes the EU and exposes it to people invited in from other regions .
This subject concerns us all , for it does not relate solely to each individual state .
That is why I ask whether the Presidency intends to take any special interest in the matter .
( SL ) Thank you for this supplementary question , Mrs Panayotopoulos .
The Presidency is aware that there is no longer an active population in some regions .
However , I would like to reiterate that it is up to the Member States which are proposing the required measures to prevent this phenomenon from happening .
On the other hand , we must appreciate that we cannot force people to live and work in particular regions .
It is a serious problem which has to be solved .
I repeat that the cohesion policy measures offer solutions , but it is up to the Member States which of those solutions to propose for given concrete cases .
( DE ) Minister , may I take issue with your last comments .
Of course , the competence lies with the Member States here , but the European Union also has a responsibility for the depopulation of these regions ; this is happening because of what we face throughout the European Union , namely liberalisation .
Post offices are being closed down in small communities because they are no longer making a profit , local savings banks are being closed down , and local swimming pools are being closed down , in some cases , because public services are being privatised .
All this makes life in these communities slightly less worth living .
I come from a mountain region and I have seen it happening .
My question , then , is whether any thought has been given to this issue at Council level .
Madam President , may I also make one brief comment in response to the previous question : in Graz too , you have to get on a bus to travel five metres , so you are not the only one .
It is the same old nonsense : they claim that Schengen is to blame , which of course is completely untrue .
( SL ) I think it was 20 and not five metres , but even that is too short .
As I said before , I do not wish to discuss the workings of Ljubljana airport , which is an independent company following its own rules of operation .
However , I would like to reiterate that the European Union cohesion policy provides for the Member States to deal with the problem pointed out by Mrs Panayotopoulos .
How successful they are is another question that may be asked .
You mentioned postal services , which is a very interesting point .
However , I must stress that the Directive concerning postal services , which the European Parliament also adopted this year , addresses this problem too .
An important element of the Directive is the guarantee that the postal services will be universal even after this market has been opened up .
Therefore , the problem you mentioned has been appropriately addressed by that Directive .
Subject : Lisbon Treaty

Article 1 , paragraph 24 , relating to Chapter 1 , Article 10 A , paragraph 2 , ( Principles and aims ) states that the Union shall ' ( f ) help develop international measures to preserve and improve the quality of the environment and the sustainable management of global natural resources , in order to ensure sustainable development ' .
Does the Council consider that this provision implies that an EU ban on a particular environmental measure which goes beyond a fully harmonised level may be regarded as contrary to the Treaty ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) Mrs Goudin 's question is not covered by the Council 's competences .
The Council as such did not take part in the intergovernmental conference which prepared the draft for the Lisbon Treaty , but the Member States ' governments did .
In addition , as we know , the Lisbon Treaty is not yet in force .
When it comes into force , and we hope that will be soon and by the anticipated deadline , it will be the court that will be competent to deal with the explanation of its provisions - I think that is what Mrs Goudin was asking about .
Minister , we have had many estimations given to us in this House as to how similar the old Constitution and the proposed new Lisbon Treaty are .
Could you give us your own view as to how similar the two documents actually are ?
( SV ) Madam President , I believe that we should reasonably be able to ask questions about how we are to interpret the Treaty , which is now being presented under another name but is the same , and that the Council ought then to be able to answer the question .
My supplementary question now to Question No 3 is : Does this wording mean that the EU will decide not only the objectives of global environmental policy but also the means , the means the Member States are to use to achieve the objective ?
( SL ) The question as to how similar or different the Lisbon Treaty is to or from the former Constitutional Treaty is primarily down to personal impressions .
It is a different treaty from the Constitutional Treaty but offers some similar or even identical solutions .
I will limit myself to the following facts .
It is different inasmuch as it is not the kind of treaty that supersedes all previous treaties .
This is a classic method of adapting fundamental European Union treaties .
It is different in the sense that the constitution concept has been dropped and there is no longer talk of a European Union Constitution , but of a classic treaty .
Similarities or equivalents are to be found in numerous solutions , including institutional solutions , functional solutions and solutions in the areas of simplification , the adoption of decisions and an increased role for the national parliaments and the European Parliament .
Therefore , the treaty is different from the previous Constitutional Treaty , but offers some similar or even identical solutions .
As regards the second question : I paid special attention to the language of Mrs Goudin 's question and I would like to point out that this provision concerns the Union 's support in shaping international measures to preserve and improve the quality of the environment , sustainable development and so on .
In other words , the Union does not prescribe or order , but helps .
I think this language speaks for itself .
I am going to take one more supplementary question on this particular question .
We have had a whole spate of indications , but I take into account political balance and who has asked a question already .
( SV ) The wording cited by Mrs Goudin is good , and it is fantastic that we want to protect and improve the environment , that is good wording in the Lisbon Treaty .
The constant problem with the EU 's environmental policy is when environmental measures conflict with the internal market .
Recently Commissioner Verheugen stated that in the past five years the Commission has taken Member States to the European Court of Justice a whole 19 times in cases where Member States have legislated to protect the environment .
In all 19 cases the court ruled in favour of the internal market and against the environment .
I am wondering whether this in any way strengthens the environmental guarantee ?
With this wording , can we say that the environment takes precedence over the demands of the market ?
Could you issue a statement on this please ?
( SL ) Yes , I would like to say to Mr Holm that I totally agree with him .
It is absolutely the case that there are clashes between legal norms in different areas , even when it comes to the nature of the legal norm .
That norm or that provision of the Lisbon Treaty , which I repeat is not yet in force , talks about the Union 's support .
The nature of the legal norm is different from an order or a ban .
The largest number of orders or bans can actually be found in the common market .
It is a fact that there is the possibility of a clash , but it is also a fact that it is in the nature of things for these clashes to be resolved by the Court in accordance with current Community law .
There is a way of eliminating the risk of a clash when formulating the legal norms , but that is a matter for the European Commission , which alone has the right of legislative initiative .
I am convinced that when it takes that initiative it is careful to avoid any potential clashes .
Subject : Lisbon Treaty
Is the Council satisfied that questions submitted by the Slovenian Presidency to the Member States , which included thirty-three points on the Lisbon Treaty that needed clarification , have been adequately responded to ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) Mrs Harkin asked about the points raised by the Slovenian Presidency .
It is a matter of the technical work that is needed to prepare for the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , work which should be done in advance if we want to enforce the Treaty to the full extent .
This work started in January , in accordance with the mandate which the European Council bestowed on the Slovenian Presidency in December last year .
I must stress that these activities are of a purely preliminary nature .
They are preliminary because , as we know , the Treaty will come into force only after it has been ratified by all 27 Member States .
Nevertheless , the Council regularly gives reports on this preliminary preparatory work , or technical work , to the Office of the President of the European Parliament , especially when they concern issues that involve the European Parliament .
I am pleased that the Slovenian presidency is making good progress .
I want to raise with the Minister one or two issues that are causing controversy in Ireland at the moment .
I would like clarification from the Slovenian presidency on these issues .
First of all , in the matter of the introduction of a common consolidated tax base , and indeed the matter of tax harmonisation , could you clarify that each country has a veto on these matters ?
Secondly , I want to ask you about the protocol annexed to the Lisbon Treaty on the Euratom Treaty .
I want you to clarify for me whether this protocol amends or changes in any way the substance or procedures of the Euratom Treaty and whether there is any change in the legal base or any implications , in particular with regard to nuclear power .
President-in-Office of the Council . - I will make an exception and speak English , Ms Harkin , in order to avoid any further controversy and to make myself maximally clear on the issues you raised .
First , taxation : at present , every Member State has a veto on issues related to taxation , be it the common corporate tax base , tax harmonisation or any other taxation issue , and that will remain the case after the Lisbon Treaty enters into force .
The Lisbon Treaty does not change that .
In the area of taxation , the method of decision-making remains the same : decisions can only be taken by consensus of all Member States , including , of course , Ireland .
Concerning your other question , the same applies : the energy mix , the choice of sources of energy is , and will remain , within the domain of sovereign decisions by Member States .
Each Member State is free to choose nuclear power , to include nuclear power in its energy mix and each Member State is free not to choose it .
That is going to remain the same after the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty .
Given that the Member States have sought clarification on certain points of the Lisbon Treaty , I wonder if I could also seek clarification , specifically on the ' passerelle clause ' .
There are many areas where the EU seeks competence but has no legal basis , and that has been the subject of much criticism and scrutiny over the years , but are you not concerned that , with the ' passerelle clause ' , the EU can gain new competences without the need to consult national parliaments ?
Are you not concerned that this actually undermines national parliaments and democracy across the European Union ?
Can the Minister comment on why it was thought necessary to introduce a moratorium during the Irish referendum on bad news from Brussels and on any new controversial proposals from Brussels ?
Is fear of the people so great that the Council and the Commission think it better to keep them in the dark ?
Can you tell us what proposals are subject to this moratorium and , specifically , whether they include anything relating to harmonisation of corporate tax calculations , and , if so , why ?

( SL ) Regarding Mr Kamall 's question , I would like to stress the following : the ' passerelle clause ' enables the Member States to agree to make a decision allowing a certain activity at Union level .
I think it is erroneous to regard this as something that could happen without the agreement of the national parliaments .
If anyone were to act without the agreement of the national parliament , that action would not have backing at home .
Let me also explain that the Lisbon Treaty will strengthen the roles of the national parliaments , involving them more directly in the mechanisms of the European Union .
This ' passerelle clause ' is also subjugated to this greater role of the national parliaments .
In response to Mr Allister , I must say that I am not familiar with any moratorium .
No one has made any decisions , neither the Council nor the Presidency , on a moratorium on bad news or delicate topics .
The question you posed as an illustration , concerning a common consolidated corporation tax base , is not a new question .
This issue has been discussed for some time now , for years in fact , and there is still no agreement .
Without an agreement , there will be no progress .
This is because , as I have already explained in answer to a previous question , taxation matters fall within the category of questions on which the European Union makes decisions exclusively by agreement .
That has not changed and will not change , either as a consequence of the Irish referendum or subsequently .
We now move on to two questions , which will be answered jointly , concerning human rights in China , the first from Ms Doyle and the second from Mr Evans .

Subject : Human rights in China
On 17 January 2008 , the European Parliament adopted a resolution ( P6 _ TA ( 2008 ) 0021 ) that urged China ' not to use the 2008 Olympic Games as a pretext to arrest ... and imprison dissidents , journalists , and human rights activists who either report on , or demonstrate against , human rights abuses ' .
What actions have the Council taken in response to Parliament 's resolution ?
What responses , if any , has the Council received from the Chinese authorities ?
Is the Council satisfied that the Chinese authorities are making sufficient efforts to live up to the principles of the Olympic Charter ?
Subject : Human rights in China
In early 2007 , human rights activist Yang Chunlin was collecting signatures for a petition in China entitled ' We Want Human Rights , not the Olympics . '
In July of that year he was arrested for ' inciting subversion of state power ' and continues to be held in a detention facility in Jiamusi City .
Does the Council share my deep concern at the ongoing detention and treatment of Yang Chunlin ?
Does the Council agree with me that the imprisonment of human rights activists runs counter to the promises made by numerous Chinese officials in the run-up to the Beijing Olympics ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) Like the two MEPs who asked these two questions , the Council is also concerned about the persecution of Chinese human rights activists .
As regards Chinese commitments for the Olympics , it is a matter for the International Olympic Committee .
However , we can say that recent repressive actions against human rights proponents and other activists are casting doubt on China 's commitment to fulfilling its promises based on international human rights standards .
This involves protecting the individual 's legitimate right to free expression .
We are also concerned about evictions and persecutions , including those connected with Olympic constructions .
In accordance with the guidelines concerning human rights advocates , the leaders of European Union Member States ' missions to China are carefully following the situation of individuals like Yang Chunlin and Hu Jia .
The European Union Council is constantly , and in various ways , warning the Chinese authorities about cases that give rise to concern .
After Hu Jia was detained in December , the Council spoke up several times about his case , but without a satisfactory response .
The Council will follow these two cases closely and attempt to take action .
Nevertheless , we should mention some positive cases , for example the speedy release of Chinese journalists , including Yu Huafeng and Ching Cheong .
We also welcome the changes in media laws , namely that there has been a temporary relaxation of restrictions on foreign journalists in the run-up to the Olympics .
In the last round of human rights talks between the European Union and China , held in October 2007 , the European Union Troika called on China to retain the regulations concerning foreign journalists even when the Olympics had ended .
The Chinese delegation gave an assurance that journalists would still be allowed to work more easily after October this year .
The Council will certainly discuss this issue again with the Chinese authorities .
You probably know that the Council is preparing for the next round of talks on human rights between the European Union and China .
These talks will take place in Ljubljana on 15 May .
The EU Troika intends to discuss the most worrying issues of the moment , especially freedom of expression , internet control , the issue of regulations covering foreign journalists , the right to peaceful assembly and the role of civil society .
The EU will pay special attention to the problem of the rights of human rights proponents .
I can assure you that the EU Troika will do its utmost in the discussion on these issues and will unequivocally show its concern to the Chinese government representatives .
' The goal of Olympianism is to place sport at the service of the harmonious development of man , and [ ... ] any form of discrimination with regard to a country or a person on grounds of race , religion , politics , gender or otherwise is incompatible with belonging to the Olympic movement ' - two fundamental principles of the Olympic Charter to which the Chinese have signed up .
While I want the Olympics to be a great success - and I feel we should not seek to boycott the Games - we should not be afraid to remind the Chinese authorities that they must make greater efforts to preserve human dignity through a free and fair justice system , free media , better treatment of Tibetans and other ethnic minorities , better animal welfare etc .
We must also recognise the enormous demographic , environmental and modernisation challenges facing China .
However , as part of this process , would you agree , Council , that they must be able to accept legitimate criticism when they fail to live up to the commitments they have signed up to , such as the fundamental principles of the Olympic Charter ?
The Minister said he had not received satisfactory answers from the Chinese authorities so far .
In the weeks and months ahead , will he follow up forcefully what he has asked already and for which he has not received answers ?
He will be aware that in the run up to their Olympic bid , China made many promises about improvements to their human rights record , assurances which to date , we know , have not yet been met .
Now is the opportune time to act in the pre-Olympic period because afterwards will be too late .
On 15 May when they have these discussions , will they actually be discussing what positive steps they can take to press China on freedom of speech , the rights of journalists and the right to free demonstration and so on ?
Will he press them also on their use of capital punishment ?
Because what statistics there are show that China is executing more people than the rest of the world put together at the moment .
We cannot have the Olympic Games there without putting this message as forcefully as possible to the Chinese authorities .
( SL ) In answer to Mrs Doyle : as I said in my first answer , the Olympic Charter is a matter for the International Olympic Committee .
That body is competent to act if it judges that there has been a violation of the Olympic Charter .
In response to Mr Evans , the European Union is watching over the human rights situation .
I have already said that human rights talks between the EU and China will take place on 15 May .
They will include the issues of freedom of expression , internet control , regulations covering foreign journalists , the right to peaceful assembly and the role of civil society .
This is not a full or exclusive list ; other aspects could be discussed too .
As far as capital punishment is concerned , the European Union 's position is clear and the EU is consistent in advocating and enforcing it in all multilateral and bilateral fora .
( LT ) Minister , you have mentioned that there would be attempts to influence the Chinese Government .
How very true .
However , the disruptions to the Olympic torch relay have provided an insight into the possibility that during the Olympic Games Chinese television would give us coverage not only of athletic competitions , but also various police riots in the streets and squares , involving both Chinese citizens and tourists .
In view of this situation , do you think it is more feasible to exert pressure on China or to choose the path of diplomatic negotiations ?
It has been alleged that if you want an organ transplant in China they can tell you that they will have the organ very soon , and there is the suspicion that they are in fact killing people to order , so to speak .
People who are to be executed are being executed to meet these requests .
I argued here yesterday with another Commissioner that megaphone diplomacy does not work in the case of China .
So , can we take it that the Council will be pursuing other forms of diplomacy with China , because that does work ?
Will you in particular raise these concerns which have been documented and raised with the Council and Commission in the past ?

( SL ) On Mr Paleckis ' question : I think the answer is very simple .
We must never give up diplomacy as a means of discussion , persuasion and achieving results .
Therefore , the answer is simple .
As we have said , the Council is conducting a very developed dialogue between the European Union and China .
This is an ongoing dialogue and a new chapter will be revealed next month .
We wish to continue with this dialogue , of which human rights are , and will remain , the important element .
I cannot comment on Mr Mitchell 's question because the Council has not debated this phenomenon and does not have an opinion on it .
Mr Mitchell , you will probably agree that I cannot comment on information and data appearing in the media or elsewhere .
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , you rightly said that in practice , dialogue can contribute to resolving conflicts .
My question is this : can you imagine creating new fora with China , whether it be in education or research ?
Learning from each other and understanding each other must be a key focus of attention .
After all , at international level , we not only have sport , music and business ; there are the personal human relations as well , and we need new fora here .
I would just like to follow up on the question asked by my colleague , Mr Evans .
If the Chinese do not address the issues outlined by my colleague satisfactorily , what action does he believe the Council and EU Member States should take ?
If he feels that he cannot answer that at the moment , what actions would he suggest the Council seek to take ?
Or will we just sit idly by and meekly accept whatever the Chinese tell us and simply attend the Olympics ?
What action should we take ?

( SL ) In a way Mr Rübig 's and Mr Kamall 's questions are connected .
The question was about what can be done if we do not receive a satisfactory response , and one of the possibilities is certainly to repeat the request .
You asked about new platforms for the dialogue with China - yes , of course , if the need arises and if the Council and the Chinese delegation agree to such a broadening of the dialogue .
However , I think it is essential for the dialogue to continue , and I see this as a joint answer to both gentlemen .
The Council is determined to continue the dialogue and to address the human rights issue .
Subject : Tibet
The EU responded strongly to the violent suppression of the riots in Myanmar some time ago .
Economic sanctions were imposed and a special EU envoy was appointed for the country .
In the case of China , the Council is expressing itself with far more restraint .
Indeed , the spokeswoman for the EU 's High Representative for Foreign Affairs , Mr Javier Solana , went so far as to say : ' Relations between the EU and China are completely different to relations between the EU and Myanmar . '
Does the Council consider there to be a difference between Myanmar and China as regards the massive violations of human rights and the violent action of the authorities ?
Can the Council inform me what improvements have been brought about by the political dialogue with regard to the human rights situation and the position of the Tibetan language and culture ?
What is the Council 's view of the proposal by Amnesty International that international observers should be admitted to Tibet so that an investigation can be carried out ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) Like the European Parliament , the Council is also concerned about recent events and human rights violations in Tibet .
On 19 March , only a few days after the events , the Council made a statement in the name of the European Union , in which it appealed for restraint .
It called on the Chinese Government to respond to the anxiety of the Tibetans regarding the respect of human rights .
It appealed to the Chinese Government and the Dalai Lama to enter into a concrete and constructive dialogue which would lead to a lasting solution acceptable to all and entirely respectful of Tibetan culture , religion and identity .
The Slovenian Presidency sent a similar statement on behalf of the European Union during the session of the Human Rights Council in Geneva on 25 March .
We are aware of the calls for a United Nations enquiry into the Chinese response to the events in Tibet .
The Council appealed to the Chinese Government to lift the restrictions on access to the region , which would help in an independent evaluation of the situation .
The human rights talks between the European Union and China , which have been mentioned several times today and will take place in the Slovenian capital , Ljubljana , on 15 May , will be another occasion to discuss the situation in Tibet and other pressing issues , such as the position of human rights proponents .
The European Union Troika will insist that the Chinese authorities allow foreign journalists access to Tibet in accordance with the new rules adopted in the run-up to the Olympic Games .
The European Union and China will talk in Ljubljana about internet censorship and thereby continue the debate which started during the last round of the dialogue in October last year .
It is important to assess the human rights dialogue in the context of a broader dialogue between the EU and China on human rights , reforms and political and social advances .
The issues underlying the disturbances we witnessed in Tibet are regularly discussed as part of the human rights dialogue with China .
These issues are freedom of religious persuasion , minority rights and cultural rights .
The EU Troika held a very open discussion with the Chinese authorities on the restriction of religious freedom in the last round of talks in October last year .
Among the recent positive changes in the field of human rights in China is also the fact that new employment law came into force this year and the competence to review capital sentences is back in the hands of the Supreme People 's Court .
Consequently , the number of executions has fallen .
Finally , I would like to stress that the European Union is following the situation in Burma just as closely as the situation in Tibet .
As regards the latter , the European Union is actively supporting the United Nations ' efforts to accelerate the transition to democracy , reconciliation and development of the country , and is involved in consultations with its Asian partners .
( NL ) I thank the Minister for his answer , which was fairly detailed , but unfortunately did not get to the heart of the matter .
We in this Chamber are all agreed that we should be concerned about the human rights situation in Burma and China .
I venture to doubt that a positive change is under way .
I should like to point out that , only a few weeks ago , the French newspaper Libération published photos of the equipment used to torture Tibetan prisoners in China on the front page , so I do doubt that there has been any positive change .
However , I shall put my question in more specific terms .
Why does the European Union have double standards , when , for instance , very strong action is taken against Burma , with economic sanctions , whereas that does not happen with China ?
Could it be that , when major economic interests are involved , we are rather less principled than with human rights ?
( SL ) I cannot agree with you , Mr Dillen , that there are double standards .
I think the European Union does not hold double standards .
If that were the case , the Slovenian Presidency would not have spoken on behalf of the European Union at the session of the United Nations Human Rights Council in Geneva on 25 March on the subject you mentioned .
When it comes to human rights , the European Union strives to have the same standards for all third countries .
The question is what means should be used .
That differs from case to case .
When deciding what levers or measures to introduce , it is essential to consider the probability of achieving the desired result .
Subject : Human rights in Chad
Can the Council state exactly how it is increasing diplomatic pressure for a ceasefire in Chad to protect beleaguered civilians and increase diplomatic efforts to secure peace ?
Two opposition politicians , whom the Chadian Government says it is not holding , were in fact seized by state security forces on 3 February in Chad .
After the coup attempt in early February , how is the Council ensuring freedom of the political opposition following arrests which were part of a crackdown on political opponents in the capital , N 'Djamena ?
President Déby declared a state of emergency on 14 February , granting his government exceptional powers to censor the media , search people and property , and tightly regulate all movement in Chad .
How is the Council ensuring that the Déby administration is not infringing the human rights of Chadian citizens with these newly acquired more expansive powers ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) The Council has been closely following the civil rights situation in Chad , especially since the Chadian authorities declared a state of emergency .
As we know , the state of emergency was revoked on 16 March .
The Council called on President Déby to respect fundamental rights and freedoms , exercise restraint and release the detainees immediately .
At the moment only one person is still missing .
An agreement with nearly all political opposition parties was reached on 13 August last year .
The Council is still appealing for the signatories to the political agreement to continue with the implementation of that agreement regardless of the interruption which occurred due to violent clashes with rebel groups .
Continued implementation of the agreement also applies to the provisions for the promotion of democratic freedom and free speech .
The Council is joining international efforts in promoting this process and especially in gaining the trust of the political opposition parties and civil society .
Pressure from the European Union has led to the formation of a Commission of Inquiry , in which the European Union and the International Francophone Organisation are cooperating in the role of international observers .
One of the tasks of this commission is to research human rights violations during the fighting and to establish the circumstances under which some opposition leaders disappeared .
The commission should complete its work within three months .
I was actually in Chad on 24-30 March and met with the Minister for External Affairs and with the chairperson of the National Assembly .
I am not satisfied with the answers I received in relation to Mr Saleh , who is missing , and also in relation to the Committee of Inquiry .
I just want to ask : are the international people on the inquiry and the representative from the EU there as observers ?
Are they actually taking part in the inquiry ?
My understanding is that they are there only as observers , and I am not satisfied if that is the position .
I do not think we will get a true and accurate report if there are no international representatives involved in the inquiry as opposed to being observers .
( SL ) You are right , Mr Burke .
The representatives of the EU and of the International Francophone Organisation are taking part in this inquiry as international observers .
In my opinion this role is sufficient to evaluate the report which we expect the Commission to submit in three months .
I have no further questions on that point , and the next question will be the last question .
Subject : Peacekeeping mission to Chad
Can the Council make a comprehensive statement outlining how the EU peacekeeping mission to Chad is progressing at this time ?
President-in-Office of the Council . - ( SL ) Following attacks on the capital city , N 'Djamena , which Chadian rebels carried out from Sudan in January , the commanding officer , General Nash , decided on 31 January to interrupt the deployment temporarily .
This decision was accepted for two reasons , firstly to allow evaluation of the new political and security situation , and secondly to carry out an unhindered evacuation of the Europeans and of civilians from other countries .
The deployment was resumed after 12 days and this 12-day break did not affect the general schedule of the operation .
The initial operational capacity was reached on 15 March , and , according to the plan , the full capacity should be reached by the end of June .
Regardless of this short temporary interruption , the Council has clearly stated that it is still committed to implementation of the mandate in accordance with the relevant United Nations Security Council resolution , particularly the humanitarian mandate .
The clashes at the beginning of February had been foreseen as a possible scenario which was taken into account from the very beginning when the operation was being planned .
Sadly these predictions came true , which gave extra urgency to the deployment of the EUFOR mission and the United Nations mission in Chad and the Central African Republic .
The Council is of the opinion that it is in the interest of the international community and of the European Union to improve stability and security in the region .
The presence of the multidimensional structures mentioned will contribute to stabilisation of the humanitarian and political situation and prevent the crisis from spreading to neighbouring countries and regions .
As regards the incident at the Sudanese border , when one EUFOR soldier died , the commander of the operation expressed his regrets for unintentionally crossing the border and for the unfortunate action which resulted in this fatality .
The commander confirmed that EUFOR would carry out its mandate in accordance with the United Nations Security Council resolution , that is to say with impartiality and consistent respect for the Sudanese borders .
I should add that the inquiry into that incident is ongoing .
The deployment of troops is proceeding according to plan .
At this moment there are 1 800 EUFOR soldiers in Chad and the Central African Republic .
When the mission becomes fully operational it will have 3 700 soldiers from 14 Member States .
At the moment , negotiations with third countries about their possible contribution are under way .
Madam President , can I ask the Minister if he is satisfied that there is adequate logistical support available to allow full deployment of the peacekeeping mission over the next weeks and months ?
Furthermore , would the Minister agree that the EU peacekeeping mission to Chad sends out a very strong message to the Sudanese Government , because many of the 300 000 refugees stranded in the camps in eastern Chad have come there to escape the genocide from the Darfur region ?
( SL ) The answer to the first part of Mr Aylward 's question is certainly yes .
The answer to the second part is yes , provided that the mandate for the operation , which does not include Darfur , is observed .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will be answered in writing ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.10 and resumed at 21.00 )

Towards a reform of the World Trade Organisation ( debate )
The next item is the report by Cristiana Muscardini , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , ' Towards a reform of the World Trade Organisation ' .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to begin with sincere thanks to the secretariat , which has been very active and helpful to all members of the committee during the drafting of this text .
Today we are delivering to the Commission a series of thoughts resulting from in-depth deliberations carried out in a constructive spirit by the entire Committee on International Trade .
Our committee wants a more effective and democratic World Trade Organisation equipped , in terms of its institutional operation , to perform the important task of regulating international trade .
For this to happen , reform is indispensable .
The recent accession of many new members - one might just mention China and the forthcoming entry of Russia - highlights the success of a body now comprising 152 countries .
However , precisely on account of its increased size , some thought needs to be given to a reorganisation of the WTO .
In the report we emphasise the key reasons why the WTO and trade multilateralism require a new , stronger , more dynamic and democratic structure .
A regular feature on our agenda is the Doha Round negotiations : we know that an agreement is always just around the corner but keeps escaping our grasp .
The Committee on International Trade , conscious of this problem , therefore reiterates its support for those negotiations , which ought to lead to more balanced , fairer trade .
Meanwhile we believe the time has come to look ahead to the post-Doha period in a bold , ambitious frame of mind .
In delivering our thoughts to the Commission today , we call on the Community executive to be equally bold and ambitious by taking a political initiative in Geneva which could pave the way towards a review of the operation of certain mechanisms that are evidently not working properly at present .
The WTO 's institutional structure could be improved by distinguishing between activities connected with the negotiation of new international rules and commitments or activities relating to the implementation of existing agreements .
The principle of consensus is and should remain the norm for ministerial conferences , but it might be possible to devise methods other than unanimity for procedures leading to final decisions in an organisation which , having been enlarged , requires different mechanisms .
Such mechanisms have been envisaged for Europe ; now they also need to be envisaged for the WTO !
The guiding criterion for the Doha Round has been to involve all member countries in negotiations on a whole range of matters , whereas in such a broad-based organisation efforts should be made to develop a plurilateral approach incorporating a form of ' variable geometry ' .
We have talked about this in the past for Europe ; now it is needed at the WTO !
Development is an important topic , and in recent years the group of developing countries has become increasingly large and diverse .
It includes emerging economies as well as countries which in effect have already ' emerged ' , such as China , India , Brazil and South Africa .
It would be appropriate , therefore , for the sake of real developing countries , to reclassify countries into clearer and more homogenous groups on the basis of their respective economic situation , and to require all countries to meet their responsibilities in keeping with their economic strength .
The WTO secretariat , while being highly regarded for its professionalism and competence - and we consulted it many times during our months of work - has a relatively limited establishment plan .
It would be appropriate to strengthen the secretariat 's role and enable it to take initiatives and suggest compromises .
Strengthening the secretariat means making it more representative in terms of geographic coverage , so that it feels itself to be the hub , the driving-force of the Organisation 's activity , in the interest of all members , including above all those developing countries which at present are paid insufficient attention for them to be able to achieve real growth .
As concerns transparency and the parliamentary dimension of the WTO , the transparency of international dispute settlement proceedings needs to be increased so as to improve the WTO 's external image .
The promotion of a parliamentary dimension should draw on the existence of the Parliamentary Conference on the WTO , enhancing it to form a fully-fledged parliamentary assembly with advisory powers lending legitimacy to its proceedings .
It is vital for there to be consistency and coordination with other international organisations .
To this end , relations with the International Labour Organisation and with certain UN agencies need to be strengthened , since major international social and environmental issues must not be beyond the bounds of WTO activity .
Above all else , we should not forget that the dispute settlement system is a unique feature of the WTO .
Unless a way is found to streamline and accelerate these proceedings , there is a risk that disputes may drag on for years , with detrimental effects on society , member countries and consumers .
For this reason we would make a cordial appeal to the Commission to be as bold as the parliamentary committee has been in identifying new rules to streamline the World Trade Organisation for the future .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission is grateful to Parliament for this insightful and timely report .
Making sure the WTO can respond to the challenges of a rapidly changing global economy should be a major priority for the European Union .
In addition , in the light of the current economic difficulties that many WTO members are facing , a strong multilateral institution is more essential than ever to counter the call for beggar-thy-neighbour protectionist policies .
The report recognises the central importance of the Doha Development Agenda ( DDA ) .
The Commission wishes to reiterate that any initiative in Geneva with regard to the future of the WTO will have to be calibrated and rooted in what we hope will be a successful outcome of the DDA .
Today , during what could be the final phase in the DDA negotiations , no WTO members would have the political willingness and / or the administrative resources to engage in a meaningful reflection on the reform of the WTO .
We do expect and hope that this situation will evolve towards a final DDA deal to be signed before the end of 2008 .
This will also open the gates to a debate on the future of the WTO , a debate that will be highly dependent on whether the DDA is concluded successfully or not .
As to the ideas expressed in the report , the Commission shares most of them in principle , even if it is clear that some proposals put forward in the motion for a resolution will face strong resistance from certain WTO members .
With regard to institutional matters , the Commission remains supportive of enhancing the parliamentary dimension of the WTO and of other ideas , like granting additional resources to the WTO Secretariat and expanding its tasks , as well as strengthening the WTO active transparency mechanisms and to monitor and supervise effectively the application of the rules .
We note the call for openness in the dispute settlement procedures and would like to underline that it was based on our initiative , that some hearings in WTO cases involving the European Union have been open to the public .
As to the substantive proposals put forward in the report , the need to integrate non-trade concerns within the scope of WTO rules will remain a guiding principle of European Union policy within the multilateral framework , but also in the framework of its bilateral negotiations recently launched on the basis of the Global Europe Communication , and unilateral initiatives in favour of developing countries .
The new unilateral system of tariff concessions in favour of developing countries , the General System of Preferences Plus , is an example of that .
The relation between trade policy and labour and environment will surely be an important area , and other trade subjects might appear on the agenda .
The shaping of a new multilateral policy after the conclusion of the Doha Round will be one of the most stimulating and difficult challenges for European trade policy .
Parliament will take on an ever-growing role in designing and driving such policy , in particular once the Lisbon Treaty enters into force .
The Commission , and my colleague Mr Mandelson in particular , is looking forward to engaging with you in open and constructive dialogue in order to reach solid and realistic conclusions aimed at strengthening the WTO and the whole multilateral trade system .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Development . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , our Committee on Development fully supports the arguments by the rapporteur , Mrs Muscardini , in favour of a radical reform of the World Trade Organisation .
In 2001 the Sutherland report started a very lively debate in the WTO itself on its institutional reform , a debate that unfortunately came to an end far too quickly .
Some people do not think the debate on reform is appropriate at present .
They want to wait for the outcome of the Doha development agenda before having a fundamental debate on the institution as such .
In our view , however , the two are not mutually exclusive .
From the point of view of development , we would like to see a new differentiation between the developing countries in the WTO , based on the development needs of each of the countries rather than country categories .
Mrs Muscardini has already explained why that is necessary .
Not only is greater transparency required in the WTO , better cooperation with other international organisations , such as the International Labour Organisation and UNCTAD , is also essential .
The proposal in the Sutherland report for funding arrangements for technical assistance for the least developed countries to be regarded as a contractual right , so that they can play a full part in the multilateral trading system , is essential as far our committee is concerned .
Finally , dispute settlement , in which , for the reasons we all know , developing countries often come off worst , also needs to be reviewed as Sutherland has advocated .
In short , reform of the WTO is crucial , not just to reinforce its legitimacy with all its members , including the very poorest , but , I think , also to safeguard multilateralism .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur and the Committee on International Trade for this report .
I think it is worthwhile , when we discuss the WTO , also to underline the fact that globalisation and free trade have given millions and millions of people new opportunities .
In the last two decades , we have seen more progress in the fight against poverty than the world has ever seen before .
This underlines the need to safeguard a stable framework of fair and multilateral rules for free trade .
This is the main task of the WTO and it is also why it is important to have a strong and strengthened WTO .
We need to ensure that we can have more international trade and competition without distortions .
This is why the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs has pointed to the need to reduce state aid , to remove non-tariff trade barriers and to help developing countries to be in a better position in the negotiations regarding the multilateral framework and the rules of free trade .
This underlines once again why we need a strong WTO and a strong Secretariat - in order to take decisions and to uphold the rules , but also in order to develop the multilateral trade system .
If we succeed in having a strong WTO and a strong Secretariat , we will do an important thing to safeguard the opportunities for global trade to develop in a framework of free and fair rules .
That is our task - nothing more and nothing less .
In that sense , it is also important to highlight some of the things that need to be done : we need to increase free trade in services ; we need to increase openness in financial services ; we need to ensure that we can have more free trade in agriculture .
When we discuss increasing food prices , we can see the importance of opening up the markets .
But we will never succeed in doing this without a strong WTO and without the opportunity to uphold a strong framework that is good for the developing countries , that can give poor people new and better opportunities and that can also help us all benefit from the opportunities of free trade .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Madam President , at first sight it is strange that we should be debating the reform of the WTO in the wake of the extended deadlock of the Doha Round negotiations .
Nevertheless , it is well worth debating the operation and the future of the WTO because this deadlock is due to structural and institutional problems , and shortcomings in the system of world trade .
The report by Mrs Muscardini also demonstrates this .
In my view , the major challenges of the attempted reform are threefold .
Firstly , there must be the greatest possible and mutually profitable liberalisation of commercial exchange , for this is a tried and tested provider of economic growth .
The objective certainly remains the equal distribution of benefits among the members of the WTO and the harmonious incorporation of developing countries into the world trade system .
Secondly , the challenges are to be found in the institutional arrangements required to guarantee the consent , unified commitment , democratic legitimacy , transparency and effectiveness of an organised world trade governance .
Thirdly , the appropriate balance must be found between commercial and non-commercial issues .
The WTO member states have every right to apply restrictive trade measures in a bid to protect the environment , public health and consumers .
A typical example is the cases brought before the WTO 's tribunals by trading partners against the EU , owing to GMOs and the ban on beef imports containing hormones originating from the USA and Canada .
It should , however , be understood that the solution does not lie in overloading the WTO with additional responsibilities , but linking mutual support and consistency with goals and actions , both by the WTO and other international organisations .
Ladies and gentlemen , the WTO 's mission is not to cover operational gaps left by other specialised bodies in the UN system .
The global community is undergoing both a worrying financial and economic crisis , and an undocumented food catastrophe .
In the face of these two scourges , cosmetic changes , such as the lifting of barriers , is not enough .
Global challenges demand global understanding , systematic convergence and a coherent regulatory regime .
This applies to social responsibility , environmental protection and economic competitiveness .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , it is essential to complete the Doha Round but it is also essential to examine once again the functioning of the WTO .
Every day we can see that it is beset by problems concerning its efficiency , legitimacy and interaction with the other bodies of the multilateral system .
To some extent it was inevitable that , just over 10 years after its creation , its operating mechanisms would need to be reviewed .
By changing from the GATT to the WTO , the multilateral trading system did not just change in dimension ; in some regards it changed in nature , too .
The trade rules were extended to a considerable range of new areas : services , intellectual property , investment , non-tariff barriers .
New member countries joined the original ones and this enlargement introduced a diversity , a disparity of situations and Member States , with different resources and different problems .
All of that obviously means that , in addition to the efforts to complete the negotiations on the Development Round , the necessary reforms have to be examined .
I welcome the work carried out by our rapporteur , Mrs Muscardini , and the fact that we were able to cooperate with her and with the other groups .
I would like to emphasise several points in this extremely important report , which , I hope , will be adopted by a large majority of this House tomorrow .
The first element is the balance in terms of international standards and the establishment of new relations between the WTO and the other international organisations .
You will see in the report that we obviously mention the interaction with environmental issues , health issues - and this is clearly vital , as seen in the case of generic medicines and intellectual property - but also with social issues .
We cannot fail to discuss this topic in the WTO .
Cooperation between the ILO and the WTO , which was resumed by the Directors-General of the two organisations , must go much further and the European Union must act as the driving force in this respect .
We are putting forward two specific proposals : the first is that the ILO should be granted observer status in the WTO , as is the case for the International Monetary Fund ; the second is that the WTO should set up - and the Union should propose this - a committee on trade and decent employment , modelled on the Committee on Trade and Environment , which has enabled a great deal of progress to be made on the interaction between environmental and trade rules .
Secondly , I would like to emphasise the aspects of the report that encourage the WTO to give more resources to the weakest members , to the least developed countries , to ensure equal , effective and efficient participation in all the negotiations and in all the committees in which future agreements and trade policies are shaped .
Thirdly , we also stress the importance of external transparency and the possibility of civil society , parliamentarians and a truly dynamic parliamentary dimension playing a greater role in the WTO .
We want to see a genuine parliamentary assembly .
At present , a Parliamentary Conference meets alongside the WTO .
The Director-General has recently addressed it and the trade ministers , too , but we want it to be recognised , which is why we are putting forward very specific proposals , for instance in relation to the appeal body and on dispute settlement .
Since these proceedings are similar to those in a court or tribunal , they should take place in public and the documents should be publicly available .
I also believe that that would help to dispel certain myths and make the organisation more transparent .
Finally , the secretariat 's resources represent another important issue , which has been highlighted .
The WTO 's budget today is USD 135 million : six times less than that of the IMF and almost 10 times less than that of the World Bank .
It employs around 600 staff , a figure that is again much lower than that of the other multilateral organisations .
As a result , increasing the resources of a WTO that is better incorporated in the system of multilateral organisations is , in my opinion , one of the conditions for better trade rules that promote development .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( BG ) The dynamic process of economic and financial integration on a global scale is a determining factor for the difficult international economic environment .
Analyses by leading world organisations on macroeconomic policies and global trends indicate that the coming ten years will see high levels of political and economic insecurity .
At present , certain risks loom large such as rising energy prices the dynamic movement of which affects prices of agricultural products , and taken together these factors generate an inflationary pressure and food insecurity , limited infrastructure capacity to transport supplies which are vital for international trade , financial turmoil .
I draw your attention to these risks and insecurities not because I want to deprive you of your restful sleep but because I want to stress some of the parameters of international economic environment and the need to implement a policy to adjust imbalances and support vulnerable economies .
Let me recall that two of the main industries most affected by trade liberalisation are manufacturing and agriculture , and rising food prices have caused violent protests in many regions around the world .
To respond to the economic and political realities , the World Trade Organisation , as a trade system with rules which are binding on international trade , ought to make improvements to its rules of operation , organisational structure and decision-making procedure , and exhibit a more pragmatic institutional flexibility and adaptability .
And in doing so , it should , of course , take account of the fact that to negotiate in a format of 150 states at various levels of development , having different structures of their economies and implementing various reforms in economic sectors is quite a challenging endeavour .
However , if options are proposed by Sofia , Cotonou , Santiago , Brussels , the debates in Geneva are the mechanism to arrive at agreements which should increasingly remove barriers .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( GA ) Madam President , agriculture should not lose out in a World Trade Organisation agreement .
Commissioner Mandelson is currently negotiating a very uneven deal , which would be detrimental to European farmers and the entire EU agri-food sector .
It seems to me that the US electoral calendar is dictating the timetable for the WTO negotiations .
Such nonsense should not be tolerated .
The content and substance of the agreement is far more important than any election .
Although Ireland is the fourth largest exporter of beef in the world , it would be badly hit by this agreement .
The domestic beef and lamb market in Ireland , which is currently valued in excess of EUR 2.5 billion , will be undermined by the WTO agreements .
The reduction in import tariffs of up to 70 % on beef and lamb products being proposed by Mr Mandelson is simply too much .
10,000 farmers marched on the streets of Dublin last week in protest against President Barosso 's visit to the city .
Mr Barosso knows the full wrath of the Irish farmers and it is time he reined Commissioner Mandelson in .
Finally , it is imperative that we reach an agreement in the World Trade Organisation - an agreement that would be to everybody 's satisfaction ; an agreement that would benefit Europe , farmers and agriculture ; and an agreement that would safeguard food sources .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , the Green Group certainly supports the general lines taken in this report , especially the call for more consistency between WTO rule-setting , the work of UN agencies and the existing social , environmental and human rights covenants .
We believe that it must include an observer status for the ILO , as well as measures against social and ecological dumping .
We also support the role of parliamentary scrutiny in order to mitigate the WTO 's lack of accountability and legitimacy , as well as the need to develop the WTO dispute settlement on the basis of international environmental and social law , ensuring that it has real sanctioning capacities .
I am concerned , though , that the report fails to acknowledge that the failure of the Doha Round is precisely rooted in the shortcomings of the WTO as an organisation .
These are not two separate things .
The stalling of the Doha Round is completely linked to the systematic abuses of its decision-making processes by some powerful countries and the resulting alienation of the weaker countries .
I think the report also fails to recognise that it required nothing less than a revolution on the part of developing countries in Cancún in 2003 and of some of the emerging countries prior to Hong Kong in order to begin to end the old feudal system on which the WTO has been running for far too long .
I think it is clear that we should stop waiting until we have an outcome from the Doha Round and immediately start with the reform of the WTO : reform both of its procedures and also of its policies , because reform of process alone is not enough .
We need to look at a whole range of rules that are now completely out of date in the 21st century , facing new challenges like climate change .
So we need to look at rules like the one on PPMs , for example : the prohibition of distinguishing between products on the basis of which they have been produced .
Such discrimination is crucial if we are able to support and promote things like energy efficiency , for example , and fewer emissions .
We also want to see a complete refocusing of the dispute settlement proceedings , and I would commend to my colleagues an amendment that the Greens have put down which asks very specifically for a new way of looking at the dispute settlements mechanism , ensuring that it is rooted in the principles of the UN Charter and that it is separated out of the current WTO form .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , the only thing we will agree on is the urgent need to revolutionise the WTO .
The WTO , like the IMF , is an illegitimate , anti-democratic and dangerous organisation as far as the people 's interests are concerned .
It was initially set up to ensure the financial and industrial hegemony of the United States and major transnational groups .
The Union has , of course , slavishly put itself at the beck and call of this system , in the hope of gathering a few crumbs from the table of the American master .
This unbridled free trade has today turned against its founders and the planet 's centre of economic gravity has swung towards the East and Asia in particular , resulting in the most terrible financial and food crises the world has ever experienced .
There are few countries that yesterday were classed as emerging nations , went on to become predators and then renounced their role as predators in the name of some benevolent objective or another , with the entire global trading system built around the WTO encouraging them to continue along that path .
The rules for all players are to get rich as quickly as possible , irrespective of the means , including speculation on medicines or basic foodstuffs .
In the Union the inequalities have exploded and the working and middle classes are getting poorer and poorer .
The food crisis affecting the poorest populations is a direct consequence of the WTO 's policy aimed at destroying subsistence crops to the benefit of export crops .
Biofuels are merely the easy scapegoat of a mercenary system that must be revolutionised as soon as possible .
I want to take this opportunity to denounce the irresponsible comments of Mr Mandelson , who called for further deregulation of the agricultural markets at a time when the World Food Programme is highlighting the surge in food prices and calling it , and I quote , ' a silent tsunami threatening to plunge more than 100 million people into hunger ' .
Does Mr Mandelson thus want to go down in history under the shameful epithet of someone who was responsible for starvation ?
The WTO must therefore be revolutionised in order to curb speculation and support producers rather than a minority of profiteers benefiting the global financial markets , so as to encourage the populations to become independent in terms of food and industry and to urge the nations to cooperate rather than compete .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Madam President , from the report it seems that the EU requires all Member States to reach a consensus in WTO negotiations or to justify the position in writing .
So the UK , for example , has to go along with the rest of the EU .
We have to toe the line .
Put simply , it means that , in reforming the WTO , Britain will be more closely forced to trade with such other countries as the EU allows .
But we are world traders .
We have been doing it for centuries .
We have a great deal of expertise in global trading .
For instance , our trade with the USA is more than France and Germany put together .
But EU countries do not seem to want to take advantage of our experience , so we are already constrained by EU trade agreements , and that is ruining Britain 's global trading reputation .
We are not allowed to trade sufficiently with our traditional partners in the British Commonwealth .
That is not exclusive trade .
We would not try to stop other European countries from joining us in trading with our Commonwealth friends .
It would be of benefit to all concerned .
EU countries would prosper , and many Third World countries would find their living standards rising .
The WTO was set up to promote trade and friendship , and the EU keeps on saying it wants to help the disadvantaged .
Well , one way to start is to widen trade links , not cut them off .
( SK ) There are not many people who would doubt the importance of the WTO but there is also almost no one who would be in doubt about the need to reform this organisation , whose main aim is to combat poverty and provide aid to developing countries .
The basis for the reform is to be the report by Mr Peter Sutherland .
As we know , Mr Sutherland at present heads two supranational giants : BP and Goldman Sachs International .
Other members of his team are former diplomats , businessmen and academics ; none of them known for their criticism of the present system .
With due respect for all these gentlemen , I would like to ask : whose interests will the WTO reform proposed by them protect ?
Will it protect the interests of developing countries or the interests of supranational companies ?
What kind of a signal is this for developing and less developed countries ?
As we all know , trust is important in economic as well as political matters .
The WTO is not only an economic but also a political institution , which is why trust among members is important .
However , will people in developing countries believe that the gentlemen in supranational corporations have their welfare at heart ?
Why play into the hands of the opponents of the WTO and put the image of this institution at stake ?
( FR ) Madam President , at a time when the negotiations under the Doha Round are losing direction and getting bogged down , the issue of the WTO 's operation is more relevant than ever .
Is it not possible to move beyond this impasse by reforming the WTO ?
Failing an agreement on the substance , could the process for achieving such an agreement be improved ?
This revival of the WTO seems possible and will enable it to operate and make decisions more effectively .
Two levels of reforms are envisaged : those aimed at improving the negotiating procedure and those aimed at improving the WTO 's legitimacy , a key factor of its organisation .
To this end , it is important to emphasise the parliamentary dimension in the WTO and to make the most of us , the citizens ' legitimate representatives , thereby making globalisation issues more transparent and democratic .
Much work is needed to ensure the consistency of international policies .
There is no point in eliminating the obstacles at the borders if behind them lie obstacles to investment , disdain for social rights and infringements of environmental standards .
An effective WTO is therefore essential to guarantee the objective of more trade and liberalisation regulated by the markets .
However , rules do not mean protectionism .
In fact , liberalisation without any safeguards is not the solution to all evils , particularly those we are experiencing today as a result of the rise in the cost of agricultural raw materials and the consequent spread of hunger .
The Falconer proposal to reduce customs duties is thus unacceptable for our European agriculture and would have untold consequences on the agricultural production of the poorest countries .
Moreover , in order to conclude the Doha Round , it is essential to restore balance to the negotiations and reach genuinely reciprocal agreements on market access .
We are not yet ready to sacrifice our agriculture and our role as contributors to food security just to obtain , shamefully , a few reductions in industrial tariffs .
( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I welcome the debate this evening on Mrs Muscardini 's report on the reform of the World Trade Organisation .
The food crisis that is currently hitting the developing countries hard illustrates perfectly the urgent need for better regulation of global trade .
This should come from a reformed WTO that is capable of controlling globalisation prices and promoting fairer trade rules .
This crisis is structural , not cyclical .
It is a sign that serious problems are diverting global trade from what should be its main objective : ensuring the development of all , notably the poorest countries on the planet .
A number of theories have been put forward to try to explain the origin of this crisis and I do not doubt their relevance . However , I think that collectively we should ask ourselves a number of questions .
Would this crisis have been as extensive if the priorities of the developing countries had been given greater consideration in the WTO ? If there had been better coordination of the WTO and other international organisations such as the UNDP and the FAO ?
If our free trade agreements had not encouraged the developing countries to specialise in single crops for export , to the detriment of their traditional subsistence crops and food self-sufficiency ? If we had listened to the African countries and supported them in the WTO when they asked that action on the price of basic products be included in the current round of negotiations ?
In this respect , I must point out that Article 38 of the GATT requires all WTO members to stabilise and improve the situation of the markets for primary products , which are of particular importance for developing countries .
In order to deal with the current problems and improve the efficiency and legitimacy of the WTO , this report proposes several measure .
In order to ensure that the voices , the points of view and the interests of developing countries are better heard and , indeed , taken into account , it emphasises the need to introduce a more democratic system of decision-making and better representation in the WTO secretariat , which must also be provided with additional financial and human resources .
In order to guarantee greater transparency of the organisation 's debates and work , provision should be made for better information , dialogue between the organisation and representatives of civil society , and public access to meetings , particularly for the dispute settlement procedure .
Finally , the WTO 's parliamentary dimension , which guarantees the democratic legitimacy and transparency of negotiations , must be strengthened .
That includes , in particular , the creation of a WTO parliamentary assembly with consultative powers .
In addition to these measures , the very aims of the multilateral trading system must be reviewed with a view to ensuring consistency with the other international organisations .
Only a committed reform in this regard will allow us to conclude a Doha Round that is truly working towards development and towards achievement of the Millennium Goals .
I would point out in this respect that the first of these goals is the eradication of poverty and hunger ; sadly the current situation reminds us that our commitments remain unfulfilled .
Madam President , I wish to stress that the reform of the WTO has to be embedded into a reshaping of the whole institutional set-up which deals with the governance of global challenges .
Just look at the effects of global warming and the financial crisis of huge economic imbalances .
Open trade has to be fair .
In addition it has to be linked with policies that help poor countries to develop , through agriculture in particular .
The formidable rises in food prices are going to fuel protectionism and restrictions unless we focus on developing food production throughout the world .
The rises in the prices of basic commodities has compounded a very complicated general state of affairs .
Food will increasingly be seen as a national security problem both in wealthy and poor countries .
Therefore the reform of the CAP , the EU development aid policy and the energy policies have to be examined by considering the dramatic changes in the international context .
( PL ) Madam President , Commissioner , I should like to draw attention to three issues in the context of this debate .
Firstly , despite being members of the WTO , many countries are not complying with social , environmental and animal welfare standards .
As a result , their manufacturing costs are lower .
Unfortunately , however , it is then impossible to compete with products processed within those economies .
This aspect must be taken into account when improving access to the European market for third country goods , otherwise many European manufacturing sectors will simply cease to exist .
Secondly , the European market is continuing to open up to agricultural products from third countries in exchange for those countries making concessions for exports of industrial products and services from Europe .
Europe 's agricultural potential is therefore being weakened .
Thirdly , I fully support Mrs Muscardini 's suggestions concerning the establishment of a WTO parliamentary assembly , changes in the classification of countries into developed and developing , the need for closer cooperation between the WTO and the UN , and departure from the principle of consensus especially at the level of working groups and committees within the WTO framework .
( NL ) Mr President , I would very much like to say a lot about my ideas on the reform of the WTO , but instead I would rather ask the Commission a number of specific questions to which I would like answers .
The questions illustrate the points we have to take into account in the debate on WTO reform , in addition to the procedural reforms , such as transparency , that have already been mentioned .
In the context of climate change , there is more and more pressure to use biofuels .
I do not want to get into the debate on whether that is good or bad here , but I am raising the following questions regarding European Union obligations under the WTO .
The EU climate change package contains a number of environmental criteria that biofuels have to meet .
However , I and many of my colleagues would like to see social criteria applied , such as the minimum wage and the prevention of child labour .
Is that compatible with WTO requirements ?
If not , are we not then being forced into a position of accepting child labour and underpayment ?
I have another question about the trade in GMO food .
I believe that the Cartagena Protocol leaves it to the Member States to decide whether to approve GMOs .
Is that compatible with the WTO and , if not , how are you going to resolve that ?
Parliament has indicated that the majority of its members are opposed to the trade in sealskin .
Canada is now threatening to challenge that through the WTO .
How do you think the wishes of the majority of the population in the EU can be upheld on that issue ?
I think that those questions are very important and they need to be taken into consideration in the reform .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , trade between nations is a good thing .
Free trade is desirable , but today the world has changed and the WTO 's rules are ill-adapted and in many cases need to be amended .
The very nature of international trade has changed .
In the past trade was based on complementarity : we sought what we did not have and exported any surpluses .
That order made nations prosperous .
Today , however , social dumping reigns .
We abandon what we know how to do in order to import what somebody else is doing cheaper , not because it is more profitable , but because there are less costs , less taxes , less social constraints .
This WTO order allows the poor countries , the poor in the rich countries , to make the rich in the poor countries even richer .
It is less and less based on solidarity or on mutual agreements between nations ; rather it is an order that is disrupting nations and creating a conflict between the winners and the losers .
The WTO rules therefore have to be changed .
They must restore the Community preference and revive the spirit of the Treaty of Rome , which established the common external tariff .
That was not over-cautious protection , but fair compensation in the face of social dumping .
The founding fathers were not always wrong .
The WTO must incorporate the erratic exchange rate fluctuations in its evaluation of trade constraints .
It is unacceptable for the yuan to remain so low when the country has such a high foreign trade surplus .
It is outrageous that EADS loses a billion euro every time the dollar falls 10 cents against an ideological euro .
In conclusion , the future of truly free trade reminds us that we have a lot to do before we can sit back .
On the one hand , we need to restore the border as a condition of the policy and , thus , freedom for the people ; on the other hand , we need to allow the monetary and financial policy to take a back seat to the real economy , the productive economy , for it is that economy alone that allows the people to live here in freedom .
Madam President , the WTO has many flaws but surely its most ludicrous defect is the unfair advantage which it gives to China , India and Brazil by affording them the favourable status of developing countries .
They once were emerging economies but today they have very definitely emerged and can compete with the best .
Indeed , so successful are they that they are world leaders in several fields .
Yet , inexplicably , we give them a free ride as developing countries and in consequence accept lower standards and commitments from them .
There is little wonder that my constituents often see the WTO as not meeting or serving their interests , a feeling which is accentuated when they watch unmatched concession after concession on agricultural issues by Commissioner Mandelson .
Commissioner , getting the right deal is more important than getting a deal .
It will not be the right deal if it washes away our agri-food industry under an incoming tide of cheap imports from countries we treat more favourably than their robust economic capacity requires .
( PL ) Madam President , an institution that is not operating properly must be reformed to ensure that it serves all stakeholders and consumers correctly .
We do support free trade , but unfortunately the latter is often accompanied by the temptation to succumb to greed .
A control mechanism must be established as trade is liberalised , and that is the purpose of a strong World Trade Organisation operating correctly .
International trade has now developed to such an extent , and become so swift and wide-ranging that good coordination is required .
The European Parliament cannot stand idly by .
In my heart of hearts I therefore firmly believe that Mrs Muscardini 's work on reforming this organisation will serve to meet these expectations and result in an international body able to steer trade along a clear and well defined course .
Madam President , firstly I would like to congratulate Ms Muscardini on an excellent report .
The WTO does still have a significant role to play in the world and still plays its role well , but it needs to be modernised and reformed .
One of the key reforms , I believe , is to bring parliamentary democracy to the WTO .
We need a parliamentary assembly that meets regularly and monitors the work that is going on around the negotiating table at the WTO .
We also need to update the WTO rules to ensure that environmental sustainability and climate change are taken into greater account in WTO negotiations and that social and labour clauses are also included in WTO negotiations .
In particular , I would like to see the ILO more closely associated with the WTO 's work than it currently is .
In terms of the report as a whole , I very much support the work that Ms Muscardini has done in the Committee on International Trade .
( PL ) Madam President , the common market and unrestricted trade are key prerequisites to economic development .
The term unrestricted does not , however , mean unregulated and lacking any principles determining conditions for trade exchange whilst providing for competitiveness .
The need for appropriate trade regulation at world level is particularly acute in the context of globalisation .
That is why the role of the World Trade Organisation is so important .
The latter is a broadly based body bringing together more than 150 member countries .
The WTO will be able to act more effectively if its competences are clearly defined and restricted to trade policy .
Above all else , clarity and competitiveness involve ensuring that the production process meets established standards and quality requirements regarding for instance environmental protection , work and pay conditions , and animal welfare .
Competitiveness is not measured exclusively in terms of production costs and prices .
As I conclude I should like to say that WTO reform is an expression of the will to work together in the interests of development and in order to combat poverty .
Madam President , I wish to offer my congratulations to all concerned on this report , particularly the rapporteur .
I see - and I am liberally quoting from the explanatory statement here - that the analysis of the whole World Trade Organisation , on which the Committee on International Trade is about to embark , is going to be based very strongly on the conclusions of the Sutherland report , which , for many years , has been languishing gathering dust on a shelf .
Then , apparently , when the committee draws up its own report , the Commission will have the task of taking the necessary steps in Geneva to carry through the improvements that are recommended .
What guarantee have we that any new report is going to receive any more action than the excellent Sutherland report ?
Will environmental and climate change considerations be part of any new WTO package ?
Regarding the point already made in relation to the lack of homogeneity among developing countries , and the position of China , Brazil and India at the moment , will we be distinguishing more clearly between different levels of development at that level ?
And my final point is : will regional food security for all regions be a legitimate consideration ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank the honourable Members for their comments and suggestions , which will be taken into account in the Commission 's thinking about the WTO reform .
The Commission shares many of the concerns expressed during the discussion and actually supports many of the proposals put forward by Ms Muscardini 's report .
One has nevertheless to recognise that some of them will face strong resistance , but the Commission will certainly promote them .
In particular , the Commission fully supports the call for consistency between the WTO and other international organisations , and the calls for more transparency as well as for an increased role for parliaments , particularly in the monitoring and trade policy reviews .
The Commission also shares the view that a strong WTO is in the interest of the developing countries .
I would also like to respond to Ms Liotard 's comments , which go beyond the WTO reform .
I cannot go into details at this stage , but I would like to assure you that we already engage with our partners regarding child labour and other related issues , and we support the cooperation between ILO and WTO .
Finally , I would like to say that I will certainly report your comments to my colleague , Mr Mandelson , to be taken fully into consideration in the discussions with other WTO members .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank the Commission for its appreciation of the committee 's work .
I am likewise grateful for the assistance provided by the draftsmen of the Committee on Development and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , as well as by the many colleagues who have spoken in this House .
I would make the most of their political and , as it were , technical support this evening to point out to the Commission once again that no time must be wasted .
Woe betide those who have time and waste it !
In other words , it is true that the Doha Round may ultimately find a solution , but that solution has been postponed all too often in recent years .
Now that we have a very serious food crisis on our hands , we must also remember that some of the responsibility lies with certain practices - including on the part of the European Union - which , long ago , envisaged different scenarios for the emergence of agriculture and food .
If we wish to avoid a confrontation between genuinely poor developing countries and countries that are already developed , if we wish to make the market fair - and the market can only be fair and free on the basis of rules - we need to be bold , because we cannot agree to yet another postponement if we are to defend the concept of decent work and accelerate the settlement of disputes .
The Committee on International Trade is aware of the difficulties surrounding reform of the WTO , where certain ways of working have been established over time .
However , it is also aware that , in order to meet expectations in various quarters and to become a modern organisation of the third millennium , the WTO must somehow find the strength and courage to embark on the road to reform .
It is up to the Commission to take on board our reflections , which this House will formally express as a political demand tomorrow by a large majority .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - In 2001 , the Doha Round negotiations had an objective to lower trade barriers around the world , permitting free trade between countries of varying prosperity .
In 2005 , the EU cut prices offered to EU sugar farmers by nearly 40 % due to the World Trade Organisation 's determination that it would help benefit poorer countries on the global market , such as Australia , Brazil and Thailand .
Unfortunately , it had an extremely negative effect on countries within the European Union , like Ireland whose sugar industry was destroyed , and on the poorest sugar-producing nations of the African-Caribbean-Pacific countries like Mauritius , Belize and Fiji .
Now again in 2008 , many of these poorest countries who suffered the impact of the EU 's sugar restructuring are now experiencing civil disturbance over the price of staples like rice and maize , which they cannot afford because they no longer have an income from sugar .
Before we embrace new dismantling measures on trade protection , we should honestly make an impact assessment on the effect that the EU could have on some of its poorest neighbours so that any more changes of this type will not be destructive again .
Free Trade Agreement with the Gulf Cooperation Council ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Helmuth Markov , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the recent developments in negotiations on the free trade agreement between the European Union and the Gulf Cooperation Council - B6-0020 / 2008 ) .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , some may say that negotiations on the Free Trade Agreement with the countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council have lasted for 17 years .
In fact , it is only since 2002 that the substance has been discussed .
We the Commission , but also the representatives of the Member States in the Council , hope to finish the negotiations sooner rather than later .
We know that the FTA will contribute to the deepening of relations between our regions .
The FTA negotiations were conducted at an accelerated pace in 2007 , culminating in Commissioner Mandelson 's visit to Doha in December 2007 , which gave a significant political push .
We have made good progress on all chapters and are closer than ever to an agreement .
There are , however , some outstanding issues which are important to guarantee real preferential access for the EU to the GCC market and no discrimination compared to others .
These issues are export duties , some exceptions in the area of energy services , notably by the UAE , and certain horizontal provisions of the agreement , such as competition and intellectual property .
A negotiating round was cancelled in January .
Since then , there has been no feedback from the GCC side at all .
We now hope to be able to have the next round in early May , at the same time as the EU-GCC Joint Committee meeting , which is scheduled for 6 May .
Our objective remains to make progress in the next round and to conclude the negotiations as soon as possible , hopefully in the early months of the French presidency .
The Free Trade Agreement aims at creating a preferential relationship between the EU and the GCC , in line with WTO principles and disciplines .
It will thus lead to the liberalisation of substantially all trade between parties .
It also aims at supporting the Member States of the GCC in their policies of economic diversification through encouraging further economic reforms and offering the potential of bringing increased foreign investments , in addition to the increasing dynamics of inward investments in the region .
The FTA includes significant commitments on trade in services and investments by both sides and mutual access to public procurement markets , also in the energy and transport sectors .
It covers ambitious tariff liberalisation schedules , including in the chemicals sector .
Last but not least , it covers non-tariff areas , such as technical barriers to trade , sanitary and phytosanitary standards or intellectual property rights .
This House has expressed concern that the Free Trade Agreement being negotiated with the Gulf Cooperation Council does not contain clauses on human rights and social and environmental standards .
Let me , therefore , first of all clarify that the current draft of the EU-GCC Free Trade Agreement does include a number of non-trade clauses - on human rights , migration , counter-terrorism and non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
These clauses were agreed with the GCC some years ago .
However , it emerged at the last round that the GCC side had some outstanding questions on the wording regarding the suspension clause linked to the application of the essential political elements of the agreement .
In addition to these clauses , the preamble of the agreement refers to the need to strengthen the process of economic and social development in the GCC countries , while protecting the environment .
It also refers to the fact that the parties shall not encourage foreign direct investment by lowering or relaxing their domestic environment or label standards .
It also foresees consultations if it appears that an actual or proposed measure is inconsistent with these principles .
The EU-GCC FTA negotiations took into account the results and conclusions of a sustainability impact assessment study which was carried out between 2001 and 2004 .
This was the case , in particular , in sectors which were identified by the consultants as important for a more sustainable economic development in the GCC , namely services and some industrial sectors .
Further to the request of this House , in February we provided the negotiating directives for the EU-GCC FTA , including all its updates according to the agreed procedures and in respect of the confidentiality rules .
Finally , let me just stress that the European Parliament has been regularly updated on the state of play of the EU-GCC FTA negotiations and that the European Commission will continue to keep it updated .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , the conclusion of a free trade agreement between the European Community and the Gulf Cooperation Council has been the subject of negotiations since 1988 and it would seem that they will soon be concluded for once and for all .
I welcome the recent progress because the conclusion of a free trade agreement is essential in order to increase and regulate the trade between the European Union and the Gulf states .
It should thus launch a new , more dynamic era of cooperation in numerous strategic fields between two regions that are vitally important for one another , but whose relations have been lacking in substance .
The free trade agreement must help to dismantle non-tariff barriers and eliminate all public subsidies and compensation , notably for access to raw materials , in accordance with current WTO rules .
The opportunities and challenges posed by the growing importance of sovereign funds should be the subject of in-depth examination , dialogue and constructive cooperation between the European Parliament and the Gulf states .
The objective here is to maintain an environment that is open to investment while making the latter more transparent .
The managers of these funds must therefore be able to provide the market with additional information on the origin of their resources , their investment goals and their strategies .
However , Europe must also ensure that it can attract these funds , which generate growth , innovation and jobs , in the face of the strong international competition to attract productive capital .
The conclusion of the free trade agreement will encourage the Gulf states to be more receptive to the views of their European partners and will thus enable us to diversify and accelerate our trade and exchanges .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , I firstly wish to thank the Commissioner for her explanations , and immediately state that the Socialist Group in the European Parliament feels signing the FTA with the Gulf Cooperation Council is an objective we share .
We must , in fact , do this as soon as possible .
This will be to the benefit of Europe , and to the countries that comprise the GCC .
It is also true , however , that the mandate for negotiating this agreement is rather old .
It is a mandate which does not contain the necessary clauses to focus on today 's key issues such as human rights , employment or the environment .
I am therefore pleased to hear the Commissioner tell us that the Commission intends to do all it can to include these matters in the agreement .
This would otherwise be totally incomprehensible , because we are not only talking about trade or economic exchanges .
We are all aware that these are important countries , with one of the planet 's greatest sources of wealth , oil , an essential component of our modern societies .
These countries , however , do not just have oil .
They have people , men and women ; men and women born in these countries , and other men and women who come from other countries to work there , and I feel that human rights are not respected in these countries as they ought to be , for example , in terms of freedom of expression or freedom of association .
With respect to the women 's lack of equality , we cannot but feel ashamed and indignant when , for instance , we read news such the reports by Human Rights Watch , stating that women in some of these countries require permission from a so-called ' guardian ' , who may be a father , a husband , or even a son , to work , travel , study , or even get access to health services .
This is simply unacceptable , totally unacceptable .
However , we could of course also talk about the situation that was previously mentioned of the immigrants working in those countries , who constitute a strong workforce .
Are their rights guaranteed or not ?
Moreover , what are the environmental concerns of major oil-producing countries such as the GCC states ?
Are they interested in climate change or in the price of crude oil ?
This must be said amicably , but in all clarity .
It is for this reason that we are pleased that the resolution we will be voting on tomorrow has finally included paragraphs as important as paragraphs 17 and 19 , of which we feel we are the joint authors .
They refer , for example , to human rights as the subject of a clause that ought to be an essential part of the free trade agreement to be signed with the Gulf Cooperation Council , or the need for the parties to ratify the conventions of the International Labour Organisation .
We have also tabled additional amendments , which we hope the groups can support , thereby reinforcing these issues .
We must be careful , however , not to send out the wrong kind of message to our allies : human rights must be defended whether or not there is any oil in the picture .
on behalf of the ALDE group . - ( RO ) The discussion on the evolution of negotiations for the Free Trade Agreement between the European Community and the Gulf Cooperation Council caught my attention , taking into account the visit I recently made to the region , together with the European Parliament Delegation for Relations with the Gulf States .
The subjects discussed during the interparliamentary meetings included the negotiation of this agreement as well .
The GCC representatives declared that Europeans were creating pressure for unlimited access to numerous investment opportunities , while the GCC is interested not only in acquiring capital , but also in the need for technology and managerial know-how .
On the one hand , the negotiations started should have been completed in 2006 , but , as we say , they are continuing and the reasons are imputable to both parties .
The European Union feels that the GCC members lack coordination and reform and the latter complain of an interminable list of requirements that the Gulf States must meet .
Some of the most important were brought to mind by the Trade Commissioner , Peter Mandelson : market access , marking the origin of products , governmental licences , measures for protecting investment , as well as criteria for their guarantee in the GCC .
For this reason , I believe that , by concluding the Free Trade Agreement , both parties would officially commit to economic cooperation with mutually important gains : development of energy cooperation , economic and technological development of the region and , implicitly , an increased impact on environmental protection , creation of a common market and an increase in European investments are only some of them .
On the other hand , a sensitive debate in the region refers to the problem of respect for human rights .
The Union has a very important role in the international economy but , at the same time , it is also one of the main promoters of the respect for fundamental human rights .
The discussions I had with the representatives of the most active NGOs in the region revealed very clearly the opportunity provided by the negotiations for the Free Trade Agreement to put pressure on the Gulf States to provide more civil and political freedoms to the citizens of these countries .
For this reason , when economic issues are negotiated , increased attention should implicitly be given to the laws regarding the respect for the rights of immigrant workers and women .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , my group strongly supports calling on the Commission to supply Parliament with more information about these FTA negotiations and in particular to transmit the actual negotiating mandate and an updated sustainability impact assessment .
We also support the emphasis on the need for a strong chapter within the FTA on sustainable development , given the poor record of the Gulf States with regard to social and environmental standards .
That is what makes us concerned about suggestions from the Trade DG that since the FTA negotiations with the Gulf States started a long time ago , when sustainable development issues were apparently less relevant , it is somehow now too late to burden the negotiations with new issues like human rights clauses .
I think we need to say that this is politically unacceptable and we hope that the Trade DG will keep in mind that Parliament will need to give its assent to any final results of the negotiations .
But beyond our concern about the social and environmental standards of trade within the Gulf region , we need to ask more carefully what kind of trade an FTA with the Gulf aims to liberalise .
We know of course that the EU interest is about unlimited access to energy resources , about doing away with any barriers to trade like export taxes or quantitative restrictions .
Of course we know the EU is trying to out-compete other industrialised and emerging economies to get the best access conditions , that the EU sees rising energy prices and wants to sell more to the region in order to redress its trade balance .
Of course , this is completely inconsistent with the EU 's stated goals with regard to its policy on climate change .
But let us just imagine a different scenario : that the EU would not seek to balance its trade relations through all-out liberalisation but would use the incentive of trade imbalance to foster the development and application of renewable energy ; that the EU would not participate in the international race to secure access to oil but would insist on multilateral agreements giving all countries a fair share of diminishing global resources .
In comparison to this kind of ambitious scenario that we would like to see , the insistence of Parliament on a strong chapter in the FTA on sustainable development is absolutely the minimum we need in terms of deciding whether or not this House can give its assent to the upcoming agreement .
Madam President , the importance of concluding a properly functioning free trade agreement cannot be overstated .
EU exports to the GCC member states have been increasing since the 1980s .
The GCC is currently the EU 's sixth largest export market and the EU is the GCC 's first trading partner .
In 2005 , EU exports to the GCC were around EUR 50 billion , whereas EU exports from the GCC amounted to around EUR 37 billion .
The Commission expects the trade volume to double soon after the agreement is signed .
Furthermore , for the first time , as I understand , the proposed agreement foresees clauses on human rights , non-proliferation and counter-terrorism , and this is certainly to be welcomed .
Unfortunately , there has been a long delay in reaching an agreement and , when Mr Mandelson visited the region in February 2007 , you said , Commissioner , that he gave the free trade agreement a push , if I quote you correctly .
I understand , however , that he went on the record , when he was there , to blame Gulf Arab protectionism as a cause of delaying the signing of the free trade agreement .
Does the Commission still believe this to be the case and is this the sort of language to foster international agreements ?
Despite setbacks with reaching a trade agreement , GCC member states are engaging in a positive way with the Commission on the harmonisation of airport security regulations .
Passengers currently purchasing duty-free products and transferring either within the Gulf or in the European Union could potentially have their goods confiscated because of present airport liquid security restrictions .
But , thankfully , a number of Gulf Cooperation states have engaged with the Commission by applying for security recognition under Regulation ( EC ) No 915 / 2007 .
This , I understand , will allow passengers to transfer from third countries with their duty-free purchases , provided that the country has been recognised as secure .
Through this application , they have successfully established technical and practical cooperation with the EU , and the Commission should be commended for taking action in this area .
Such an example of practical cooperation is encouraging for any broader free trade agreement that may come into force later .
However , I would like to see such cooperation and agreements speeded up and extended .
An FTA should also be a way to promote scientific cooperation with the Gulf States and thereby support sustainable development in that region .
At the moment , there is very little scientific cooperation between Europe and the Gulf States , even though the potential could be great .
Cooperation in science is particularly important when it comes to climate change and energy policy .
The European Union currently imports about 50 % of its energy needs , of which approximately 20 % are sourced in the Gulf .
An FTA needs to be strengthened in the areas of combating climate change and I therefore welcome the Commission 's planned feasibility study in this area .
Madam President , let me begin with the positive .
Firstly , let me put on record my thanks to Mr O 'Sullivan , the Director-General for Trade , who responded quickly and positively to our request for the negotiating mandates .
We received them within a week or so of him coming to the committee and being asked to provide us with those mandates .
I also welcome the significant progress that is being made in these negotiations and acknowledge , as others already have as well , that this should open up the Gulf States to EU trade and should be good for EU business .
I also accept wholeheartedly that any FTA we negotiate is going to be an improvement on the 1989 Cooperation Agreement , and as you yourself , Commissioner , reminded us and Ms Doyle has just repeated , I welcome the fact that the FTA does contain a number of non-trade clauses on subjects such as human rights , migration , counter-terrorism and the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction .
But I do regret that the social , environmental and labour clauses that we are negotiating with the Gulf States are significantly weaker than those that we are negotiating in our modern round of free trade agreements .
We would not accept the standards that we appear to be prepared to accept for the Gulf States for Korea or for the ASEAN negotiations , for example .
The Commission has already told us - and we could have anticipated this - that this is because we are negotiating on the basis of an old negotiating mandate , a mandate that has not been updated since 2001 .
What I have not heard from anyone on the Commission , be it the Commissioner responsible , be it the DG for Trade or the Commissioner here this evening , is why we are still negotiating on the basis of an old mandate .
It is difficult not to be suspicious that the Commission felt it was going to be too difficult to negotiate modern sustainability , development clauses and labour clauses with the Gulf States .
Similarly , why has the sustainability impact assessment not been updated since 2004 ?
Again , I have yet to hear convincing reasons for this .
I must say that I am particularly concerned - Mr Carnero has mentioned the situation of women , and that is a concern that I share - but I am particularly concerned about the rights of migrant workers in the Gulf States .
Of course , these people make up the majority of the workforce in the Gulf States , and I do not see how in any sense they are protected by this free trade agreement .
What will the Commission do to ensure that ILO core standards are respected by the Gulf States in respect of migrant workers ?
Finally , Commissioner , your colleague Ms Ferrero-Waldner met the Bahrain Human Rights Society last week and raised with her a number of concerns over human rights and migrant workers .
She is quoted in the Gulf Daily News as giving her full support to human rights clauses in any free trade agreement .
How will the Commission plan to implement that promise ?
( FR ) Madam President , as already stated , the European Union has been negotiating the conclusion of a free trade agreement with the Gulf Cooperation Council for nearly 20 years .
Since then the Commission 's negotiating mandate has barely changed and has certainly not been properly updated .
The result is a somewhat surprising situation whereby the Union is not using the same criteria as a basis for its negotiations with the Gulf states as it uses with its other trade partners , such as Korea or the ASEAN countries .
In particular , the negotiating mandate makes no provision for inclusion in the future agreement of any clause on social standards , nor any ambitious chapter on sustainable development .
The issue of respect for human rights is scarcely mentioned .
Since these elements must be part of the priorities of European action , not only should they be fully integrated in the future free trade agreement , they should also be subject to suspension clauses for cases where the commitments are not fulfilled .
It is the EU 's responsibility to ensure that all the trade agreements it negotiates guarantee promotion of , and respect for , the democratic principles of human rights , the conventions of the International Labour Organisation and environmental standards .
In the case of the Gulf states , special attention - and Mr Martin has just mentioned this - must be paid to the living conditions and rights of migrant workers .
There are many such workers in the region to support the rapid growth there but they often work under disgraceful and unacceptable conditions .
More generally , over and above the trade that must be developed within the framework of harmonious trade relations , Europe and its Member States must step up their political and social dialogue .
We must therefore implement a free trade agreement that not only does not have a negative impact on the people living in the region but , on the contrary , consolidates their political , economic and social rights .
That is why it is essential , for example , to ensure that during negotiations on services , the need to guarantee a universal public service that is accessible , sustainable and cheap , and that meets high quality standards , is respected .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we all agree that it is very important to make improving our relations with the Gulf states a priority .
Europe and the Gulf states have many interests in common : on the one hand , Europe is the world 's strongest market , and on the other , the Gulf supplies us with resources which are unique .
From that perspective , it is essential to intensify our relations with these countries with an eye to the global context .
In the WTO , we have the ' Everything But Arms ' issue , and that should be the standard .
We must achieve a sensible solution as quickly as possible here , as this is in both sides ' interest .
We should also do more to foster exchange in research , knowledge and know-how , and try to build closer links in the education sector .
Joint conclusion of the Energy Charter is also important .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I thank the honourable Members for their comments with respect to the EU-GCC FTA negotiations .
I would like to stress that the Commission will continue to update the Parliament on the state of play of these negotiations .
I was particularly struck by the honourable Members ' interest in the inclusion of a political clause in the negotiated agreement and I would like to assure you that these concerns are indeed addressed in the negotiations .
I can also confirm something that was said , that this point was addressed during Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner 's visit to the Gulf region last week .
In fact , Gulf countries expressed their determination to conclude the free trade agreement and recognise the importance of further flexibility on the issue .
Mrs Doyle , did you want to make a point of order ?
Madam President , I will leave it now , but , as we did not use the five-minute catch-the-eye , it has been practice in other debates that , even if a Member has contributed , you can have a quick question that has arisen , so we can use all the catch-the-eye , or at least another minute , if it was there .
I will leave it now on this occasion , but it was only on that basis , as there was only one catch-the-eye tonight .
I had a supplementary question for the Commissioner , but I will leave it .
Mrs Doyle , you can ask the question if you wish .
The point is that you did not request it .
Madam President , really I just wanted to press home the point to the Commissioner that , given the prevarication and the delay and the cancellation of last January 's negotiations and the little contact since and the years this has been going on - with one or two meetings a year - are we convinced that there is any real will on the side of the GCC to have an FTA ?
You have sort of just answered that , but is there a real will to have an FTA with the EU ?
Is that not a fair question , given the time we have been negotiating ?
Member of the Commission . - I would like to simply say that we hope that there is .
As you know , the meeting that was scheduled for last January did not take place , but we hope that in the forthcoming meeting in May we shall have substantial negotiations .
Let us hope .
I have received one motion for a resolution pursuant to Rule 108 ( 5 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( RO ) As a member of the European Parliament Delegation for Relations with the Gulf States , I would like to emphasize the importance of signing the Free Trade Agreement between the European Community and the Gulf Cooperation Council as soon as possible .
The conclusion of this agreement in 2008 would constitute an essential premise to intensify the economic relations between the two regions and the need to ensure the European Union 's energy security reflects the importance and urgency of this theme .
Taking into consideration that the present trade focuses on the energy field , it is essential for the future agreement to clearly and thoroughly approach cooperation in this field and its consolidation .
This would multiply and facilitate the achievement of common projects in the energy field , including with the EU Member States in the Black Sea region , which would benefit from new development and cooperation opportunities .
Therefore , it is a priority to set a well-defined schedule for completing the current negotiations , as well as to formulate the major purpose of mutual benefits , which would lead not only to strengthening the economic relations between the EU and the Gulf States , as well as consolidating stability and sustained development in general .
Zero tolerance regime for unauthorised GMOs and the economic consequences thereof ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Commission by Neil Parish , on behalf of the Committee on International Trade , on the zero tolerance regime for unauthorised GMOs and the economic consequences thereof - B6-0151 / 2008 ) .
deputising for the author . - Madam President , I should first of all thank my colleague Mr Parish , Chairman of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , very much indeed for giving me the opportunity of coming here at this late hour to ask this oral question .
He , unfortunately , has for many months had a longstanding arrangement to go to Denmark with Commissioner Fischer Boel and had to leave for Copenhagen this afternoon .
So he sends his apologies for his absence and also sends his greatest respects to Ms Vassiliou and welcomes her to the Commission .
This is a reality check .
We have a very competitive and successful poultry and pig industry in the EU .
They are completely unsupported .
They do not receive a single farm payment ; they do not receive any subsidy at all and they have to stand alone in the marketplace .
With poultry and pigs the biggest cost of production is the feed .
Pigs and chickens do not graze the fields and therefore everything they eat is cereal-based .
If you have an unsupported industry you must make sure that they have access to competitive feed from around the world .
In Europe we take over two years on average to license a perfectly safe GM product .
Herculex , one of the few approved GM seeds , took 33 months to achieve EU approval .
In the US the average approval time is half that : 15 months .
There is no excuse for this .
With food prices and costs for the poultry and pig industry both rising , we cannot afford this time delay in licensing feed .
We have got to speed things up .
In the US many of these GM products are by-products from the bioethanol industry and they are significantly cheaper than feeds that can be accessed here in the EU by our poultry and pig producers .
So all we are doing is denying ourselves access to cheaper world market feeds , making it virtually impossible for our producers to compete and therefore we are in grave danger of haemorrhaging jobs and exporting our industry outside the EU .
Those purists who say that we must not have poultry or pigmeat produced with GM feed will not have won any kind of victory if we deny ourselves these feeds .
The end result will be that we will have lost our industry to our non-EU competitors while we continue to import poultry and pigmeat from animals that have been fed on precisely the same GM feed that we have denied our producers access to .
This is the politics of the madhouse .
We also need clear labelling and products so that consumers can make an informed choice .
They must know if the meat they eat has been fed on GMs .
With rising food prices , much GM-fed meat is cheaper and this gives consumers the choice and access to low-cost meat if that is what they desire .
The other major issue so far as feed is concerned is zero tolerance on non-GM feed coming into the EU .
Again , the great hair-shirted brigade can beat their chests and say that we are making sure that there are no traces of GM products in any non-GM feed that is entering the EU .
But what is the effect of zero tolerance when a shipload of non-GM soya is being loaded in Brazil to be brought to the EU ?
There is a chance that a very tiny residue of GM soya could be picked up through the loading equipment at the port in Brazil .
When that ship docks in the EU , if even a small trace of GM soya is found , even if that soya has been licensed in the EU , the whole cargo can be turned away .
Therefore the result of the zero-tolerance regime is to reduce dramatically the amount of non-GM feed coming into the EU .
So , even those poultry and pig producers who want to use non-GM feed find it incredibly difficult to access the quantities that they need , when they need them .
Once again , this makes it much more difficult for them to compete fairly in open world markets .
If we really want to export our poultry and pig industry outside the EU and feed our citizens on Brazilian chicken and pork and even chicken from Thailand , all of which has been fed on GM , then the present policies of zero tolerance on non-GM feed and the appallingly slow licensing of GM feed within the EU are exactly the way to go about it .
Commissioner , we are delighted that you were so resoundingly endorsed as a Commissioner for Health and Consumer Protection DG .
We wish you well but we hope that you will be the first to resist the tabloid Frankenstein food mythology and put in place some policies that will allow our farmers to compete internationally on a level playing field .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , the Commission recognises the risk that feed imports may become more difficult and more expensive , due to asynchronous approvals of GMOs in exporting countries and in the EU .
I am aware of the Agriculture and Rural Development DG study on the issue of feed shortage .
I must stress that the effects of a zero tolerance policy for unauthorised GMOs on feed imports only become an issue in the event of so-called asynchronous GMO approvals .
One of the key factors is the difference in the duration of the GMO approval procedure in third countries and in the EU , in combination with the lack of appropriate segregation mechanisms in exporting countries and the marketing strategies of the seed industry in these countries .
The increased use of GMOs by your main trading partners in commodities also has an important influence .
Against this background , the Commission is focusing its efforts on addressing these key factors .
Discussions with the European Food Safety Authority have been initiated with the aim of making efficiency gains in the duration of the authorisation procedure , without compromising on the quality of the EFSA scientific assessment .
I would like to remind you of the importance in this respect of the cooperation of Member States in the Standing Committee and in the Council .
Last but not least , I would like to note that the Commission recently adopted the authorisation of GA 21 maize , which will facilitate imports with the advantageous presence of this GM event from Argentina .
The Commission is also currently in the process of sending to the Council a proposal for the authorisation of a GM soya bean , after the Standing Committee failed to reach a qualified majority .
This soya bean authorisation will also enable a number of feed imports and thus contribute to the temporary improvement of the feed shortage problem that the Honourable Member raises .
The EU legislative framework on GM food and feed aims primarily at ensuring the safety of the products placed on the market .
This is why GM food and feed products are subject to pre-market approval .
The zero tolerance approach for unauthorised GMOs currently applied by the EU has been laid down in EU legislation , having been approved by the European Parliament and the Council as the best way to protect human and animal health and the environment .
It is similar to the approach followed by the vast majority of third countries , including major GMO producers .
At international level , the Commission , in close collaboration with the Member States , continues to support the development of Codex guidelines on the issue .
The Commission , however , recognises the possibility of incidents of the type indicated among the reasons behind your question and recognises that such occurrences are becoming easier to detect because of constant improvements in measurement techniques .
The Commission will examine whether it is appropriate and feasible to come up with an individual solution for this specific problem , in full respect of existing legislation .
In the case of the WTO complaint brought against the European Community in 2003 , the corresponding panel report , concluded in 2006 , did not call into question the EU legislation , but rather the way it has been implemented in the past .
The Commission has managed to contain this dispute until now in the context of a regular dialogue on biotech issues with the complainants .
We clearly showed the complainants that there is currently no moratorium or undue delay in the EC approval system of biotech products .
Sixteen products have been approved since the establishment of the WTO Panel , with only seven in 2007 .
We cannot rule out that complainants , notably the United States , will take into consideration the trade implications of the issue of advantageous presence in their decision on whether to proceed with further dispute settlement .
However , the European Community would be in a good position to defend its case , and the present dialogue makes this eventuality unlikely .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , yesterday in this House we spoke about the rise in food prices and the effects of that in the European Union and for developing countries .
Now we are here again this evening , talking about genetically modified animal feed .
It might have been an idea to combine the two debates .
After all , this somewhat technical subject of animal feed of course fits in with the wider debate on food safety and rising food prices .
How sensible is it actually to destroy or reject whole shiploads of animal feed because they unintentionally contain traces , very small quantities , of genetically modified products ?
That does not seem very sensible to me , either from the point of view of the food safety I mentioned , or in the light of rising prices .
Because animal feed prices have indeed gone up considerably recently and they will do so even more if we continue to take that attitude .
Many producers are seeing their costs increase as a result and I think it cannot do any harm to emphasise once again that the rising prices we keep talking about do not necessarily mean that farmers are also earning more .
In fact it has already been said that , in the pigmeat sector for example , the costs of feed are going up and the margins are actually only smaller .
How can we get out of this deadlock now ?
Not by suddenly dealing carelessly with approval procedures .
No , that is certainly not the way , but in my opinion there is a problem in two areas , and we have to find a solution .
Firstly , as Mr Stevenson said earlier , it takes much longer in the European Union for a GMO to be approved : two and a half years for us , barely a year in the United States .
I have taken note of what the Commission says about making EFSA more efficient , but of course that is not the whole problem .
The problem also lies in the to-ing and fro-ing in the Council committees , which are then unable to achieve either a qualified majority for approval or a qualified majority against approval , and then finally , after a long tussle , the decision is passed to the Commission .
So that is also part of the problem , and that procedure needs to be quicker .
It is certainly not an argument for automatic approval of products , but I do think people have the right to know more quickly whether or not a product can be approved for the European market .
Secondly , we need to find a solution to the unintentional presence of genetically modified traces in animal feed , for instance through a threshold value , certainly in the case of GMOs that have already been approved by EFSA , and certainly when you consider that chops from pigs that have eaten feed outside the European Union are regularly available in our shops .
Talk about unfair competition !
I think it is a pity I have not heard anything from the Commission about threshold values .
It refers to existing legislation .
Let us be honest , though , with the labelling we are using a threshold value , so I think it is possible .
In short , producers and consumers must not become the victims of the indecision on the part of the Council committees .
It is time now to offer clarity and speed .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as its title suggests , this question deals with the economic consequences of the GMO authorisation procedure .
I would therefore like to ask the Commissioner whether the Commission has requested any studies on the causes of the rise in the price of animal feed and I would like to know , too , what proportion of the feedingstuffs imported in recent years has contained traces of GMOs not authorised in Europe and where these products came from .
That would be useful in assessing the scope of these incidents .
Unlike Mrs De Lange who has just spoken , I refute the causal link drawn between the principle of zero tolerance of GMOs and the considerable increase in the price of feed .
The two should not be lumped together since we know very well that this increase is due to the combination of several factors , which I will not go into here , but primarily to stock market speculation on future agricultural markets .
Moreover , this increase affects all countries , including those with very flexible legislation on GMOs .
Nevertheless , it is true that European livestock farmers are in great difficulty and the main reason for this is the fact that the EU is highly dependent on feed imports .
My main question is thus as follows : why are we so dependent and how should we respond ?
I want to ask the Commission if it has carried out an analysis of the economic consequences of the Blair House Agreement , for which the European Union gave up its own production of animal feed .
In order to reduce this dependency , there are two options , in my opinion .
The first is to do everything we can to save - and I mean save - the last European fodder and protein crops and to encourage restructuring , avoiding , for example , the complete decoupling of aid during the CAP Health Check , particularly as these crops offer indisputable environmental qualities for crop rotation and , consequently , for the soil .
On the other hand , the Commission must look into diversifying our source of supply .
In December 2007 I took part in a conference organised by the GM-Free Network , which demonstrated that supplies of non-GMO feed do exist and that contacts need to be established between producers and importers .
I hope that everyone is aware that consumers have a right ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I should first like to thank the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and this plenary sitting for following up my initiative to debate this topic here this evening .
One remarkable thing is that all over the world the cultivation of genetically modified crops is on the increase , but only we in Europe are terribly scared about it .
The big question is why .
The Commissioner says quite categorically that that is how the legislation is and so we have to comply with it .
However , if changed circumstances make it necessary to amend the legislation , the Commission will have to do that .
I think it is time to do it now .
I was still asking questions about it a little while ago , but one genetically modified crop is not like another .
There is a big difference between transgenesis and cisgenesis .
One is species-specific , the other is not .
Both are covered by the same legislation and the Commission must address itself to the matter to amend the legislation from that point of view .
In my view , the crux of this whole story is zero tolerance .
There are few situations in the world where you can require absolutely zero tolerance .
There must always be a possibility of leaving a certain margin of difference .
If you drive too fast for a distance of 50 kilometres , in most countries you have a margin of tolerance of about three kilometres before you are fined .
Why is that not possible for imported goods ?
Why is a tolerance of , for instance , 0.8 % or 0.9 % not possible ?
Can the Commission give me a clear answer on that ?
I also welcome the fact that talks are under way with EFSA to shorten procedures without endangering quality , but has EFSA indicated yet whether or not that is possible ?
Talks alone are not enough , because time is pressing .
There is also another point .
Perhaps the Commission can explain to me how I , as a politician , can tell the general public that we can consume a whole lot of products here that we are not allowed to produce .
We can import without restriction from all over the world any products from animals that are fed products which are banned here .
What is the point of that ?
What is the explanation ?
Perhaps the Commissioner can suggest an idea to me for the forthcoming election campaign .
Finally I should like to ask what are the consequences of the attitude of the Commission as regards the WTO ?
Can we simply do this ?
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , there are three areas in which GMOs may prove dangerous .
The first of these is public health .
There are more and more indications that GMOs are potentially dangerous to human health , but these indications are being disregarded .
Hard evidence of the damaging effects of GMOs may emerge at any moment .
There was a time when there was no evidence of the harmful nature of asbestos , and when the evidence did emerge the cost was enormous .
Billions had to be spent on removing the asbestos .
The difficulty with GMOs is that if their use becomes widespread , it will be impossible to get rid of them .
The second area is the environment .
Many scientists believe that GMOs may have disastrous consequences for the environment .
This is one of the reasons why a store of traditional seeds has been created deep in ice on the Norwegian island of Spitsbergen , in case traditional seeds are damaged by increased use of GMOs .
The third danger relates to the economy .
Increasing the use of GMOs is a way of making farmers financially dependent on large biotech concerns .
Farmers will grow GMO crops under conditions imposed by powerful concerns that hold the patents for the seeds .
Europe is not hungry at present .
Food is becoming more expensive , but the Union 's agricultural policy continues to consist of imposing administrative limits on agricultural production .
Europe does not need to seek highly intensive technologies for food production .
Instead , Europe should opt for the production of healthy food using traditional methods .
Of course , there is also the problem of competition .
On this matter , I fully agree with Mr Stevenson and other previous speakers .
Our farmers should not be the only ones affected by a ban on GMO crops and the use of GMO feed .
Such a ban should be accompanied by a ban on the import of both plant and animal products containing GMOs .
A clear principle must be applied , namely that producers exporting their products to the European market will be subject to the same requirements imposed on our own producers .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , I would like to start by strongly challenging the assumption that seems to lie behind this oral question .
Trying to link the rise in animal feed prices in Europe and the corresponding crisis in the livestock industry to the EU 's GM laws in general , and its zero-tolerance policy in particular , is completely false and disingenuous .
It is certainly true that times are hard for livestock farmers , but I make the case that this has nothing to do with Europe 's GM policies and everything to do with a combination of factors , including poor weather conditions leading to reduced harvests , deregulation of markets , increased demand by countries like China , the rapid and misguided increase in biofuel production and growing financial speculation .
Much is also being made by the GM industry of DG Agriculture 's report on the potential impact of the EU 's GM regime on the availability and price of animal feed .
The worst-case scenario in the report rests on the assumption that Brazil will rapidly commercialise a GM soya bean variety not approved in the EU .
But absolutely no evidence is presented that Brazil is even considering new GM soya beans .
The report finds that US approvals will be unaffected by EU policy and that Brazil and Argentina will , in fact , be much more cautious about approving new GM crops that could otherwise damage their exports to the EU .
For example , Argentina has introduced a certification scheme for maize exports to the EU , precisely to avoid unapproved traits .
Moreover , there is no evidence either of major distortion of competition caused by imports of meat from animals that may have been fed with GMOs not authorised in the EU .
So , frankly , all of these questions are ill-informed and tendentious .
But I do have some questions of my own with regard to any proposed threshold for EU non-approved GMOs .
First , how can the Commission be sure that EU non-approved GMOs are safe ?
Second , in the case of damage , which institution or company will have to pay ?
The EU , which allows such contamination ?
The company , which has developed the GMO but has so far no valid market approval ?
Or the company responsible for the import ?
Finally , should such a threshold also apply to genetically engineered plants that produce substances like pharmaceuticals ?
What assessment has been carried out on the contamination of daily food with active pharmaceutical substances ?
I look forward to hearing full answers to these crucial questions at the end of this debate .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , you and I really know too little about the health risks of genetically modified organisms .
Do we therefore want to allow such GMOs - I call them messed around food - simply because that meets an economic need ?
Not as far as I am concerned .
For me the real priorities are public health , the environment and biodiversity .
Brussels already requires countries to approve certain GMOs , even when they are not willing to do so .
That is at odds with the Cartagena Protocol , under which countries may reject new GMO products if they have doubts about their safety .
Let the Member States decide for themselves which risk products they will allow .
I am not the only one to protest .
Many citizens are worried about GMOs .
We have seen that in Poland , Romania , Austria and Cyprus .
Resistance to the Monsanto experimental fields is growing in places like Raalte and Gemert-Bakel in the Netherlands , .
There is a real risk of modified seeds blowing over from Monsanto to nearby traditional or organic farms , when the farmers do not want those weeds .
I am also concerned about the plans for Monsanto to take over the Dutch seed company De Ruiter , a firm that is amongst the top ten in the world .
It is all too obvious that Monsanto is trying to infiltrate more into Europe . Either in expectation of more flexible rules , or simply to be able to put pressure on the politicians to relax the rules very quickly .
We have to resist that fiercely .
Public health , the environment and biodiversity are more important to us than commercial profits .
Madam President , what a laughing stock the EU must be to its competitors !
With sanctimonious fervour we ban GMOs in animal feedstuffs , even to the ridiculous point of zero tolerance of any unauthorised GM trace , but simultaneously meat derived from animals reared outside the EU and fed with the very GMOs which we refuse to authorise can be imported freely anywhere within the 27 States .
It sounds like zero sense to me .
The EU strains at a gnat and swallows a camel , and who suffers ?
Our own producers , who have to pay sky-high prices for GM-free feedstuffs .
It seems that , within the EU , if the political correctness boxes can be ticked then we should be happy , never mind the lunacy which we create .
( ES ) Madam President , although European livestock generates over 40 % of added value in our agriculture production , it is also true we now lack sufficient raw material to feed our animals .
In my country , Spain , the situation of beef , more dependent on feed than in other Member States , is devastating .
In the case of pigmeat and poultry , the terrible situation is similar all over Europe .
As has already been mentioned , Community legislation permits the sale of feed containing GMOs , provided these are authorised in the EU , but does not envisage any minimum levels for unauthorised GMOs .
This is causing problems in trade with third country exporters and also with the European livestock sector per se which , as I have said , is experiencing shortages .
This is not the first time I have agreed with Mr Mulder , and on this occasion I listened to him and I think we also agree on this issue , for a possible solution could be to accept accidental GM contaminations up to a certain threshold , provided these have been positively assessed by the EFSA and authorised by a third country , in accordance with Codex principles and operating a clear labelling policy .
Another solution could be to produce more in European territory , but it would appear that the Commission has shut off that particular avenue by its checking proposals .
The case of desiccated feed as an essential component of animal fodder is paradigmatic .
Even though it acknowledges the danger involved in abandoning production , the Commission still insists on applying the decoupled payments .
I therefore wish to emphasise that we are facing a serious problem of animal feed shortages , and the European Commission is responsible for dealing with this situation .
( FI ) Madam President , a genetically modified crop species is cultivated by changing its genotype with the help of precise scientific technology .
This technology is based on developments in genetics going back a good half-century .
It has helped to cultivate species in a way that requires less effort and less use of pesticides , and has made it possible to produce bigger harvests .
For that reason , their cultivation has increased fast .
The European Union has been unable to be involved in this development because it adheres to a system of strict bureaucratic monitoring .
Whenever trials and research carried out by the European Food Safety Authority have shown a species to be risk-free and of benefit to the consumer , it still has to go through a lengthy process before it is approved .
The Commission 's proposal first goes to a standing committee , which approves or rejects the proposal by a qualified majority .
If it cannot make a decision , the next step is the Council , and if they cannot make a decision either , the proposal goes back to the Commission , which in the end makes a decision .
It has , however , all taken time .
A lot of GM animal feed is imported into the European Union .
Countries which try and restrict the cultivation of GM species are even happy to use it .
Because the EU has not had time to approve all the species now being used , the feed may contain small traces of these .
In such cases the entire shipment is returned .
This causes the industry to incur costs and affects the competitiveness of European food production .
This is why we need to apply reason in this area .
Infinitely small traces of species approved in other countries should not have such unreasonable consequences , especially when European agriculture is up against global competition anyway .
( BG ) A Latin proverb says that natural is good .
Naturally , this is not to say that GMOs , which are artificial , are bad , but as yet we do not have conclusive scientific data proving beyond any doubt that they are good for you .
On the contrary , we have the example of the United States where the highest tolerance towards GMOs is combined with the highest obesity incidence .
Genetics and bio technology are still an inexact science .
The hold a lot of promise but at the same time by using them we run the huge risk of losing a lot , losing perhaps more than we can afford .
The current EU policy of caution to genetically modified organisms is a good policy for the time being , considering available scientific achievements .
I believe , however , that we should nevertheless remember European producers .
The current situation is , in a way , quite unnatural and the Commission should strike a balance where European producers are not discriminated against , while achieving a situation where European consumers can indeed choose whether to consume GMOs or GMO-free crops .
I am glad that I am a young person in the European Union and I would enjoy being able to make this informed choice .
Madam President , given the high import dependency of the EU for protein-rich feedingstuffs such as soya bean meal and corn gluten feed , how can the Commission justify the current situation in which even feedingstuffs with only the smallest trace of unauthorised GMOs are banned and destroyed at our ports , whereas meat derived from animals that are fed with these very same unauthorised GMOs can freely enter the EU into the food chain and be consumed by our consumers , thus causing a major distortion of competition to the detriment of European farmers ?
A threshold value - as is already the case for the adventitious presence of traces of authorised GMOs for the labelling of products as GMO-free - should be applied for the adventitious presence of traces of unauthorised GMOs that have already obtained a positive assessment from the EFSA or that have undergone a feed and food safety risk assessment in accordance with the Codex GM plant guidelines .
Is the Commission planning to come forward with concrete proposals to that end , and when ?
Our lengthy authorisation process lacks scientific rigour and integrity and is the road to serious world trade disputes and , embarrassingly , arises from interinstitutional prevarication on this issue .
No other trading block is resisting change in this way .
( HU ) The time has come for us to have a serious and worthwhile debate on genetic technology in Europe , for up to now we have only heard religious polemics , in many cases only whipping up hysteria .
Science cannot and must not be stopped .
With an explosion in population and food prices , we cannot dismiss the opportunities offered us by biotechnology and genetic engineering .
We cannot have the green revolution without them .
My report on biogas , approved in March , shows that the European Parliament expressed consensus on licensing GM plants to be grown for bio-energy .
While there was consensus among the parliamentary parties in Hungary on the preservation of GM-free agriculture , we have to see that this is an illusion .
Eighty-five per cent of the soya imported as animal feed is now genetically modified .
It is obvious that genetic modification is not a game , the risks are huge .
It is imperative that a credible , science-based specialist supervisory agency at Union level , independent of big business , is set up , able to inspect GM products , able to provide protection against hazards and quell groundless anxieties .
On the one hand , the multinational companies concerned with GMOs are somewhat reluctant to issue detailed documentation about their products , and are not partners in scientific trials although , for consumer protection , this would be an essential requirement .
On the other hand , there is also a lot of confusing information and unscientific scare stories put about by GM opponents . That is why this debate is so important .
Thank you for your attention .
( PT ) I should also like to express the extreme concern that the agricultural sector in the Azores , my region , has about the current situation .
I believe it has been shown in this debate that nothing can justify the existence of a policy which prohibits the use of GMOs in animal feed at the same time as allowing the consumption of meat produced using these GMOs .
I also believe that the exaggeration existing in the zero tolerance policy has been made clear .
Finally , I should like to say that anyone who knows the animal feed industry cannot doubt the obvious impact that both these factors will have on food prices .
This impact is very clear , particularly for corn gluten feed and the waste from using maize to produce alcohol .
I have already called on the European Commission to take account of the situation of farmers throughout Europe .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in the agriculture debate , we currently face the challenge posed by the Health Check .
I would be interested to hear whether the GMO debate plays a role , and to what extent it is being discussed , in that context .
We all know that there is a heated debate worldwide about the food / energy security issue at present .
We need to see what implications this debate has for us .
I myself am always in favour of zero tolerance when it comes to labelling .
It should be clear to the consumer what he or she is buying .
From that perspective , we should ensure that the legislative bodies at regional level also have a chance to decide on this issue .
Madam President , even at this late time of the day , listening to the debate , I feel the need to say just three things .
First of all , it is true that there is no scientific evidence that GMOs pose a hazard to human or animal health .
However , as a previous speaker , who has now gone , mentioned , asbestos was not thought to be hazardous and , yet , we know today that it causes mesothelioma - lung cancer .
And , of course , smoking was not thought to be hazardous to anybody until a few years ago and now , of course , we know that it causes lung cancer , pulmonary disease and coronary artery stenosis .
So it is better to be safe than sorry .
Secondly , Mr Allister and Mr Casaca talked about the difference between GMOs in feed and animals that have been fed on GMOs .
There is a large difference between the two .
There is a difference , because , in the feed , the GMO is in a completely different state from the GMO that has been fed to the animal , digested by the animal and metabolised by the animal , and then is just , probably , present - but it is not - in the animal 's meat in a completely different form than in the feed .
( FR ) Madam President , it is clear that this topic of genetically modified organisms is a democratic urgency , an economic necessity and a legal imperative .
I congratulate our committee for tackling the subject .
As far as our debate is concerned , it is clear that the European Union is highly dependent on imports of protein-rich feedingstuffs .
That goes back to the scientific debates , and the import of animals fed with feed that does not comply with the European rules leads us to wonder whether the European Union is capable of protecting its citizens .
The protection regime is not protectionism , it is simply a question , and I would like to ask the Commission if it feels that the quality of our customs system , which has in my view deteriorated considerably , would allow it to respond to all of the considerations raised in this excellent debate .
Madam President , when the Commissioner answers , could she say something about the possibilities of increasing the tolerance level from zero to a higher percentage , say 0.7 % , 0.9 % or whatever it is ?
From listening to the debate , I think that is the essence of what has been said .
Zero tolerance in the present circumstances is a bit too stringent .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I listened very carefully to the various comments that the honourable Members have made .
We do recognise in the Commission that asynchronous approvals of GMOs can represent a problem for the availability and cost of feed imports .
Although the rising costs in this sector are the result of different , complex and sometimes much wider factors , all these factors have been taken into consideration in the study that was made by DG AGRI .
The Commission 's efforts are targeted at addressing some of the key factors behind this issue , both at internal level , though the authorisation of new GMOs in the full respect of the EU legislative framework , and at international level , through the discussions with our major trading partners .
Several speakers have posed the question whether the Commission would be prepared to move from zero tolerance to something higher .
I must remind you that to do so we need codecision both from Parliament and the Council , and we need to have the support of Member States .
You know what the stance of the Member States has been in the various standing committees , where we rarely , as far as I know never , managed to get a qualified majority .
I would like to say that to impose restrictions over imported animal products which are the product of animals fed with GMOs would probably fail to comply with our international commitments .
Lastly I want to say a few words about the delays in the authorisation process , which was mentioned by a number of speakers .
There is an ongoing discussion between the Commission and the EFSA to verify the possibility of efficiency gains in the authorisation procedure without any compromise on the quality of the scientific assessment .
One of the elements which have been highlighted is the need to better communicate to applicants the requirements for the authorisation in order to improve , from the start , the quality of their dossiers .
Furthermore , and as a result of this discussion , the Authority has taken the commitment to carry out the preliminary validity check within six weeks from the submission of the application , thus significantly reducing the timeline for the authorisation procedure .
It is also important to note that the approval process could be significantly shortened if the Commission had greater support from Member States in the comitology process for the authorisation of GMOs .
Lastly I want to reply to a comment that was made by a speaker that in our risk management we take into account economic grounds only .
I would say that , for us , the primary factor is the safety to human and animal health and the environment as well .
Having said that , I would like to say that the Commission remains open to discuss possible suggestions in this field , but only on the precondition that any proposed solution respect the fundamental aim of guaranteeing the safety of the products placed on the EU market .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
in writing . - ( EL ) The EU 's policy on GMOs favours multinationals at the expense of consumers .
Farmers become ever more dependent on monopolisation and the multinationals take control of agriculture .
GMOs are detrimental to public health .
Some of them have been scientifically proven to be implicated in allergies and to undermine the immune system .
The irreversible effects on the environment make the danger of GMOs many times greater .
Biodiversity is restricted and the limitation of contamination can certainly not be guaranteed .
This policy is economically harmful .
GMOs are one of the contributing factors to increased food prices and world hunger , as international economic organisations now openly assert .
The proposal to adopt zero tolerance is spurious and ineffective ; it is the result of compromising with the interests of multinationals .
It permits the cultivation of certain GMOs and the consumption of products deriving from genetically modified fodder , such as meat from non-member countries .
This policy has the specific aim of limiting the vehement protests of the workers in EU Member States who are demanding safe , GM-free food , at accessible prices .
We believe that genetically modified crops should be totally banned in Member States , as should imports of products showing traces of GMOs .
At the same time , however , measures should be taken to protect Community production and consumers .
Agenda for the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 11.20 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Annual policy strategy 2009 ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
New Flame shipwreck and its consequences in Algeciras Bay ( motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Green Paper on market-based instruments for environment and related policy purposes ( debate )
The next item is the report by Anne Ferreira , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the Green Paper on market-based instruments for environment and related policy purposes .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to express particular thanks to the shadow rapporteurs and the draftsmen of opinions for their valuable assistance .
Today we can be satisfied with the balanced report adopted in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , which is the result of joint efforts .
The European Union is unquestionably committed to the environment , both internally and at international level .
Having set a number of objectives in order to meet the urgent environmental needs facing us , the European Union has to devise ways of achieving them .
To do that , it has , over the years , adopted legislation that is regularly revised and applicable in the Union .
It invests in research , raises public awareness and encourages good practice by the Member States .
Now we are suggesting looking at another possibility , that of market-based instruments .
The report is based on the Commission paper , which contains a number of proposals and ideas that I welcome .
Firstly , it endeavours to improve on a text that , in my view , focuses a little too much on climate change .
That is certainly a crucial issue , but we must not ignore the whole picture , all the fields of human activity whose impact on the environment is also very important .
Furthermore , I did not , unfortunately have any information from the consultation that might have helped us in our work .
In the Green Paper , the Commission is proposing to achieve the environmental targets at a lower and a reasonable cost .
That should be possible with the economic instruments which are , moreover , a flexible way of achieving the aims set .
Finally , the report suggests that the Commission should draw up an action plan or other system for a market-based instrument for the environment .
I have a question for the Commission : can it tell us what stage it has reached in its discussions and whether the consultation results available to it at the moment will reinforce or amend the proposals in the Green Paper ?
I believe that is a very important question .
As regards the implementation of the market-based instruments , we must be guided by certain principles .
We must , of course , apply the ' polluter pays ' principle , ensure that the market-based instruments complement each other and complement other instruments , and that they are consistent and appropriate to the areas covered .
That is the aim .
In other words , we must not be systematic , but must show a great deal of ingenuity .
With regard to specific instruments , which I do not have time to discuss here , I must emphasise that Parliament is sceptical about the proposal on biodiversity , for the simple reason that it seems to us difficult , if not impossible , to compensate for a fairly unusual ecosystem in another country .
As for internalisation of the costs , that is a principle on which we have to base ourselves and for which we have to take steps .
At the moment , very little account is taken of the environmental costs of human activities , particularly industrial and economic activities , in other words , to use a more technical term , the external costs .
The transport sector is a typical example .
I note that last June the Commission was to put forward a proposal for revision of the ' Eurovignette ' directive , particularly by making the road transport charge variable .
That principle of variability must be applied more and more when devising market-based instruments for the environment .
The Commission is proposing a similar system for energy taxes , in which they would be made up of two components , an energy component and an environmental component .
If the revision of the directive achieves its purpose , it should also ensure that competitiveness with other means of transport is restored and that modes that emit less CO2 are used .
Finally , there is one point to which I should like to draw particular attention : the competitiveness of the European economy .
Of course we agree on this , but we have to be careful .
The question that arises here is whether inaction would have a social , economic and environmental cost , as well as a political cost .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank Parliament and , in particular , its rapporteurs for its very constructive reaction to the Commission 's Green Paper on market-based instruments .
Last year , this Green Paper was presented together with Commissioner Dimas with the purpose of launching a broad public debate on advancing the use of market-based instruments for environment and energy-related policy purposes in the Community .
The Green Paper starts from the broadly shared view that not only market-based instruments , such as taxes , charges and tradable permit schemes , but also targeted subsidies , provide a flexible and cost-efficient means of reaching given policy objectives .
I am pleased that Parliament supports this approach .
Equally , I am pleased to see that Parliament shares the view that market-based instruments cannot be seen and used in isolation and should be combined with regulatory instruments .
Parliament 's report is a very useful and very comprehensive contribution to the discussion about the use of market-based instruments , both at Community and national level .
Its scope is even broader , covering issues such as the greening of gross domestic product and the review of the EU Emissions Trading Scheme .
While these issues are obviously linked to the subject of the Green Paper and highly important in their own right , they were left out of the Green Paper , as they were covered in other Commission documents elaborated in parallel .
The Commission will take account of the numerous comments and requests made by Parliament in the context of its work on the various issues mentioned in the Green Paper and on further specific initiatives .
As far as imminent actions foreseen for this year are concerned , I can inform you that the Commission is planning to revise the Energy Taxation Directive in the autumn with the objective of ensuring that it contributes more effectively to meeting the EU energy and climate change targets .
Most importantly , and in line with the request of Parliament , one of the main aspects will be to achieve better complementarity with the EU Emissions Trading Scheme .
In my view , it is very important to provide for the best possible synergies between the revised EU Emissions Trading Scheme and energy taxation in such a way as to ensure that the EU meets its climate change and energy goals in the least costly way .
Our aim is to present the proposal in time for Parliament to render an opinion before the end of its current mandate .
There are areas where effective action can only be taken by legislation at EU level .
This concerns , for example , the taxation of energy use - which I have just spoken about - and the EU Emissions Trading Scheme for greenhouse gas emissions .
There are , however , other areas where Member States can take effective action themselves and where they can cooperate and benefit from experiences gained in other Member States .
To this end , the Green Paper suggests the creation of a forum on market-based instruments , which would allow knowledge to be shared across sectoral boundaries and Member States .
In conclusion , I would like to thank Parliament for its constructive contribution to the debate about the further use of market-based instruments , which is of use to all policymakers , whether here in Strasbourg , in Brussels or in the national capitals .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . - Mr President , Ms Ferreira has produced an excellent and balanced response to the Commission 's Green Paper on market-based instruments for environmental purposes , and as draftsman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs ' opinion under the enhanced cooperation procedure , I am very pleased that we have been able to collaborate with Ms Ferreira and contribute significantly to this report .
In our view , the emissions trading scheme ( ETS ) is the most cost-efficient , demand-sensitive and objective market-based instrument available for actually reaching the EU 's greenhouse gas emissions reduction target of 20 % by the year 2020 .
The ETS should be the cornerstone of the market-based instruments mix , and I welcome the Commission 's proposals to improve and expand it .
The scheme should have a progressively tightening cap designed to reach that 20 % objective in 2020 .
It should also be spread as widely as possible among significant emitters .
Auctioning should be the main means of allocating emissions targets , in order to avoid the disadvantages for competition of grandfathering .
Auctioning is more economically efficient .
It encourages new entrants , innovation and technological and operational improvements .
Madam Commissioner , I particularly stress that we feel that energy taxation , indeed taxes and subsidies in general , should remain only a very secondary and complementary greenhouse gas reduction tool for these emissions that cannot be covered directly or indirectly by the Emissions Trading Scheme .
For this reason , we find paragraph 26 of the report inconsistent with the overall message of giving priority to the Emissions Trading Scheme .
Finally , the Commission must urgently negotiate reciprocal agreements with other jurisdictions .
Mutual and equivalent international commitments covering sectors that are vulnerable to competition would be greatly preferable to the adoption of border tax adjustments to offset trade distortions .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - Mr President , whilst a great deal is said about climate change but little is happening in terms of concrete measures , I think the EU needs to set a global example .
Therefore , greater use of market-based instruments is crucial , as they are cost-effective means to reduce carbon emissions and increase energy efficiency .
These indirect taxes , tradable permits and subsidies , I think , will assist the European Union to achieve its emissions targets .
However , while recognising that Member States need to retain flexibility over their own tax systems , any tool or aid that can support our industries and consumers to make greener choices is to be welcomed , and our policies must be such that they incentivise behavioural change .
Therefore , it is imperative that market failures are corrected and that we have carbon-based pricing to reflect environmental damage as part of the ' polluter pays ' principle .
Reduced VAT on environmentally friendly products can assist the vulnerable in society , especially the elderly , who are now more than ever at risk of energy poverty .
Furthermore , any revenues raised through auctioning should be reinvested to tackle energy poverty and fund further environmental programmes .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , this is , as already has been said , an important report and I want to congratulate Ms Ferreira .
We know that our current economic model fails to integrate environmental costs into market prices .
Already at the Stockholm Conference in 1972 the ' polluter pays ' principle was established and agreed upon .
But , as we know , it has not been implemented in most countries .
This report is very important .
It responds to the many market failures we experience in several areas , where of course climate change is the most obvious problem today .
The report suggests plenty of initiatives in many key areas .
In general most of those proposals are well-drafted .
However , I think more effort could have been made by us all to try to shorten the report and merge some of the individual paragraphs ; very similar demands are now being put forward .
I think the report would have benefited and become much clearer .
On behalf of my group and as has already been said by Mr Purvis , I have to mention that we have difficulties with a few paragraphs .
One is paragraph 26 .
You cannot favour an emissions trading system and at the same time ask for a general CO2 tax at European level .
It is inconsistent .
Secondly , we have some problems with paragraph 24 .
While we agree with most of the contents , it is , in our opinion , too general in its language and somehow gives the impression that auctioning revenues would be or should be part of the EU budget in the future .
That is not something we can support .
But , apart from that , we are in general in support and once again congratulations to Ms Ferreira .
on behalf of the PSE group . - ( HU ) ' Let 's make the world different , ' say the people on the left who think our world should be changed .
We cannot reconcile ourselves to casino capitalism - so-called development , but accompanied by the destruction of natural values .
The twentieth century showed us that utopias are bound to fail without proper economic and social frameworks .
The environmental basis of the ' green tax ' and the whole tax policy can help create a better world to live in by providing a market economy and sustainable instruments .
As for the increased imposition of taxes on raw materials , a single energy tax could compel everyone to reduce their dependence on energy imports , use their cars less , and invest in public transport , trams and railways .
If the taxation balance was shifted from wages to consumption , a very new kind of workplace would develop and a lifestyle closer to nature and culture would have a bigger part to play , instead of consumer madness .
The imposition of tax on harmful emissions and non-recyclable waste will reduce environmental pollution and the endemic diseases that accompany it , and so reduce the number of premature and unnecessary deaths .
A switch-over to green taxation will be acceptable as a form of peaceful revolution .
Of course , the level of taxation will not rise , as Europe is already too heavily taxed .
A reduction in energy consumption would enhance the competitiveness of our goods .
With green taxation , we can make the leap from the generally materialistic world of the twentieth century to a more sensible world , richer in environmentally friendly and human values .
If there is one thing on which we , the European representatives of 27 countries , can all agree , it is green taxation .
Let us make the world different , but through carefully considered and bold reforms .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should also like to congratulate our rapporteur , Mrs Ferreira , on her excellent work and on her close cooperation with the shadow rapporteurs on this important issue .
I shall focus here on the two main points of the resolution , the system of exchanging CO2 quotas and green taxation .
Turning first of all to emission quotas , it is disturbing to note , as has been said over and over again , that industrial CO2 emissions were up by 1 % in 2007 , last year , when the European Union at the spring summit had set itself the ambitious target of a 20 % reduction in greenhouse gases by 2020 .
In short , the machinery is jammed and - to put it nicely and euphemistically - we have to get it started again , because it is time to get into a virtuous circle .
I see two courses of action .
The first is to support the European Commission , which is in favour of payment for emission quotas .
The second starts from the idea that the present system relating only to CO2 is too narrow , and that other air pollutants will have to be incorporated gradually , starting no doubt with NOx and SO2 .
I also wonder about the favourable arrangements that still apply to the shipping sector .
Unlike the situation that will soon apply in the aviation sector , it is not subject to any Community or international legislation on CO2 reduction , a double standard that we can no longer afford .
Another cornerstone of the resolution is green taxation , environmental taxes , the revolution that Mr Eguy mentioned .
The position of the Liberals and Democrats on that question is clear .
Instruments based on the Community market should not be confined to the system of exchanging emission rights .
We have to consider other systems and , as author , I am very much in favour of paragraph 27 , which revives the idea of introducing a ' carbon ' tax to offset a reduction in fossil fuel subsidies .

On the other hand - and I agree with Mr Purvis and Mr Wittman on this point - the ALDE Group will not support the last sentence of paragraph 26 , which asks the Commission to submit a proposal on this Community CO2 tax by the end of 2008 .
We prefer the Union to complete its ambitious package of ' energy and climate ' legislation .
In conclusion , we have to stop being hypocritical and be very aware of the cost of our ambition .
If CO2 emissions are to be cut by a third , for example , every person in European must emit eight times less carbon dioxide .
These blunt statistics show that , over and above the use of these market-based instruments to protect the environment , we cannot escape our own personal responsibility , and the Union will need to work very hard to stay on course , so that sustainable development is not just a fad but the model for all of us in the future .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to thank Mrs Ferreira for her excellent work .
Taking global responsibility to combat climate change is a crucial task that has to be achieved at various levels : not just in the world of enterprises and institutions , but among individuals as well .
As European citizens , we can substantially reduce our ecological footprint and achieve major results simply by means of small measures , including our purchasing choices , that can have a global and significant impact .
The Member States can encourage , or make it easier for , people to choose ecological products through market-based instruments .
As well as promoting research into new technologies it is important to ensure that these technologies are made available to consumers and disseminated widely enough to bring about environmental benefits for the community .
It is a pity that 16 countries representing the planet 's largest economies , meeting in Paris on 16 and 18 April , did not manage to reach agreement on a joint resolution aiming to cut global greenhouse gas emissions by 50 % by 2050 .
However , we are hopeful that the subsequent negotiations in Kobe and Hokkaido will lead to more success in this area , especially as I believe that climate change has to be combated at a global level ; otherwise , it will merely place a heavy burden on European enterprises causing them to become less competitive than their rivals from outside Europe without achieving the aim of an environmental improvement at global level .
We have to use market-based instruments as economic levers if we are to move towards environmentally friendly production systems that are sustainable in the long term ; in that respect , I welcome the Commission 's Green Paper .
The European Union has to foster the dissemination in the Member States of market-based instruments that make it possible to internalise the environmental costs of products and to promote energy efficiency and the thermal insulation of buildings .
I consider that it is essential for the European Union to achieve the goal of 20 % of consumption from renewable sources by 2020 .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Ferreira for a good report on an important subject and for enjoyable and excellent cooperation .
If the EU is actually going to live up to the many fine words spoken in connection with our targets for the climate and the environment , it is crucial that we politicians take responsibility and make the difficult decisions of behalf of our electorate .
One of the effective tools that we have at our disposal is to limit consumption levels that create pressure on the environment by making the polluter pay .
This is an excellent principle that everyone is agreed on but that has so far not been taken seriously in cases where it really does cost the polluter .
For example , motorists ' costs have never been reflected in the cost of transport .
One of the first things that we should do is to internalise what are popularly referred to as ' external costs ' .
This would be a significant step forwards .
It is of course also possible to go further in controlling the consumption of polluting substances through even tougher financial means , and let me say here that I simply do not understand why it is not possible to combine CO2 charges with an emission trading scheme .
I simply do not understand this .
The use of an environmentally sound pricing policy is an effective way of using the market within environmental policy , not as a substitute for mandatory requirements and bans , but alongside them ; this has also been suggested by the Commission .
Concerns are often raised that the use of these market-based methods could have a skewed social impact .
However , there is a need to be aware of hypocrisy .
Consumption taxes usually have a fair impact , as the richest are also those who consume the most and who therefore pay the most .
If there is a desire to do something about the difficulties being experienced by the poor in paying for essential consumption , there are many other methods that can be used which do not involve green taxes .
For example , ordinary taxation , social and wage policies are much more appropriate if we take our responsibility for caring for the less well off seriously .
One method that will not work here is based on the establishment of a type of basic consumption that is made cheaper or even free .
Firstly , consumption will always be relatively high ; however , the worst aspect of the model is that it does not provide any incentive to make savings .
Thus , in spite of everything , progressive taxation using green taxes is better .
However , the very best thing to do is to keep these market-based instruments free of other considerations if they are really to be effective in the battle to save the environment , climate and nature .
It is a good thing that concern for social distortion is so great ; however , in this case it is a question of saving our living space for our descendents .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) We will shortly be reaching a decision on the report by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety and Anne Ferreira on the Green Paper on market-based instruments for environment and related policy purposes .
It is an excellent report and it has my full support .
Let me first make a personal comment .
We are talking about market-based instruments here .
Personally I am tired of the talk of market-based instruments in environmental policy .
We do not need any more influence from companies or the market .
We need more political control .
We need more planning .
We need , for example , tougher emissions requirements , we should be able to use public procurement for environmental purposes and environmental taxes and charges .
It is in fact here that we have market-based instruments , because it is all about introducing taxes and charges on things which exacerbate environmental problems , internalising environmental problems in other words .
These instruments are a good example of how we take political responsibility for environmental problems instead of leaving it to the market .
Let me give some concrete examples of particularly important aspects in this report .
A minimum tax on CO2 , a CO2 tax combined with a clear reduction requirement , is likely to be the most effective way of getting emissions down .
My own country was the first in the world to introduce a CO2 tax .
That was in the early 1990s .
Without claiming that Sweden is at the forefront in all climate areas , the CO2 tax has actually been one of the main reasons behind the reduction in our CO2 emissions .
It is high time that more countries did the same .
In paragraph 26 of this report we call for precisely such a CO2 tax .
In general we call for more support for Member States to introduce environmental taxes .
I believe today that there is an entirely unique opportunity to push for a CO2 tax and other environmental taxes .
In the most recent years , awareness has increased enormously worldwide .
In the report we also state that the Member States themselves determine this area .
Of course this is entirely correct .
It is within their field of competence .
Another issue is the Emission Trading Scheme .
We have to admit that the first trading period 2005-2007 has been nothing other than disastrous .
The scheme has not succeeded in reducing emissions and many polluters have even received overly generous allocations and made huge profits from this scheme .
In this report we therefore call for auctioning of emission permits , we demand an emissions cap which is consistent with the reduction target of 30 % , and restrictions and tough requirements for the use of flexible mechanisms .
It is hoped that doing this will enable the trading scheme to start working .
If this does not succeed , we should consider replacing the trading scheme with something else entirely , for example steep taxes on emissions .
In this context it is important to remember that now that aviation is to be included in emissions trading , we can no longer limit anti-aviation measures to the trading system alone .
Parallel measures such as a tax on air fuel and charges on nitrogen oxide emissions , NOx , are a must , and this is precisely what we are calling for in this report .
Here I would like to take the opportunity to ask the Commission a question : You previously said that you would present measures against airline nitrogen dioxide emissions , against NOx , and that this would happen this year .
Can you tell us what is happening with that ?
Do you have a date when these measures will be in place ?
Considering the fact that air transport has almost doubled its emissions in recent years , many of us here would like to see concrete measures .
We really cannot wait any longer !
These instruments are a good example of how we are taking political responsibility for climate change .
Taxes and charges enable us to speed up the necessary reductions in emissions and hopefully solve the entire climate problem .
Let us do so !
This is our duty to our children and all other living beings on this beautiful planet .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , my compliments to Mrs Anne Ferreira on her report on market-related instruments for environmental purposes .
One of the pillars of the proposal before us is the ' polluter pays ' principle .
This is an important premise in that it allows for an equitable sharing of the burdens .
This is also one reason why I am in favour of all external costs , and thus environmental costs too , being passed on to the consumers of manufactured and consumer goods .
It makes for a realistic picture and fair competition .
In November of last year I attended the conference entitled Beyond GDP .
A broad discussion was held there of ways in which indicators other than gross domestic product alone might be used to measure social wellbeing , because in practice social and environmental factors play a part here , as well as economic factors .
You may be doing very nicely financially , but if you live in a densely populated city with too much air pollution , your quality of life is not all that wonderful .
I am glad that Mrs Ferreira makes this point in her report too .
Lastly , I would like to express my support for two specific paragraphs in her report , paragraphs 58 and 59 , on internalising environmental factors in the pricing of water and , secondly , a legislative framework to reduce the level of waste generated in the medium term .
( PL ) Mr President , the threat to the world 's environmental balance requires us to take steps that will result in changes to our models of growth and a new lifestyle in our societies .
Business activity has ecological costs that are often not taken into consideration in financial accounting .
Despite the fact that the polluter pays principle , one of the pillars of the European Union 's environmental policy , is in force throughout the Community , its application in certain countries leaves much to be desired .
The European Union is introducing a series of items of legislation and rules to improve the state of the environment , and it is vital to introduce new market instruments .
Economic taxes in the European Union could play a very significant role in achieving environmental protection objectives within the EU .
So far , the only system in place is the emissions trading system for carbon dioxide .
This would appear to be insufficient .
Other market instruments should be considered .
It is very important that income from ecological taxes should be used to prevent negative impacts on the environment and on human health .
It would seem that a gradual harmonisation of environmental taxes throughout the EU is essential .
Ecological taxation in Member States is very varied .
Leaving solutions for these issues in the hands of Member States runs the risk of distortions in competitiveness between companies .
When introducing new market instruments a number of basic guidelines have to be followed : the public have to accept them , the taxes cannot be seen as yet another obligation imposed by the European Union and also the taxes have to be introduced gradually .
Some EU Member States already have their own market instruments , for example , energy saving certificates or green energy certificates .
However , all Member States should give strong support to low-carbon technologies , energy saving and renewable technologies .
Finally , I would like to point out that the European Union is a leader in the area of environmental protection and I believe it has a responsibility to set an example to the rest of the world .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on an excellent approach to the issue of environmental protection .
I would also remind you that we have known since the UN report entitled ' Our Common Future ' , which was prepared by Margot Wallström , that it is our responsibility to future generations , to our children and grandchildren , to leave the natural environment in the best possible condition .
The involvement of the European Union in this area is already very good , but the European Parliament is also keeping its finger on the pulse .
We have a special temporary Committee on Climate Change , we have good legislation , and we enact regulations , directives and decisions .
Now the time has come to strengthen other mechanisms , especially financial incentives and taxes , and also to step up information campaigns and preventive measures .
For these actions to be effective , there has to be a Community approach .
Member States have to overcome their reluctance and their resistance to tax harmonisation , at least as far as the environment is concerned .
Even though they are used for sensible purposes , ecological taxes are not at all popular at present .
Just like all taxes , they are disliked .
For this reason we have to make all possible efforts at European and national levels to make ecological payments and taxes socially acceptable .
What we need are activities that inspire a high level of ecological awareness .
We need incentives that will ensure that good practices are used widely and will promote pro-ecological social behaviour .
After all , no one complains when , in the European Parliament shop , we are asked to pay five cents for a plastic bag .
This is of fundamental importance - not the financial dimension of this action , but the moment of reflection that accompanies it , when the customer thinks whether to take the plastic bag , or to leave it and reduce the amount of rubbish on the planet .
This is a good way to make people think .
People will accept financial charges , taxes and other environmental levies , but only when they believe they are sensible and can see a positive outcome .
( DE ) Mr President , I welcome market-based instruments as a means of implementing policies , including environmental policy .
I would , however , make the point that no policy instrument is effective simply because it carries the label ' market-based ' .
All the instruments that we use to achieve policy objectives must meet certain criteria .
For example , is the instrument appropriate to the given objective ?
If we confuse different objectives we will not achieve any of them properly .
If part of the thinking behind an environmental measure is that it should be a means of making money , we are already on uncertain ground because the measure is liable to be distorted for a variety of reasons .
Does a given instrument actually help to achieve an objective ?
That question needs to be closely - and regularly - examined .
Is a given instrument compatible with others that already exist ?
What about efficiency - the relationship between cost and benefit ?
Reading this report , I am doubtful in some cases whether the criteria I refer to have been met .
Emissions trading systems work very well in theory but the reality is somewhat different .
The EU Emissions Trading Scheme is in a state of chaos .
Fortunes have been wiped out and the actual aim of the scheme has not been achieved .
Fair enough , you may say , this is the experimental phase and we have not yet got it right ; but we certainly cannot afford much more of this expensive experimentation .
The policy on taxation of energy use also illustrates my point .
Taxation really has no place in an EU Green Paper about market-based instruments .
The mere fact that an instrument influences sections of the market does not make it market-based .
I have no objection in principle to tax measures being used to achieve environmental objectives but I will support their introduction only if they meet the criteria I have mentioned .
My case is that we should set out the objectives to be achieved ; the choice of means to achieve them should then be left to those involved in the market .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the market-based instruments for environmental policy purposes , as described by the rapporteur , come down in large part to taxes and charges .
As she rightly points out in paragraph 28 it could happen that they do not fulfil the stated objectives but , instead , become just a means to increase tax revenue .
The matters that have been discussed in some detail are aimed just at the future .
The question is : according to the polluter pays principle , who is to clean the soil , water and air that have been polluted by past industrial waste or by outdated pesticides , asbestos , phosphorus pentachloride and other compounds ?
I think that the green bonds referred to in paragraph 67 would be very good for this purpose .
Companies involved in this process could be allocated tasks that had not otherwise been dealt with and would carry them out with the help of the financial markets .
The introduction of such bonds , which could be called green bonds , would make it possible to resolve many problems associated with the introduction of market-based instruments into the area of environmental protection .
It is an excellent idea and I congratulate Mrs Ferreira .
Mr President , I welcome Ms Ferreira 's excellent work and cooperation , thanks to which we have before us a report that gives a comprehensive and honest appraisal of the potential and limitations of market-based instruments .
Market instruments clearly have a role to play .
Making economic logic align with environmental and social reality by applying the ' polluter pays ' principle should be a powerful way of steering patterns of production and consumption towards sustainability .
For example , if the true environmental and social costs of freight transport were internalised within prices paid along the supply chain , we might finally see an end to the madness that sees more or less identical products being pointlessly traded back and forth between distant countries .
Applying such principles at the level of individuals via a system of personal carbon trading could be an extremely effective way of influencing consumer behaviour .
But , as Ms Ferreira 's report rightly makes clear , market instruments must not be seen as a replacement for other forms of environmental standards and regulation .
Their usefulness also depends crucially on the way in which they are designed .
The emissions trading system is a case in point .
I would like to warn colleagues that , if we listen to a lot of what the industry is telling us , we will end up with a scheme that is no more than trading backwards and forwards for the sake of trading , as we have seen with the first two phases , completely losing sight of any environmental objectives .
To be effective , the scheme has to have a tough cap deriving from the 30 % emissions reduction target , restrictions on the entry of outside credits and full auctioning of allowances from the outset .
Finally , I would like to mention one other welcome thread running through the report - the recognition that traditional economic growth as measured by GDP is no longer an adequate or accurate measure of true well-being .
A conference was held on this topic in Parliament earlier this year and I look forward to the Commission 's report in the autumn .
( SV ) Mr President , environmental issues have justifiably become one of the biggest political issues of our time and they have also , justifiably , become one of the most important areas for EU cooperation .
Firstly , cross-border environmental pollution in Europe cannot be tackled at national level , and this gives the EU a clear role here .
Secondly , the EU is the world 's largest economy , with enormous production and foreign trade , and the Member States are united in taking responsibility for the environmental consequences of this fact .
This combination of size and agreement on fundamental environmental targets gives the EU the opportunity to exercise a global influence which can be of major importance .
However , the report does not inspire trust .
It makes no distinction between consumption of finite resources and impact on climate .
The rapporteur also shamelessly uses the climate question as an argument for supranationalism , bureaucracy and protectionism , making an all-out call for joint taxation , a review of the notion of free competition and tariff increases .
There is no realisation that countries must seek solutions in competition with each other .
Then to cap it all , there is the usual officious statement that we must adopt a new lifestyle in our western societies .
Appalling !
Our job is to ensure that the environmental costs of consumption are reflected in the prices consumers pay .
Free citizens choose their lifestyles for themselves .
( FR ) Mr President , yesterday , in this Parliament , I was questioned by a 16-year-old high-school student , who asked me , ' Is Europe prepared to make great sacrifices to save the planet ? ' .
This young student was very worried about climate change and was asking us how far we could go .
It was an expression of the distress felt by idealistic young people who expect a lot of us .
Well , we have market-based instruments that have been put in place : the Community system for the exchange of greenhouse gas emission quotas , and the ' Eurovignette ' directive in the transport sector .
These instruments have certain advantages because they set a value on environmental costs and help towards the achievement of environmental targets , at a lower cost , and they encourage businesses to make a longer-term commitment , which ultimately sustains employment .
These instruments can help to reduce the damaging effects that environmental taxes could have on competitiveness in some sectors .
The promotion of sustainable development and the efforts to combat climate change should not be just a deterrent , through taxes and charges , but also an incentive , by facilitating a quicker transition to virtuous and eco-friendly behaviour .
Everyone has to make the effort ; that is why environmental costs need to be internalised .
It must also be stressed that environmental taxes should not be regarded as a way of increasing tax revenue , but as a means of preventing all harmful pollution and damage to the environment , at a reasonable cost .
Finally , in future debates on the ' energy-climate ' package in the European Parliament , we shall have to give serious consideration to putting in place a border adjustment instrument , which will in particular help avoid any carbon leaks .
We need to fulfil the obligation to reduce CO2 emissions , whilst preserving economic competitiveness .
In that connection , I emphasise the importance of the ' carbon ' tax .
That is often a taboo subject , but I still think it is worthwhile and should be considered .
( BG ) We ought to come up with a combination of solutions , a general model and principles .
The report makes this clear in an excellent way .
To protect the environment is cheaper than to rehabilitate it , but the failure to use fair market tools means to provide hidden subsidies to polluters .
The green toolbox needs flexibility if we are to have certainty and make sure we do not default on other indicators and increase the burden for citizens .
Trade instruments need to be combined with promoting investment in new technology , with offsetting instruments for overcoming deficits .
Individual countries do matter .
Bulgaria , for example , will be facing problems in the future .
The closing down of certain parts of the nuclear power plant in Kozloduy lead to an increase in generation at thermal power plants , electricity prices went up .
This increases emissions , yet the low GHG allowances work like penalties and consumers are paying the increased price .
Unless carbon dioxide allowance are reallocated and in the absence of sufficient compensation to off-set the decommissioned power units , the application of the other trade instruments will bring about more problems .
Environmental economics has its social dimensions and we should not wait until 2010 or 2013 before we act .
Mr President , I would like to stress that tackling climate change requires more extensive actions than those focusing on transport and energy .
Avoiding deforestation should also be at the core of the EU climate change mitigation strategy , as a highly cost-effective way of reducing greenhouse gas emissions fairly quickly .
Avoiding deforestation can be achieved only by a mix of regulatory approach and market-based instruments .
Civil society has repeatedly exposed the way the EU actively contributes to global deforestation by allowing illegal timber to freely enter its market .
It is vital that the EU introduces legislation to ensure that only timber and timber products from legal sources are placed on the EU market .
This regulatory approach should be complemented by a set of market-based instruments specifically designed for forestry , such as charges for premature harvesting of forests or incentives for sustainable forest management .
However , in order to use market-based instruments more widely in forestry , we need to clarify which instruments work best , to what extent they can be used and how they can be correlated with regulatory law .
I call on the Commission to present an analysis of the most appropriate market-based instruments for the forestry sector , and to outline the suitable context for these instruments to be used and combined with other policy tools .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to draw attention to just two matters in this debate .
First of all , the way that the burden associated with counteracting climate change has been allocated within the European Union framework is highly unfair .
For example , carbon dioxide emission limits were allocated to individual Member States without taking into account the backwardness in their development , which , in Poland among other countries , has resulted in a sharp increase in the cost of electricity and , as a result , a visible jump in the costs of production and also living costs .
Secondly , the implementation of the climate package , according to the estimates of the European Commission itself , will come to about EUR 50 billion per annum .
In a situation where the majority of the fastest growing nations of the world , such as China , India and Brazil , as well as economic powerhouses such as the United States , are not too bothered about climate change , it could well happen that the European economy will stop being competitive in world markets , which means it will be necessary to introduce instruments to protect European output , burdened as it is by such high additional costs .
( RO ) We should emphasize the fact that the European Union will be able to meet its objectives of reducing pollutant emissions only by the cooperation and firm commitment of local communities .
They should know the market instruments used for purposes related to environmental policies and other related policies .
The trade in emission certificates , the Directive on Fuel Quality , the EURO standards for vehicles , the Directive on Purchases of Clean and Energy-efficient Road Vehicles , the EURO 6 standard for vehicles are only some of the Commission 's initiatives .
In October , the Commission will come up with a proposal to review the Commission on Eurovignette , based on internalizing external costs , including environmentally-related costs .
As a Rapporteur for the opinion of the TRAN Committee for the draft Directive regarding clean and energy-efficient road vehicles , I consider it important to calculate the costs of a vehicle for its entire useful life , taking into consideration not only the initial purchase price , but also the price of the fuel used , carbon dioxide emissions , etc .
I hope many local authorities will actually participate in these consultations .
Mr President , I offer many congratulations to Ms Ferreira for an excellently balanced report .
Our environment is suffering under the insults inflicted as a result of an ever-increasing world population and man 's uncontrolled appetite for materialistic consumption .
The climate is changing , biodiversity is suffering and natural resources are diminishing .
The rapporteur , having fully understood the task at hand , is rightly supporting the view that the main market instruments needed to remedy the situation are financial incentives and taxes .
Consequently , I fully support the idea of an EU environmental taxation system , which will inevitably have to be uniform amongst the Member States .
At the same time , an effectively revised carbon emissions trading scheme will , I am sure , help to improve matters significantly .
Of course , one should never forget the fact that making citizens adopt environmentally friendly lifestyles is not just a market-based issue : creating an environmentally caring consciousness also involves proper education and learning from an early stage and continuing throughout life .
( PL ) Mr President , environmental protection covers many areas and its effectiveness depends on synchronisation and judicious application of the tools that are available , and this includes economic instruments .
The instruments associated with the Green Paper present a series of measures without offering systemic solutions .
One example of this is support for savings in fuel used for communal transport and other purposes , which are legitimate .
However , the sudden increase in the price of environmentally-friendly electricity rings some alarm bells , as does the fact that in large measure it is created using hydrocarbons .
The proposed carbon dioxide emission charges punish the consequences but do not address the cause .
The promotion of clean sources of energy , such as water , wind , solar power and atomic energy , together with stability in their prices , would have a significant impact for society , the economy and environmental protection and should be an area where systemic measures are undertaken .
Mrs Ferreira 's report raises this issue .
( CS ) As we heard in many previous speeches , carbon dioxide is an important and perhaps a key player in so-called ecological price determination , and is presented as the cause of climate change .
I want to draw your attention to the fact that , according to scientific research , carbon dioxide in the atmosphere increases not before the earth heats up but only after it heats up .
This warming process correlates with the sun 's activity so that warming is an effect rather than a cause .
As a result , the main emitters of carbon dioxide after warming are the oceans .
Of course , I am not against a reduction in carbon dioxide emissions caused by human activity but I think that we have to accept our responsibility for pollution that has health-related and other consequences , rather than responsibility for climate change .
We should call a spade a spade .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , this a good report .
I do not want to repeat the points that have been raised already , but I would like just to draw attention to a few particular issues .
Firstly , human beings are not the most important part of the ' environment ' and humans do not own the water , the soil and the earth .
Humans only use them , we are just tenants .
We must keep this fact in mind .
Issues that affect the environment know no borders - air , water and the soil are not subject to frontiers - so our activities also have to go across frontiers .
This applies at European Union level , but it also applies throughout the whole world .
Otherwise our activities will not achieve their objective .
I would like to emphasise one other matter .
Apart from these fiscal issues and economic pressures , it is very important to raise people 's awareness , starting from children .
Otherwise we will not have energy-saving technical devices , houses , cars and vehicles .
I would like to thank you , Commissioner , for the progress so far and I would ask you to take further steps in this direction .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to thank Mrs Ferreira for the report she has presented .
It considers issues that , as this debate has illustrated , will become increasingly important in the future .
In today 's debate , we have discussed how we have to have an ecological mind-set .
I am convinced that there is considerable ecological awareness in the European Union and in individual Member States .
People want to live ecologically , they want to have an ecological lifestyle and they are very ecologically aware .
However , let us not forget that many European Union countries , such as Bulgaria and Poland , lived for many decades under a different system .
Our economies were based on another method of obtaining energy .
The regulations on the system of environmental taxes could therefore reduce the competitiveness of these economies and , as a result , reduce environmental awareness .
Mr President , with our clear focus on thriving but low-carbon economies to meet global targets for CO2 emission reductions as we face our most serious environmental challenge of climate change , a wide range of market-based instruments - including taxation - have a vital role to play , being based on the widely accepted environmental principle of the polluter pays .
However , over-emphasis on taxation - with the frequent calling on the Commission to come forward with legislation for the same throughout this report , for example , paragraph 26 , which ' calls on the Commission to put forward a legislative proposal for a Community minimum tax on CO2 before the end of 2008 ' - makes the report as a whole unacceptable to me , despite the excellent work and the many recommendations I can support .
I am firmly of the view that such taxation is a matter for each Member State .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank the honourable Members for their comments and the views they expressed during the debate .
I will try to comment on some of the comments made .
Ms Ferreira commented on the lack of information about the replies to our debate .
I would like to inform you that we received 170 replies , which are being analysed at the moment , and we hope to have a summary of these replies by the end of the summer , in which case we shall , of course , provide you with this summary .
Mr Wijkman raised the point of inconsistency between emission trading systems and the carbon tax .
I would like to say that , in the revision of the Energy Taxation Directive , one of the objectives is precisely to deal with and tackle any possible inconsistency .
Two Members raised the issue of possible border tax adjustments to prevent carbon leakage in case international negotiations fail .
I would like to say that the main and priority goal of the Commission is to reach a successful post-Kyoto international agreement to address climate change .
On the issue of tax on air kerosene , the issue has already been discussed with the Member States .
It proved to be a very sensitive issue and no progress was made .
Two Member States apply a tax of this type , but I must point out that it also raises questions of international law .
The Commission does not intend to submit any proposal for such a tax .
On the use of reduced VAT rates to achieve environmental goals , the Commission services are currently studying the issue .
Finally , I would like to say that a number of the comments made by honourable Members fall within the work of different Commissioners .
I have taken note of all your comments and I shall convey them to the Commissioners concerned .
They will be analysed and taken into consideration in the follow-up action to the Green Paper .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Thank you , Commissioner , thank you , ladies and gentlemen , for your very thorough and interesting contributions .
We appreciate that the taxation debate is not closed and I should like just to mention three points at this stage in the discussions .
Firstly , the proportion accounted for by energy taxes .
On average they represent 76 % of environmental taxation , compared with 21 % for transport .
Secondly , domestic consumers , who have to pay by far the largest proportion of environmental taxes , when other sectors of the economy are the biggest consumers of energy , water and transport .
Thirdly , the proportion of GDP of Member States represented by environmental taxes has declined over the past five years .
That gives us something else to think about in our future deliberations .
I certainly regret what the EPP is asking for on paragraph 26 , in which we were proposing a minimum Community tax on CO2 .
It seems to me that we need to continue along that path if we want to prevent dumping in the European Union .
The idea is not to take over tax powers from the Member States , it is to have minimum tax harmonisation .
That is necessary and it has been underlined .
Apart from the fact that Member States are asking for further progress towards tax coordination , I should also like to draw attention to another point in the report .
The reduction in taxes on employment cannot be linked only to the reduction in environmental taxes , as the Commission is proposing .
In my view , it should be part of a more general reform , with principles of solidarity and social justice .
I am well aware that that is not yet a competence of the States , but let us think about it here and give the Member States some information .
The final point that I think is important is the domestic dimension .
The measures we take here should not have an adverse effect on households that are already on low incomes and make the position of other households more insecure .
That is what I wanted to say in conclusion .
Thank you , Commissioner ; I can assure you of our support in drawing up future legislation on these matters .
in writing . - ( HU ) In order to achieve their environmental aims the Member States nowadays give preference almost exclusively to direct regulation , even though there are many other regulatory instruments available .
We feel more focus should be given to market-based environmental protection incentives .
We believe that the concepts of the market , competition and protection of the environment are not mutually exclusive .
The significance of market incentives is that the aim of environmental quality can be achieved more cheaply and more effectively with them , and other social objectives can be achieved at the same time .
Unfortunately , the European Union has not done much to encourage market-based incentives , though the emissions trading scheme could be given as an exception .
It is therefore comforting that the Green Paper contains a survey of hidden opportunities for these topical incentives .
We might add , however , that the survey should have gone a lot further .
A wider use of market-based regulation should go hand in hand with a reduction in ineffective direct regulation .
Since economic incentives are income-generating , we have to examine just how these instruments , primarily imposed on labour , can generate taxes .
This subject warrants intensive debate .
We are also convinced that the EU 's ambitious environment policy objectives cannot be fulfilled without going further in the field of market incentives .
International Financial Reporting Standards and the governance of the International Accounting Standards Board ( debate )
The next item is the report by Alexander Radwan , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on International Financial Reporting Standards ( IFRS ) and the Governance of the International Accounting Standards Board ( IASB ) .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , the subject matter of the report before us would seem , at first glance , to be highly technical .
It concerns so-called accounting standards in the European Union and worldwide , particularly for small and medium-sized companies .
It may very well be the type of subject that is discussed now in the European Parliament and then takes several years to begin to affect the economy and ordinary people .
At that stage the cry will go up that nobody knows where these standards come from or who is responsible for them .
Nor will anyone know why they have to be applied .
The objective is to achieve a single set of global accounting standards , particularly for public limited companies .
We support that objective .
The argument we hear advanced for it is that we need ' high quality standards ' , and this House considers itself the only forum empowered to set those high quality standards .
However , in these times of turbulence on the financial markets , it is astonishing to hear the same people who previously argued for the principle of ' fair value ' now questioning that principle and asking , too , whether a ' market to market ' approach still makes sense if we no longer have a market .
The very people who let the genie out of the bottle are the ones now asking whether we are on the right track .
The only people responsible for these standards are the people sitting in the offices of this private organisation in London , who are undoubtedly influenced in making their standards by the desire to keep themselves in a job .
My report , on which we are to vote today , therefore concerns not just the impact on small and medium-sized companies , but also the fundamental question of who makes rules for whom , and who supervises the application of the rules .
The first issue to address is that of governance : how transparent is this organisation ?
In other words , how transparent is its funding ?
There are certainly hidden interests here .
The members of this committee , who are demanding transparency and always try to portray the market as transparent , should make at least a modicum of effort to comply themselves with the transparency requirements they lay down for the market !
My impression so far is that this organisation fights with every means at its disposal to avoid transparency in any form .
Who takes the decisions about financing and the choice of personnel for specific posts ?
Why are individuals appointed ?
Is it about regional balance ?
Is it about inter-sector balance ?
The current project concerns IFRS for small and medium-sized companies , so it is fair to ask who represents small and medium-sized companies .
Who knows about small and medium-sized companies ?
And another thing : why are IFRS for small and medium-sized companies actually on the agenda right now ?
Who sets the agenda ?
Commissioner McCreevy and Sir David Tweedie have also been asked many times , over a number of years , why we are actually doing this .
Several years down the line we now know why we are discussing IFRS for small and medium-sized companies in Europe : it is because of requests from South Africa and Brazil .
What a marvellous answer !
We know quite well that the focus of all this is not South Africa or Brazil , but rather the European market , where there will be a lot of money to be made if SMEs are required to introduce something like this .
So these are the issues at stake in the matter of governance - and some initial , positive steps have been taken .
But all the bodies that are to be set up in the future will be assessed according to whether the people who belong to this supervisory organisation and have to answer questions about it at political level - and they could include a Member of the Commission - will also have the power to shape new developments .
It is not enough for them simply to be notified of proposals .
One of our aims is convergence .
We must take care , however , that the interpretation of convergence does not slip from Europe 's grasp , to be replaced by the SEC 's interpretation .
In Europe today we are sufficiently familiar with the way the US stock exchange is supervised .
We should not be so naïve as to leave the business of supervision to the Americans .
What we want is therefore what we have already called for : IFRS as Europe understands them and not as this board dictates .
Small and medium-sized companies are the ones affected here , and I have to say , without mincing my words , that the ideas on the table today are too complicated and too difficult .
I would also warn against taking the voluntary approach .
I am wearing my Bavarian national costume today and a good old Bavarian term comes to mind here : it is ' hinterfotzig ' and it means something like ' through the back door ' .
We know very well - despite all the denials and the acquiescence - that IFRS for small and medium-sized companies will be introduced to the European market through the back door , via a small number of Member States .
We will then hear the same voices calling for a single set of standards , and they will proceed to foist their standards on the market - standards which are too complex , which nobody understands and nobody wants - purely because there is a market opportunity .
What we have here is a case of a minority trying to impose its will on a majority at global level , and it is unacceptable !

Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs and in particular the rapporteur , Mr Radwan , for the considerable work that has gone into this comprehensive report .
It raises important issues for the future development of European and indeed global capital markets .
In this brief intervention I cannot address all the issues raised in the report .
Let me therefore focus on three points .
One , governance issues ; secondly the EU 's input to the International Accounting Standards Board , the IASB ; and thirdly the project to develop an accounting standard for small and medium-sized enterprises .
On IASB governance , your report rightly highlights the fact that our shared objective is to develop high-quality global accounting standards .
The EU 's decision to require listed companies to use international accounting standards was a bold and visionary step towards this objective .
A single set of globally accepted accounting standards would provide significant benefits for our companies , our capital markets and our economy .
We must continuously strive to ensure that international accounting standards remain relevant in the face of changing economic circumstances and that they represent the interests of all stakeholders in a balanced manner .
To ensure that these conditions can continue to be met , progress should be made as a matter of priority in three areas .
Firstly , the accountability of the International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation ( IASCF ) , needs to be enhanced , in particular towards public authorities .
The latter should play an active role in the selection and appointment of trustees .
In this respect , the proposal that I , together with my counterparts in the US SEC , the Japanese FSA and the International Organisation of Securities Commissions , made last November goes in the direction advocated by your report .
Secondly , we need to look at how the IASB 's agenda-setting process can be improved .
In particular , the process through which priorities are set needs to be made more open and more transparent .
Thirdly , the IASB 's due process should be enhanced , mainly by ensuring that standards are subject to a full impact assessment before they are adopted .
Your report makes constructive suggestions about these and related points .
The forthcoming review of the IASCF 's constitution provides the opportunity to implement the necessary reforms .
The committee will pursue them in consultation with this House , the Member States and our international partners .
Now , turning to the EU 's input to the IASB .
Your report argues that the EU needs to strengthen its capacity to make its views on accounting matters heard at the international level .
I agree .
In particular we should seek means to ensure that the views of European stakeholders , especially proactive input to the IASB 's agenda-setting process , can be put to the IASB in a more timely and coherent manner .
I see this as an evolutionary rather than a revolutionary process .
We should build on the European Financial Reporting Advisory Group and I am ready to pursue this as a matter of urgency , including the possibility of using funding from the Community budget to support such a structure .
I must , however , sound a clear and unambiguous warning .
This structure will in no circumstances become an embryonic European standard-setter , nor can there be any question of developing European interpretations of international accounting standards .
Europe must and will remain part of the movement towards a single set of globally accepted accounting standards .
Anything else would damage the international competitiveness of our companies and our capital market .
Turning now to the IASB 's project to develop an accounting standard for SMEs , let me begin by stating that the Commission currently has no legal basis to endorse this standard .
Moreover , we have never made any commitment to take over whatever standard the IASB produces .
We would only do so if we were genuinely convinced that the IASB produces a standard that meets the interests of European users .
The IASB has not yet finalised its project .
However , at this stage the Commission 's views are clear .
The current exposure draft published by the IASB remains too complex to provide a satisfactory accounting framework for European SMEs , especially for smaller companies .
Our focus remains the simplification of the regulatory environment for SMEs , including in the accounting area .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs . - ( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the IAS system makes sense for big listed companies that operate worldwide .
That is why , during Parliament 's last term , we decided , on the Legal Affairs Committee 's proposal , to adopt the IAS Regulation .
The ultimate aim - as Alexander Radwan has said - was indeed to achieve convergence , at least with the USA and if possible worldwide .
The system makes no sense in the case of small and medium-sized companies because , as a rule , they have no need of international financial markets , no need of Wall Street and the rest .
For that reason alone , the necessity of developing IFRS for small and medium-sized companies is highly questionable .
On top of that - and I think Commissioner McCreevy was entirely right here - the current proposal is for nothing more than a slimmed-down version of what are , by any measure , extremely complicated international standards , entirely unsuited to the structure of small and medium-sized companies in Europe .
They are particularly ill-suited to family companies , which have been run by their owners for several generations ; which have already written off property belonging to them ; and in which the application of fair-value rules would simply encourage greed and , in the end , could very well jeopardise the companies ' chances of survival .
On the other hand , we must be realistic .
Ultimately , the question of accounting standards for SMEs in Europe will not be exempt from some form of pressure for harmonisation .
Our demand is for comparability , at least within the Single Market .
So I think it is important that we should seriously consider how to develop European alternatives to the proposals from London , with the aim of achieving greater standardisation in this area too - but standardisation that is sensible and appropriate for SMEs and geared to the long term , rather than short-term valuation .
I have one further point to make about the IAS bodies .
There is a real problem here , as Alexander Radwan has outlined .
There may be a certain geographical balance but there is no balance in terms of economic weight .
Europe is by far the largest bloc , the largest region in which the IAS rules apply .
That is why we must have a commensurate say , and we simply cannot be compared with somewhere like Australia .
Australia carries the same weight as a middle-sized EU country or , indeed , a big region like North Rhine-Westphalia .
The balance needs to be improved in this respect .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , first of all my compliments to Mr Radwan on getting this thorough report completed .
It was under discussion up to the very last minute .
In its final form it is a report that is clear , but sometimes critical too .
The rapporteur is convinced that the IASB 's democratic accountability has to be improved and I am glad to see the IASB taking this criticism on board .
The Chairman of the Trustees , Mr Gerrit Zalm , indicated recently in the European Parliament that he was open to suggestions and ready to put forward proposals on adapting the structure .
The IASB is working on IFRS standards for small and medium enterprises .
I agree with the rapporteur that IFRS are too complex and too expensive for SMEs .
I also believe that encouraging the voluntary use of IFRS by SMEs would carry the risk of them being introduced into Europe by the back door .
In my view there has to be differentiation according to company size .
It is a good thing to have big multinationals , banks and insurance companies which operate worldwide producing their annual accounts to a single standard .
But small and medium-sized enterprises in Europe should have their own standard .
The IASB has achieved much in respect of internationally listed companies and accounting standards for them .
If SMEs are now saying that cost and effort can be just as well managed using more than one standard , we cannot have a single standard being imposed from the top down .
It is also very important that the interests of investors and of transparency should be considered too .
Policy is there to facilitate , to ensure that there is sound , transparent and cost-effective information on business performance .
I think the proven benefits of IFRS can also benefit European equity markets , certainly if the Americans exchange their US GAAP system for IFRS .
Comparability here can be very beneficial to international investors and stakeholders .
The idea behind IFRS thus deserves to be supported by the European Parliament .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FR ) Thank you , Commissioner , for managing to come to Strasbourg .
Thank you also to the rapporteur , in your Bavarian costume .
I think we worked very well together , and the way in which it was possible for various people 's amendments to be incorporated in your report is proof of that .
First of all , I should like to make three points about accounting standards .
It seems to me that , in terms of the governance and operation of the body responsible for setting these accounting standards , we are in an unusual situation .
There are many forms of standardisation .
Not all of them have such a strong impact on financial stability , or on the issues , in terms of power and governance , as accounting standards have .
What is happening today is an important event , a passage to adulthood .
When these accounting standards were formulated , perhaps by auditors who worked amongst themselves , they basically prepared the ground very well .
Nowadays these accounting standards are international .
They are used and applied by everyone and so the question of governance is crucial .
How does the body responsible for setting these accounting standards fit in with international governance , in relation to democratic bodies , bodies that legitimately represent State power , and the European Union in particular ?
The second point we need to look at in regard to governance is of course the balance between those bodies .
What is the geographical balance , what is the balance in the representation not just of those who draw up the standards , but also of those who will have to use them ?
The third point is financing .
How are these bodies to be financed ?
Might the idea of a levy on businesses , which would be coordinated by regulatory bodies , be worthwhile ?
Could they be financed by government , by the European Community ?
We hope that the Commissioner will be making some strong proposals on that point .
The fourth question in regard to those bodies is the programme .
Is it right for them to develop the concept of fair value when we know the effects that can have on financial stability ?
Is it right for this body to develop an SME programme that Europe does not need ?
Is it right that , on this issue of standards for SMEs - just because , as our rapporteur has said , South Africa or Australia might need them - the Commissioner did not make sure that Europe had a say in those bodies .
It is absolutely essential , as a first step , that Europe should make sure it is there to represent the strength of all the Member States and the voice of Europeans , in the IASB , the IASCF and IFRIC .
Commissioner , that is your responsibility .
We are expecting strong proposals from you on that point .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , IFRSs are being adapted by more and more countries , so their value and importance is growing .
This brings with it a need to strengthen accountability and transparency of the IASB , which may not have been so obvious at its inception .
I welcome moves in that direction , but I regret that some parts of this report present criticism in a negative way , rather than acknowledging changes that are under way and pointing the way forward .
So several of my amendments aim to be more forward-looking , highlighting the advantages and benefits , alongside the need for further adaptation , both to the standards themselves and the IASB that oversees them .
However , unnecessary politicisation of technical issues must be avoided .
IFRSs are an important tool for advancing comparability across borders and reducing burdensome requirements for companies reporting under different regimes , but it would be useful if presentation of financial statements lent itself more easily to other comparison purposes .
However , it may well be the case that tools such as XBRL tagging can develop that .
I have to thank Ms van den Burg for organising an interesting presentation on that subject last week .
The SME proposals cause concern in several quarters .
To me they look more like a tool for medium entities , perhaps on their way to full public reporting , so they may merit their own separate consideration in that light or on a voluntary basis .
But - as you have said , Commissioner - as yet they are far too complex for the majority of ordinary SMEs .
Madam President , I commend my colleague Mr Radwan for a very well written report .
I hope the Bavarian national dress he is wearing here this morning is not indicative of a change in political direction .
The adoption of the IFRSs in January 2005 has brought great benefits to the European Union by making accountancy requirements simpler across borders and financial statements easier to compare across countries , competitors and industries , enhancing the work of regulatory oversight , banking and capital markets .
International financial reporting standards are now being used or are being adopted in more than a hundred countries , including Australia , South Africa and others .
I support the calls for increased transparency , effectiveness and accountability over the IASB .
The report points to the fact that 17 months had passed before the IASB appointed a new chairperson .
This cannot be acceptable .
The IASB is a private , self-regulatory body which has been given the role of rule-maker and it is only right that we demand increased accountability and oversight because of that .
We should also be careful about calling for the establishment of extra EU structures to deal with the interpretation and application of IFRS standards .
Why is it needed ?
What will it do ?
On the subject of EU-US convergence , there has been great progress made in this area and in the EU-US accounting road map .
Last year , the US President , the President-in-Office of the European Council and the President of the European Commission signed a joint EU-US statement which undertook to promote and to seek to ensure conditions for the US generally accepted accounting principles and the IFRSs to be recognised in both jurisdictions .
This is very welcome .
With regard to the application of the IFRSs to SMEs , SMEs are small and smaller .
I feel it might be better to make it optional so as to ensure flexibility , rather than prevent its application outright .

( NL ) Madam President , I must echo the compliments paid to Mr Radwan , not least because his report has enabled us to have a very interesting debate on the conflicts between legislation and self-regulation , especially at world level .
I appreciate that our aspirations place us in a quandary .
On the one hand we want these international standards , applicable worldwide , but on the other hand we insist on our authority as co-legislator to judge the substance of those standards and to discharge our duty as co-legislator responsibly .
I think the European Parliament has shown latterly that it does that .
To my mind the key lies in timely consultation , in a balanced consideration of the interests of all stakeholders , including third-party interests of employees , local authorities , suppliers and so on ( because adequate financial reporting benefits more than just money providers alone ) , and a sound assessment of the consequences .
The Commission has a weighty responsibility here .
And in the immediate future these things must be done on behalf of small and medium-sized enterprises .
We can make this a really worthwhile project for the EU .
Lastly , I have two comments which are also relevant to another report which we shall be voting on in our next part-session , Mr Lehne 's report on a simplified business environment for companies .
Here too I have taken the line that rules are not just for companies , money providers and the accountants who earn their living from them , but also for employees and other groups .
So we must not meddle with the quality of the rules .
I have advocated that the rules should in any event be applied to delisted companies and off-balance activities .
I hope you will agree that there is also work for the IASB to do in that area .
I will end by repeating my heartfelt endorsement of the XBRL standard .
As you are aware , the US SEC is about to take a decision making this mandatory .
I urge you to think about how Europe should respond to this , and encourage you to draw up a roadmap for Europe accordingly .
Madam President , there are issues with the transparency and governance of the International Accounting Standards Board ( IASB ) , but it has accepted this criticism and acknowledged the need to change .
Steps have been taken and more are planned : publication of feedback statements , explaining the reasoning behind its decisions , pushing cost-benefit analyses and enlargement and more active involvement of the board of trustees .
It bent over backwards to communicate with Parliament .
Mr Radwan 's report is much improved from earlier versions and I believe the positive amendments from the PPE-DE and ALDE Groups will further improve the text today .
I would like to thank the rapporteur because , although we have had our differences , he was willing to compromise in certain areas on this governance aspect .
Unfortunately , I am unable to agree with him on the issue of International Financial Reporting Standards for SMEs .
The IASB was asked to draw up a simplified version for SMEs .
Mr Radwan 's report declines to acknowledge that this could also be useful in the European Union .
In fact , with the proposal still only at the drafting stage , the report proclaims that it will definitely not benefit EU companies .
Yet we have been told repeatedly that it will be optional and is designed for those growing SMEs which aim to become public listed companies .
Small enterprises with no aspirations beyond their local markets need not take it up .
An opinion survey last September found that a clear majority of European SMEs , including German SMEs , considered the benefits outweighed any disadvantages and would improve financial reporting .
The efforts of the IASB to develop global accounting standards of a high quality are a major and welcome contribution to the European and world economies and , frankly , I think we should be applauding them .
( ES ) Madam President , the requirement since 2005 for publicly traded companies to use the IFRS ( International Financial Reporting Standards ) for their consolidated financial statements has been a wide-ranging and hugely influential political initiative .
About 100 countries are using the standards and their globalisation has provided comparability and transparency , thereby increasing the confidence of operators , creating a more level playing field and strengthening market discipline .
The proposal contains two great challenges relating to governance .
On the one hand , the private entity , which has been setting worldwide voluntary standards since 1973 on a corporate and professional basis , now finds itself in a position of huge responsibility entailing a change in its nature , procedures and composition in order that it can become a transparent , controllable institution , with a legitimacy reflecting its new role .
It is necessary to recognise and coordinate the activities of all the public and private interests concerned and at the same time to secure the organisation 's financing and independence in the setting of standards .
Furthermore , the organisation must be integrated into international governance .
It is also necessary to strengthen European accounting governance by adopting a more proactive and integrated approach to the preparation , approval , implementation and assessment of standards .
It is vital to improve the conceptual framework of standards , and to bear in mind that they are neither neutral nor academic and can produce both winners and losers .
Likewise it is important to assess their effects and ensure their compatibility with European strategy , to learn from financial upheavals and to regulate the accounting standards of administrative concessions in a balanced way .
The financial accounting arrangements for SMEs will need to be simple and be linked to their exploitation of the internal and global market .
These matters are covered by Mr Radwan 's report , which has achieved broad consensus and comes at a very opportune moment in terms of the upcoming review at the end of 2009 , envisaging the creation of a supervisory body and altering the composition of the Standards Advisory Council before next year .
Madam President , paragraph 30 of our motion for a resolution points out that financial statements do not simply serve the needs of investors but also other stakeholders .
As we also draw attention to the need for EU law changes in paragraph 41 , I rise to remind the Commissioner that this Parliament has voted that any changes to the fourth and seventh Company Law Directives should include a requirement for social and environmental reporting by companies .
I draw to his attention such requirements in South Africa , in France 's law on new economic regulations , as well as the recommendations of the Prince of Wales 's Accounting for Sustainability project from my own country , the UK .
In the mean time , and in addition , I would like to ask the Commissioner , following the 2001 Commission recommendation on environmental issues in our new accounts , whether the Commission could issue a similar recommendation on social issues in accounts .
I would also like to ask the Commissioner to press the International Accounting Standards Board to include social and environmental aspects in its planned publication of a management commentary .
The Commission may or may not want to call this corporate social responsibility , but perhaps today we can all agree to call it accounting for responsible companies .
( ES ) Madam President , the recent financial crises have shown the importance of high-quality accounting standards for the proper functioning of the markets .
This being the case , it seems to me that another lesson of the crisis is that there is a certain asymmetry between the stated importance of accounting standards and the nature and operation of the private entities responsible for setting , producing and interpreting those standards .
Mr Radwan 's report is therefore correct to point out that the first matter to be dealt with is that of governance .
In my view he has put forward intelligent and realistic proposals about the need for the institutions representing the Union to be more proactive in this process of setting standards which are to be incorporated into the Community legal order , also concerning the internal operating rules of those private entities .
Greater transparency , safeguards to prevent conflicts of interest and broader geographical representation are some of the proposals which Mr Radwan has put forward .
The second aspect dealt with in the report is the matter of small and medium-sized undertakings .
We have emphasised here in the House the need to reconcile two objectives : simplification and reduced cost of accounting procedures for SMEs and the provision of adequate information for market players .
The last point covered by Mr Radwan - and one with which I concur - is the need for global standards in a global environment .
Therefore it is extremely important to reach agreements with the other major world financial markets , notably the United States .
This calls for greater dynamism and a more significant role for the European institutions , including this Parliament and all those listening today .
( DE ) Madam President , I can entirely endorse what our colleague has just said .
The underlying premise here - and Mr Radwan pinpoints it in his report - is that an institution without a political mandate should nonetheless lay down a relatively large body of measures affecting the economy , some of which are binding .
It is not enough to call for improved governance , or better framework conditions ; political bodies also need to become more involved in this matter than they have been in the past .
What we are doing here in Parliament constitutes a step in the right direction , but further steps must be taken .
There is also another aspect to consider .
What is done here at the level of a regional organisation - in this case the European Union - should also be mirrored in the global context .
So it is not a simply a matter of seeking to apply these rules to our region of the world alone .
( LT ) Madam President , as my colleague has already mentioned , this report deals with who is responsible for what in the accountability process .
Parliament 's role is quite significant , and I believe that we should have this function too .
However , I would like to express some doubt regarding the consideration of every technical detail and establishing standards .
I do not find the description of the method of assessment and evaluation of realisable and non-realisable assets completely acceptable .
That is why I doubt we should interfere , whether this is good or a bad method .
We should wait for the experts to carry out the assessment .
Meanwhile , the review of the standard of non-realisable assets and consultations on this issue has already started .
Only then should we make our decision .
I therefore suggest that we do not support the proposal in Article 30 ( e ) or that in Article 42 .
Madam President , could I have assurances from Commissioner McCreevy that the single set of global accounting standards - with the consequent drive for increased standardisation of procedures - will in no way increase the justification , or even the requirement , for an EU common consolidated corporation tax base ?
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I would like to thank Members for their comments .
It was certainly a very wide-ranging debate with diversity of views on many of the issues and we have taken note of them .
I would like to emphasise again that high-quality international accounting standards are crucial for the effective functioning of both the European and global capital markets .
The process through which these standards are developed should therefore be subject to robust governance .
It should be characterised by a high level of transparency and it should ensure a balanced consideration of stakeholder interests .
The IASCF and the IASB have over recent years implemented significant reforms of their internal procedures but I cannot deny that further improvements are necessary .
Moreover , I recognise that we in Europe should better organise ourselves to guide and provide input to the IASB standard-setting process .
In short , even if the IASB 's governance and due process were perfect , international accounting standards will only meet the needs of European stakeholders if their views are presented in a coherent , a convincing and a timely manner .
Nearly all speakers referred to the question of IFRSs for SMEs and I repeat again that there is no legal basis for its endorsement in Europe at present .
If we were to do so , it would need codecision with the European Parliament .
Can I just repeat , as I have said many times about IFRSs for SMEs , when the IASB was going about this particular work I made it quite clear in a number of speeches that they should not assume that there was going to be automatic endorsement from the EU for this particular project .
We would only recommend it if it was simple and effective and met the needs of SMEs .
They were told that when they were doing their work .
Their first exposure draft has been presented .
I then took the opportunity of telling them that it did not meet those criteria and in the present state of affairs I could not possibly even consider recommending it for SMEs because it was neither simple nor effective .
That remains my position but , in line with what others have said and Mr Purvis in particular , it would probably be a good thing if there was a simple effective IFRS for SMEs - but only on that particular basis .
The idea is a good one .
I do not want to knock the idea at all , but I am not going to endorse now or in the future anything for SMEs that is just more complex and which no one understands .
It is not needed .
I take this opportunity of repeating again in Parliament what I have said on many occasions about this .
Ms van den Burg mentioned the question of XBRL .
We are working with the securities regulator to get consensus on the technical standards for business data and as a result of this dialogue the Commission may take further measures aiming at interoperability of regulatory information systems .
XBRL could allow investors to take full advantage of IFRS .
Any steps towards requiring the use of XBRL in the European Union should be subject to a thorough impact analysis , including the economic assessment of costs and benefits .
I have also discussed the matter with the SEC Chairman , Mr Chris Cox , during my recent visit to the United States and I support keeping this agenda point in our regulatory dialogue with the US authorities for the future .
These standards will need to be internationally accepted , technologically independent and interoperable .
It is a very exciting development and I know Ms van den Burg has recently had exposure to all this .
I took the same opportunity myself some months ago - getting experts to show me how it actually works .
I think it is something that is quite revolutionary and something to be welcomed , but we will not do anything about it just yet until we have done other work .
Mr Mitchell made an interesting point .
I think the importance of what he said was that we do not want the IASB to come and say ' an EU body or any other body ' .
We want to be an internationally accepted body - because this goal is well worth pursuing - and it needs to be an independent body .
I think that should be taken as read , but with proper input from the various stakeholders .
May I remind everybody in the European Union that it was the EU which gave the IASB such importance .
We were the largest jurisdiction to say as from 2005 that the IFRS would become the rule for listed companies .
It was some years ago that this decision was made , together with the European Parliament , and that in itself gave greater importance to the IASB and to the process .
I would say - and I have said this repeatedly to the IASB also - that road testing - you can call it impact analysis - should be done before standards are adopted , particularly by the IASB , and with input from the EU and other bodies as well .
We should not be waiting until the standards are endorsed by the IASB .
We had the job here of either agreeing to them or rejecting them .
We do not have the role of changing them .
I think that they should be road tested enough beforehand to see if there are going to be problems , rather than finding out about serious problems after the whole IASB process has been gone through .
We made this point repeatedly to the IASB .
Hopefully , I think the new governance structures have been appreciated by most of us .
I accept that more work needs to be done in this particular area but that will lead to fewer problems in the future .
Hopefully we will arrive some day at a situation where these things will be more or less automatic and not cause any great headaches for anybody because all the work will have been done previously .
We will not have difficulties then .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thank you very much indeed for this debate , in which the main thrust of the report has certainly received support and alternatives have been outlined in various areas .
I should like to pick up on two things .
There is one point on which I am sure we all agree , and it has been made repeatedly today by speakers who fully support this general development , namely that the IFRS organisation has now taken some action , for example on governance issues , as a result of the pressure applied by this House - by the European Parliament - and by the European Union .
There are times when we need to be quite blunt - and I am aware that some of my female colleagues have criticised me in that regard - because certain individuals who have appeared before this House in recent years have occasionally given the unmistakable impression that the European Parliament is of little interest to them .
How little progress there has been is clear from the proposal on governance , where it is suggested that the future supervisory bodies may take advice only from persons they have appointed .
All I can say is that anyone required in future to report to a parliament on how he or she voted on a particular point should make sure that a share of responsibility and a say in policy-making is part of the package .
That is the first point .
How little commitment there is on the matter of impact assessments is clear from current discussions , in which the IFRS organisation is still refusing to conduct them .
Turning to the question of standards for SMEs , I have something to say to all those who believe we should introduce them on a voluntary basis .
Inspired here by John Purvis - John , this is for you - I intend to quote an independent commentator .
Peter Holgate , a partner in PricewaterhouseCoopers , writing in the German edition of the Financial Times , said the following :
' I don 't take the European position all that seriously .
Even if they end up not endorsing it , various countries could adopt it in their national generally accepted accounting principles .
If a few major players do that you have it brought in by a different door even if the EC doesn 't want to play ball . '
At the end of the day , this means you have to assume that , once a few states have adopted these standards , you will have them imposed on a compulsory basis throughout the European Union .
Such is the strategy of this organisation .
PricewaterhouseCoopers has already indicated that they see this as a business model .
That is why we need our own European set of standards for SMEs : we can build on the IFRS if that is appropriate but if it is not , then we will develop our own standards .
It is the Commission 's responsibility to ensure that we do not have standards foisted on us through the back door , which nobody wants but which would then become generally binding .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12 noon .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
( The sitting was suspended at 11.55 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon )

1 .
Commission Annual policy strategy 2009 ( vote )
- Before the vote on paragraph 24 :
Madam President , very briefly , two days ago we adopted a policy action at EU level on organ donation and transplantation .
I thought this was important enough to include it in this motion for a resolution with a suitable short reference as indicated in the voting papers .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
- Before the vote on paragraph 37 :
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am asking for the three words ' independent impact assessment ' to be included after ' better regulation ' .
That was the wording in the original draft but , for reasons I am unaware of , it seems to have fallen by the wayside .
As far as I can determine , the oral amendment has the approval of the other groups .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
2 .
2009 budget , Section III - Commission : budgetary framework and priorities for 2009 (
3 .
New Flame shipwreck ( vote )
- Before the vote :
Madam President , with regard to your comments on announcing the results of roll-call votes , allow me to express my gratitude to all those who chair votes in this House .
On behalf of all of us I would like to thank Mr Vidal-Quadras for passing on the suggestion I made the day before yesterday .
Thank you very much for agreeing to see how smoothly it goes .
- Before the vote on Amendment 6 :
( ES ) Madam President , I agree with the author of the amendment and suggest that , where the text refers to the regional authorities of Andalucia , the words ' and local ' should be added so that the phrase reads ' regional and local authorities of Andalucia ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
4 .
EU-Latin America and Caribbean Summit ( vote )
- Before the vote on paragraph 16 :
( ES ) Madam President , at the end of paragraph 16 , after the last line , which reads ' growing number of challenges at world level ' , I propose adding the following : ' but also characterised by the appearance of serious and far-reaching economic crises which can be mitigated or resolved through regional integration ' .
( The oral amendment was accepted )
- Before the vote on paragraph 22 , first indent :
( RO ) I would like you to accept the introduction to the text of Paragraph 22 , after the first line , where the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals is mentioned , of the following amendment ( I will read it in English ) :
' including the gender dimension in order to empower women and defend their rights ; '
( The oral amendment was accepted )
5 .
Situation in Burma ( vote )
6 .
Biological diversity and biosafety ( vote )
7 .
Towards a reform of the World Trade Organisation (
- Before the vote :
( IT ) Madam President , I should like to ask , on behalf of the ALDE Group , whether a separate vote is possible on paragraph 42 .
( FR ) Madam President , I am surprised at this late request by the ALDE Group , which is not in line with the agreement reached between the groups in the Committee on International Trade when it voted on the report .
We shall therefore be opposing the request .
We think that , in fact , the proposal in that paragraph to give the poorest small developing countries the chance to receive the proceeds of fines imposed on large developing countries by the WTO is a request that the European Parliament should support .
Thank you for that .
I was going to say that the request was obviously received after the deadline and my next question was to be to ask the House whether it was willing to accept that separate vote .
It is now clear , however , so that will not happen .
8 .
Free Trade Agreement with the Gulf Cooperation Council ( vote )
9 .
Green Paper on market-based instruments for environment and related policy purposes (
10 .
International Financial Reporting Standards and the governance of the International Accounting Standards Board (
- Before the vote on Amendment 8 :
Madam President , this is quite a simple amendment .
It is to delete the word ' legitimacy ' in the phrase ' may lack transparency , legitimacy and accountability ' and corresponds with a similar deletion by the rapporteur in Amendment 1 .
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
Voting time
( FR ) Madam President , I wanted to bring it to your attention that my card is not working , because I have just put in a card I thought I had lost in the office and it shows as not valid .
So I am here , I want to vote , I have my card , but it is not working any more .
I do not know what I should do , but I should like that to be recorded in the minutes .
We will send a technician so that you will be able to participate in the vote .
I should just like to point out before we start the vote that I shall not be reading out the numerical results of the roll-call votes : I shall just tell you whether they are adopted or rejected .
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
Madam President , I abstained on this particular issue because I think the Commission has got too much to do and it does not really need to reassess where it is going politically or policy-wise .
It should be talking much more about deregulation , not about how we can go forward with a common immigration policy .
Many small businesses in the region that I represent would like to see less regulation coming from this place .
Actually many people would like to see the regulation that comes from this place better implemented across the whole of the European Union .
Finally , there are many in my region who express concern that the Commission does not do what it is meant to do .
For example , the Commission might at this present point in time be shelving infringement cases against various Member States , when it comes to gambling , to hide this away from the general public for a couple of years .
That is something the Commission should be getting on with now .
( PL ) Madam President , the Commission 's priorities for 2009 are increased employment , climate change and a sustainable Europe .
Employment in the European Union is especially deserving of attention .
The Amsterdam Treaty was adopted in November 1997 during the Luxembourg summit .
This created the basis for the formation of a European employment strategy .
Due to the problem of unemployment in the Member States , where 17 million people were out of work at that time , this issue was made a priority .
Nine years later , in 2006 , in the enlarged European Union , 64.3 % of people of working age were in employment .
Denmark had the highest level of employment , Poland the lowest .
A total of 7.9 % of people of working age were unemployed .
As a comparison , unemployment in the United States was 4.6 % .
Over the last year , 24 of the Member States recorded a drop in unemployment and three reported an increase .
The largest decreases were seen in Poland , Bulgaria and Latvia and the largest increase in unemployment was in Estonia .
The report by Mrs Haug shows just how important is the role played by the Member States in the European Union 's employment policy .
Madam President , in this vote and also in the Gulf oil vote , I found myself again being forced to abstain or to vote against , simply because the vote is already anticipating the Lisbon Treaty .
I find this very presumptuous and disrespectful to parliaments that have not yet ratified , and particularly to the Irish people who are still going into referendum .
I would call on Parliament and people writing these motions for resolutions to refrain , in their haste , from presuming on a treaty that may or may not be ratified .
For the sake of democracy , they should refrain .
Madam President , I fully support the adopted resolution drafted by Mr Salafranca Sánchez-Neyra and others .
There are those that talk the talk and there are those that walk the walk .
Europe should strengthen its relationship with Latin America .
We will reap the benefits of this relationship for generations to come , something which we cannot say about the Galileo project .
After all - and as the resolution points out - the Euro-Latin American partnership has an overall population of more than one billion people , who make up one third of the UN member states and account for more than a quarter of world trade .
( PL ) Madam President , the purpose for which the World Trade Organisation was created was to bring about free and multilateral trade .
It was recognized that an open market based on principles of friendship and honesty is the key to stable economic growth and reducing world poverty .
However , for many people , the WTO is still something of a puzzle .
This is due to the lack of transparency in its activities and inappropriate information being made public .
The present reduced G4 and G6 working groups are often seen as meetings of the representatives of large countries that are imposing , or that want to impose , their will on other members .
Another problem is the lack of technical and legal assistance from the WTO for less developed countries that do not gain any economic benefits from increased market liberalisation .
Countries such as India , China or Brazil are treated as developing countries , as a result of which they can benefit from more advantageous conditions and various obligations .
I believe this to be a mistake in WTO policy .
The WTO does not take into account the massive potential of these countries and their resources .
The countries take advantage of this fact and often use price dumping in trade relations , which is harmful to other countries .
There should be a clearer division of developing countries that takes into account factors such as economic strength , economic development , GDP growth and growth in exports .
Madam President , we all agree on the need for reform for the WTO .
But the best reform for the World Trade Organisation would be in the attitudes of the negotiating parties , including that of the European Union .
I call on my colleagues to support the cross-party global campaign calling for real trade of which I am a co-chairman with Abdi Abdirahim Haithar of the East African Legislative Assembly .
We call for five things .
Let us abolish agricultural subsidies ; let us abolish agricultural tariffs ; let us liberalise rules of origin ; let us place more emphasis on aid for trade , for things like infrastructure rather than direct budgetary support for corrupt governments .
And , let us incentivise low-income countries to remove barriers between each other so that they can create wealth - entrepreneurs can create wealth - and so that they can take part in the global trading system .
I am sorry , but you are speaking too fast for the interpreters .
( PL ) ... through the introduction of emission trading guidelines in European Union countries as well as other instruments , including the European programme for combating climate change .
I believe that the report by Mrs Ferreira will further encourage the Member States to take action in the field of environmental protection .
( SV ) I would like to express my dissatisfaction with the fact that we have not had the opportunity to vote against the proposal for personal CO2 cards , in other words personal cards where we are expected to measure the contribution of individuals to the greenhouse effect .
This is simply wrong .
It is against human enterprise and development and sends extremely strange signals : don 't breathe , don 't exercise , especially don 't pant and for God 's sake , don 't fart !
What should the sanctions be for those who emit too much carbon dioxide or contribute too much to the greenhouse effect ?
Should we ban them from breathing altogether ?
No , these kinds of idiotic ideas undermine our credibility and shift the focus away from the correct , effective measures , namely emissions rights trading , the polluter pays principle and other methods which actually work .
I am surprised that more people have not protested against this proposal and that it seems to have passed unnoticed .
I am very sad if this speech has resulted in my emitting more carbon dioxide than I am actually entitled to .
I am sorry about that .
( PL ) I voted in favour of the resolution on International Financial Reporting Standards .
The IFRS make it easier to compare financial reports of companies working in the same , or even different , sectors .
I believe that the European Union should investigate whether any benefit would be gained , and if so , what kind of benefits , from the introduction of International Financial Reporting Standards in small and medium sized enterprises .
Written explanations of vote
in writing . - British Conservatives support the emphasis in this resolution on better regulation , on reducing administrative burdens , on renewed emphasis on achieving the Lisbon Strategy on growth and jobs and on further progress towards underpinning the Single Market .
We also supported references to independent impact assessments in relation to legislation , a long-held policy of Conservative MEPs .
We cannot , however , support inter alia the references to a Common Immigration Policy or a Common Asylum Policy , any moves to reduce the freedom of the Member States to act in the area of justice and home affairs , the creation of a ' European External Action Service ' or any moves towards a defence capability for the EU .
For these reasons , we abstained on the final vote .
in writing . - ( SV ) The motion for a resolution contains a number of vague points .
We are in favour of the development of an internal market , but stating that the European Parliament regrets the lack of concrete harmonisation in this area can be interpreted in several ways .
One of these is that more completely harmonised , detailed regulations should be introduced , which we do not support .
As the motion also rejects all attempts to re-nationalise cohesion policy and supports a Common Immigration Policy and the development of a common policy on NATO , we have chosen to vote no to the joint motion for a resolution .
in writing . - ( PT ) In an EU characterised by the deterioration of the social and economic conditions of its workers and the population as a whole , and in which wealth concentration , inequalities and poverty continue to increase , it is significant that neither the Commission nor the majority in this Parliament considers the fight against this unacceptable situation to be a major priority .
Moreover , it could not be any other way given that it is precisely the objective of EU policies to promote this situation .
The priorities in question seek to expand neoliberal policies and focus on more measures to promote the total implementation of the Single Market ( that is , the liberalisation of the markets for services , goods and labour , with the implementation of flexicurity ) and international trade , in line with the acceleration of the federalist and militarist agenda ( which includes a review of its own and NATO 's strategy ) , and on the basis of the unratified ( ! )
Treaty of Lisbon .
Finally , in a year in which elections for the European Parliament will be held , we are urged and called on to strengthen EU propaganda and the mystification of its policies .
Those in favour of taking such a line , rejected the amendment tabled by our Group denouncing the European Court of Justice rulings that legitimise wage dumping and restrict trade union rights .
in writing . - ( PL ) The European Parliament resolution on the Annual Policy Strategy 2009 referred positively to many points contained in the European Commission document .
It is particularly important to emphasise the interdependence between economic progress , social progress and environmental protection , which are all important for the creation of sustainable economies .
As a member of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , I especially welcome the support for initiatives that aim to stimulate the potential of small and medium-sized enterprises .
We should not overlook the issue of proper implementation of directives that are of key significance for the internal market , especially the Services Directive and the Consumer Credit Directive .
Regulations must be properly transposed into national legislation in all the Member States if there are to be real benefits from European integration .
We should not , however , forget that the European Commission plays a central role through monitoring , reporting and also supporting Member States in their efforts to achieve this objective .
In the resolution the European Parliament noted the consequences of the latest decisions of the European Court of Justice in the Viking , Laval and Rüffert cases and the need for further debate within the European Parliament .
I am counting on the involvement of the European Commission here and on constructive discussions with its representatives .
I agree that 2009 will be a watershed year for the functioning of the European institutions .
I am optimistic , however , that this fact will not get in the way of implementing key objectives for the year .
in writing - ( DA ) The Socialist Group in the European Parliament has decided to vote against the amendment proposed by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance concerning the unconditional abolition of the target of 10 % biofuel by 2020 .
We will not make compromises in connection with sustainability , either in social or environmental terms , and we therefore insist that fulfilment of the 10 % target remains an obligation , and that this can be done in a sustainable way .
We are prepared to revise the target if it becomes apparent that it cannot be achieved in a sustainable way .
Nevertheless , we believe that the Commission 's Annual Policy Strategy is the proper context for making this decision , through negotiations on the EU 's climate change package , including the Renewable Energy Directive .
I voted for Amendments 1 , 2 , 3 and 4 submitted by the Socialist Group for the proposal of a Joint Resolution regarding the Annual Policy Strategy of the Commission for 2009 .
They requested the Commission to solve the political impasse of the work time directive , the directive on temporary agencies and the directive on transferability of pension rights .
These are vital aspects of the European social and employment policy .
These amendments request the Commission to comply with its commitment to submit a legislative proposal regarding the minimum standards for transborder collective contracts that would allow the Member States to improve these standards , especially by collective negotiations .
I regret the fact that these amendments have not obtained the required majority .
Consequently , I voted against the resulting text since it does not take into consideration the needs of social Europe .
in writing . - ( PL ) 2008 is the year of ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , which is to come into force in 2009 .
It will give the European Union new powers and will have a significant impact on the Community budget .
The newly constituted Parliament and Commission will have to deal with a completely new budget procedure , to which the 2010 budget will be subject .
For this reason it is exceptionally important to have clear agreement on changes to the relevant budgetary and legislative instruments by the end of this year in order to ensure a transparent framework for 2010 .
In addition , we need to intensify preparations for a wide-ranging review of all aspects of EU expenditure to enable the Commission to submit a report by the end of this year .
The solidarity principle must be a priority for next year , but finances have to be guaranteed to ensure its implementation .
What worries me is that , given the room for manoeuvre available within the ceilings fixed by the multiannual financial frameworks , the Commission 's already existing priorities and the new priorities it has set cannot in practice be achieved simultaneously without the former suffering .
For this reason the initial budget proposal should give a realistic picture of all the requirements for next year , taking into account Parliament 's demand that all amounts allocated to pilot projects that are of general benefit to Europe 's citizens should be spent .
in writing . - ( PT ) Let us remember that , alongside the debate on the Community budget for 2009 , there is another debate on reviewing the entire EU budget , as provided for in the Interinstitutional Agreement .
The exact form of this review has yet to be defined , but we are concerned about some of the objectives already indicated for it .
Moreover , the Council has already announced its intention to establish a realistic and rigorous level of payments and that the level of its commitment and payment appropriations must be carefully analysed in relation to the Community 's capacity to absorb them , which suggests that further cuts in the structural policy and cohesion headings , which we oppose , are more likely .
We take a different view and believe that a detailed analysis should be made of the failure to spend the full amount allocated under these budget headings , and that measures should be taken to ensure their strict implementation .
Meanwhile , the proposal insists on increasing allocations for external action , to provide resources compatible with the EU 's ambitions .
The rejection of our proposed amendment has shed light on what this really means .
We are vehemently opposed to the Council 's request for additional EU budget allocations for military spending as part of the European Security and Defence Policy .
in writing . - ( PL ) Madam President , the budget for 2009 must take into account the special circumstances affecting next year .
First of all , the budgetary consequences of the expected entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty as well as the European elections and the formation of the new European Parliament and European Commission will be a challenge for continuity in the EU 's legislative and budget activities .
At the same time , this is the year in which the 2007-2013 financial perspective is to be fully implemented , following two years of ' getting up to speed ' , which were affected by delays in legislation and , as a consequence , a delay in the start of the long-term programmes .
The emphasis placed on financing innovative policies as well as on the European Union 's ambitions in foreign policy is completely understandable .
This cannot , however , happen at the expense of the cohesion policy , which is enormously important at the moment because of differences in development between various countries and regions .
Section 3 of the report , which deals with the principle of solidarity , describes how the Structural Funds can be used properly and transparently .
This takes on particular significance in the light of the budget review planned for 2008-2009 , which has consequences for EU finances after 2013 .
This is yet another important issue for budgetary policy in 2009 .
in writing . - I welcome the content of Ms Haug 's report on the 2009 Budget , Section III - Commission : budgetary framework and priorities for 2009 .
The report provides guidelines which will help facilitate the transition from the current to the new procedure resulting from the Lisbon Treaty .
I voted in favour of this report .
in writing . - Although I will vote in favour of this joint motion for a resolution , I have to say it is a typical European Parliament resolution brought about not for a concern for the environment or maritime safety but because Conservative Spanish politicians are still desperately trying to reclaim Gibraltar and embarrass their own government .
It is a text that tries to be all things to all people and rambles on at length about trivia , but only gives a small amount of wording to the important issue of maritime safety .
In English it appears badly written and paragraph 12 makes no sense and is a practical impossibility , which is why this paragraph cannot be taken seriously even if you understand it .
What is important is that the oil has been removed from the ship , that EMSA and the Gibraltar and Spanish authorities acted swiftly and correctly when the disaster struck and that we need to ensure that the whole issue of maritime safety is addressed .
All of this could have been stated on two pages far more effectively than the four pages of rambling text we are now faced with .
( Abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) ) of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the proposal for a joint resolution on the EU-Latin American and Caribbean Summit because I think the Lima Summit meeting will provide an exceptional opportunity to consolidate the strategic partnership between the two regions and intensify efforts towards achieving the Millennium Development Goals by 2015 , including the promotion of democracy and the rule of law , the protection and guarantee of human rights , with particular attention to the situation of women , the strengthening of social cohesion and poverty reduction .
I share the growing conviction of the importance of creating a Migration Observatory that would allow us to increase our understanding of migration between Latin America and the Caribbean and the European Union .
Joint action is necessary to protect the environment , biodiversity and forests , and to fight climate change , desertification and the scarcity of water .
in writing . - ( SV ) We greatly sympathise with this motion for a resolution but some of the content involves matters which do not concern this Parliament , but should instead be the responsibility of the Member States and possibly the Council of Foreign Affairs Ministers .
As always , irrelevant amendments were tabled by different groups on various important matters of principle , such as whether the MRTA should be included in the EU 's list of terrorist organisations , and on attempts to implement a peace process in Colombia .
These are important issues , but they are of such importance that they must not be decided by the European Parliament but by the competent decision-makers in the Member States .
This is why we voted against the report .
in writing . - ( PT ) Despite the careful drafting of the present resolution , it is difficult to disguise the underlying desire for a Global Biregional Partnership and for the European - Latin American Zone of Global Interregional Partnership to be the embryo of a future free trade zone ( with the free circulation of goods , services and capital ) , allowing the EU to promote Latin American integration in its own image and respond to the ambitions of its major financial and economic groups ( see the objectives of the Association Agreements between the EU and the countries and regions of Latin America , such as Mexico and Chile ) .
Some of us believe that the resolution 's exhaustive repetition of what it hopes will become shared principles , values and interests is merely an attempt to promote neo-colonial pretensions and interference by the EU powers in Latin America .
We are completely opposed to the EU 's intention to facilitate the appropriation by transnational companies of the region 's accumulated wealth , natural resources and biodiversity , which will exploit workers , promote unemployment , ruin millions of small farmers , destroy the environment , block progress and deny the rights and sovereignty of peoples .
in writing . - We regret that the text on reproductive health , which was part of the GUE resolution , was deleted in the compromise proposal of all political groups .
The deleted text read as follows :
' Calls for public policies to promote infrastructure , equipment and public services ensuring general access for women to sex education and reproductive education , including control over their fertility , and to support motherhood and fatherhood , thus enabling women to plan their families and the other aspects of their lives and furthering all the conditions required for greater participation on a basis of equality ' .
in writing . - Cooperation in this area requires a dialogue that promotes , among others , social cohesion and cooperation in fighting global warming .
The need for a more in-depth dialogue in these areas is reflected in my vote .
in writing . - I welcome this opportunity that is given to us by the EU-Latin America Summit to have a discussion on the situation in Latin America and , indeed , the relationship that the EU has with this part of the world .
I will be supporting the joint motion for a resolution , but would stress that we need to ensure that a political solution is found to the problems in and around Colombia , in line with the position of the United Nations .
We know that difficulties exist for countries of that region , and we in the European Union must be active in helping them to overcome their problems , in particular in regard to drugs and crime , and in cementing democratic principles in their governments and institutions .
in writing . - British Conservatives have voted in favour of this resolution today but wish to make clear that the reference they have reservations about - universal support for the Rome Statute and the ICC and the reference to ' the fight against the death penalty ' in paragraph 11 of the resolution - deals with an issue which is a matter of conscience for each individual Conservative MEP .
in writing . - The situation in Burma demands a unified and clear position from the EU .
Broader and more targeted sanctions form an important part of such a position and a worldwide arms embargo and the release of political prisoners including Aung San Suu Kyi is to be welcomed .
Nevertheless , the EU should not be putting pressure solely on Burma but on ASEAN countries to take steps to exclude Burma from the favourable trade rules ASEAN offers .
in writing . - ( PT ) The reduction in biodiversity is one of the greatest challenges facing society today and is becoming even more worrying in the context of climate change .
Concern about the effect of climate change on the reduction in biodiversity goes beyond merely protecting species threatened with extinction .
The reduction in biodiversity makes ecosystems less productive and less effective in the services they provide to human populations .
For example , soils with depleted biological diversity are much less able to fix carbon , accentuating the effects of climate change even further .
I therefore support this resolution , in the hope that the EU will continue to adopt an ambitious position within the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity .
in writing . - ( SV ) The June List supports international work to preserve biological diversity and biosafety .
The natural world offers riches which humans have only begun to discover and it is necessary that this treasury of future opportunities remains for generations to come .
We therefore support the resolution today .
However , it is important that the EU 's work to preserve biological diversity allows for flexibility and for EU directives and legislation to be adapted to national differences .
Our Member States have different environments and therefore require different kinds of protection .
in writing . - ( IT ) The report by Miroslav Ouzký on the ' European strategy on biological diversity ( COP 9 ) and prevention of biotechnological risks ( COP-MOP 4 ) ' calls into question the protection of biological diversity and the fair distribution of the benefits resulting from the use of such resources .
I should like to focus in particular on the issue of biological diversity and stress that the various modern techniques of genetic engineering have to be developed and used for cisgenic and not transgenic purposes in order to simulate processes which are as natural as possible .
I agree that it is important to take effective measures against biopiracy by affixing the CE mark to some of these products , and therefore to ensure that they comply with the Community directives which apply to them .
in writing . - ( FR ) This proposes nothing more nor less than the transformation of the WTO into a new centre of world governance , with a secretariat with a stronger role and prerogatives modelled on the European Commission ( staff , right of initiative , and so on ) , a parliamentary assembly , etc . , all coordinated with other bodies that want to control the world .
Paradoxically , it seeks to justify consensus , that is to say unanimity , which , I quote , ' guarantees , unlike majority ( or weighted ) voting , the equality of all members ' .
In fact , that equality is trampled upon in the European Union .
Equally paradoxically , it asks that trade negotiations and the settlement of disputes should clearly encompass social , environmental and ' humanist ' considerations , whereas applications for accession would only be considered from a commercial point of view !
A sort of ex post justification of the massive approval by this Parliament of the accession of China to the WTO , when it is now complaining of social dumping by that country , not to mention its repeated human rights violations .
in writing . - ( PT ) Despite containing various positive points , for example the need for greater coordination of activities between the WTO , ILO , UNEP , UNDP , WHO and UNCTAD , the report seeks to play down international trade liberalisation , which it does not criticise at all .
The report 's softly-softly approach is only aimed at neutralising criticism and disguising the roles of those who , like the Social Democrats , are trying to find a way out of the crisis faced by the capitalist system .
It reaffirms its support , albeit it in moderate terms , for the liberalisation of world trade , while camouflaging its consequences .
The liberalisation of international trade has promoted the opening of markets between countries with enormous disparities in their levels of economic development , to the delight and profit of the big financial and economic groups , namely the EU .
The report tries hard to hide its approval of the liberalisation of trade , and its role in the offensive led by neoliberal capitalist globalisation , which it claims will ensure the economic development and progress of peoples .
Nothing could be further from the truth .
What we have seen and continue to see is an increase in inequalities in the world , a trend that will become greater if current neoliberal policies continue .
The increase in the price of food illustrates this .
I therefore voted against the report .
in writing . - I welcome Ms Muscardini 's report ' Towards a reformed WTO ' .
Areas such as the system of representation , the organisation 's dispute settlement mechanism and its general legitimacy and transparency all require attention .
Indeed , the analysis provided in the report goes a long way in contributing to the debate on these issues .
Furthermore , increased participation of and consultation with civil society , developing countries and UN organisations on this debate is also required .
These views were reflected in my vote .
in writing . - ( PL ) The purpose for which the World Trade Organisation was created was to bring about free and multilateral trade .
It was recognized that an open market based on friendly and honest attitudes was the key to stable economic growth and reducing world poverty .
However , for many people , the WTO is still something of a puzzle .
This is due to the lack of transparency in its activities and inappropriate information being made public .
The present reduced G4 and G6 working groups are often seen as meetings of the representatives of large countries that are imposing , or that want to impose , their own ideas on other members .
Another problem is the lack of technical and legal assistance from the WTO for less developed countries that do not gain any economic benefits from increased market liberalisation .
Countries such as India , China or Brazil are treated as developing countries , as a result of which they can benefit from more advantageous conditions and various bonds .
I believe this to be a mistake in WTO policy .
The WTO does not take into account the massive potential of these countries and their resources .
The countries take advantage of this fact and often use price dumping in trade relations , which is harmful to other countries .
There should be a clearer division of developing countries that takes into account factors such as economic strength , economic development , GDP growth and growth in exports .
in writing . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am voting for Mrs Muscardini 's report on a reform of the World Trade Organisation .
A reform of the multilateral trade system and , in particular , the work of the World Trade Organisation , has been needed for some time , especially in view of the current size of the Organisation which now has 151 members .
I should also like to stress the urgent need for reform in connection with the developing countries .
At present , countries whose trade is now flourishing , including China and India , enjoy preferential and advantageous treatment as they are still considered to be ' developing ' countries on a par with less developed countries .
I agree with the suggestion to establish groups of developing countries which are clearer , more comparable and more in keeping with the actual economic circumstances of the country in question .
in writing . - Mr Markov 's oral question to the Commission on the EU-Gulf Cooperation Council free trade agreement ( FTA ) is to be supported .
An FTA between the EU and the Gulf Cooperation Council should contain provisions on labour and environmental norms and human rights .
Without such provisions , the social fibre of FTAs is jeopardised .
Calls for a renewal of the mandate need to be acknowledged if the EU hopes to remain credible in defending a socially responsible economic policy throughout the world .
I voted in line with my expressed views on this issue .
in writing . - ( SV ) We Swedish social democrats have chosen to vote in favour of this report .
We consider that economic instruments must be drawn up at EU level to tackle the many challenges which exist in the environment and climate field .
The report also emphasises the principle of subsidiarity .
However , we chose not to support the text on specific measures for low-income households .
There are simpler and better general measures to compensate for the social consequences of environmental policy instruments .
We also chose to vote against Amendments 2 and 3 .
These cover such important areas as the efficiency of combustion engines and the use of pesticides .
We consider , however , that this is best done through Parliament 's ongoing work to reduce the climate impact of cars and to regulate the use of pesticides .
in writing . - The PPE-DE welcomes the report on the Green Paper on market-based instruments for environment and related policy purposes .
We believe it contains many good and constructive elements that serve to emphasise the importance of MBIs in developing and implementing environmental policy .
For this we reason we have voted in favour of the report .
However , the PPE-DE would like to draw attention to the fact that it voted against the second part of paragraph 26 , which calls on the Commission to put forward a legislative proposal for a Community minimum tax on CO2 before the end of 2008 .
We feel strongly that this goes against the principle of subsidiarity ; it is up to the Member States to determine taxation policy .
The PPE-DE would also emphasise that the concept is incompatible with the continued development of an efficient EU emissions trading system .
The PPE-DE would further stress that while a separate vote was not requested on paragraph 42 of the report our opposition based on these same principles extends to the notion of an EU-wide kerosene tax and NOx emission charges .
in writing . - ( SV ) We support the report on the Green Paper on market-based instruments for environment and related policy purposes , , as it addresses many of the mechanisms which can be used to protect or improve the environment , e.g. emissions rights trading , the polluter pays principle and a reform of the subsidies which are harmful to the environment .
However , we reject the idea of introducing a ' CO2 card ' for individuals and SMEs , on which their energy consumption and level of greenhouse gas emissions is recorded .
Firstly , we consider that the practical difficulties pose an obstacle in themselves .
We also consider that the proposal conflicts with personal privacy and freedom , especially as no justification is given as to why this data is to be collected or what it will be used for .
We also reject the proposal on CO2 duties .
Free trade means that the earth 's resources are used as efficiently as possible .
The focus should be on international treaties on the environment .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of Anne Ferreira 's report on the Green Paper on market-based instruments for environmental and related policy purposes because I agree that the use of these instruments is essential for the pursuit of feasible and effective environmental policies .
Measures that improve the operation of markets , such as the use of the polluter pays principle , which allows the costing of economic activities that cause environmental harm , are a form of state intervention that should be encouraged , as experience in the field of environmental protection has shown .
in writing . - ( PT ) I support Anne Ferreira 's report because I believe that the use of market-based instruments such as taxation , subsidies and emissions trading , for environmental policy purposes are important tools , although not the only ones , for the promotion of sustainable development .
Although I agree with this report in general terms , I think it would be premature to introduce a single European tax on CO2 , because it would be difficult to implement alongside the European Union Emissions Trading Scheme .
In addition , I do not agree that the existing Community rules on environmental protection should be replaced by market-based instruments which , by their very nature , do not provide an alternative to regulation .
in writing . - ( SV ) Environmental issues are one of the most important fields for EU cooperation .
Cross-border environmental pollution in Europe cannot be tackled at national state level .
This gives the EU an obvious role in such areas .
It is , however , very worrying that the report shamelessly uses climate issues as arguments for increasing the political power of the EU and opening the doors to bureaucracy and protectionism .
There are many examples , and all of them are wrong .
The report demands common taxation , rethinking the notion of free competition and the introduction of so-called border adjustment instruments , in other words duties .
The Member States themselves must be allowed to determine how they deal with environmental policy .
It is in competition between countries and companies to find effective solutions to environmental problems that creativity can flourish , not by bureaucratising our existence .
We have therefore voted against the report .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report carries on a European Commission initiative and establishes a series of European Parliament guidelines for the creation of market-based instruments for environmental and related policy purposes , a prospect that we view with the most serious reservations and concerns .
It aims to reduce pollution and protect the environment through the use of market-based measures and the implementation of the polluter pays principle , the costs of which , in the final analysis , will be borne by consumers , generally families that already pay most environmental taxes .
The report refers to the payment of charges for water consumption that include the cost of using the resource and the environmental cost .
We know there is already support for replacing income tax by taxes based on the polluter pays principle in individual countries and that some also see it as a future EU tax .
In addition to measures in the field of taxation , it introduces a CO2 emissions trading scheme which is dominated by the major economic interests and will promote financial speculation .
I therefore voted against .
in writing . - Labour MEPs support market-based instruments to tackle climate change such as the EU ETS system .
We welcome much of the Green Paper and the report .
However , there are a number of areas where we have reservations .
These include inter alia :
para 47 : Eurovignette : We understand the Commission will come forward with a legislative proposal on the Eurovignette in the future and we will reserve our position until then .
para 50 : Energy Tax Directive : some derogations on fossil fuel taxes for domestic consumers have social policy objectives which must be respected .
in writing . - ( SV ) As a Swedish Liberal I have a fundamentally sceptical approach to common EU taxes .
However , this is not the case when it comes to environmental taxes .
Nevertheless , we must be careful to consider which combination of instruments will be particularly effective .
I am a firm believer in emissions rights trading and am in principle not against a carbon dioxide tax .
However , a great deal of thought must go into weighing them up against each other , and as the proposals were set against each other I found it appropriate to take a stand .
Mrs Ferreira 's report was a mixed bag .
Most of it was positive , however , and I therefore did not need to think for long before voting in favour , although not everything was good .
Paragraph 66 , which was not selected for a separate vote , was , for example , about introducing a ' CO2 card ' for individuals and SMEs .
It is true that politics is about wanting something .
However , ideally it should actually be feasible too .
in writing . - ( DE ) I am voting against this report because the proposed instruments smack of the planned economy rather than the market economy .
I do not share the prevailing understanding of what constitutes a market economy .
in writing . - ( FR ) The issues raised in the report by Mr Radwan seem highly technical but they are very important .
The public authorities should certainly have a say in the definition of accounting standards , because these have such an impact on all the actors in the economy and even on national tax revenue .
It is not right for a private body to be set up de facto as a real legislator , without any political control , especially since the technical legitimacy of the IASB is increasingly being called into question by its approach to the issues involved , which is more theoretical than professional .
Besides that , its geographical and professional composition leaves something to be desired .
Yes , new standards should only be adopted if they are useful and necessary , after a careful cost-benefit analysis .
Yes , the role of the IASB should be confined to companies quoted on the stock exchange and should not include SMEs .
As for the ' fair value ' principle , it favours a short-term approach and makes financial results the dominant factor in company management .
It increases financiarisation of the economy and volatility of the markets .
The European Union should refuse to apply that standard .
However , the position of the rapporteur on that subject is not all that clear .
We are therefore abstaining on his report .
in writing . - ( PT ) Since January 2005 , EU publicly traded companies have been obliged to use international accounting standards for their consolidated financial statements .
These standards have been developed by a private organisation ( the International Accounting Standards Committee Foundation and the International Accounting Standards Board ( IASCF / IASB ) ) that is funded by private sources ( mainly companies in the same field ) and not subject to any public control .
Although the present report includes aspects that we have reservations about , it does propose certain measures to deal with the situation and is cautious about the possibility of applying this type of international accounting standards to small and medium-sized companies .
However , it is important to be clear that it is not possible to cure the patient with palliative measures that aim to minimise the consequences of financial speculation and prevent the occurrence of situations that might lead to the collapse of the international financial system , as a way of perpetuating the increasing liberalisation of capital movements .
We have to tackle the root of the problem : the increasing control of the economy by finance capital and the increasing level of financial speculation , with the consequent flight of productive investment .
We have to put the financial systems at the service of the progress of peoples and their countries and not at the service of big capital !
in writing . - ( PL ) High quality global accounting standards are enormously important for stability in financial markets .
The International Financial Reporting Standards ( IFRS ) will , without doubt , make it easier to compare company financial reports and , as a result , will make it possible for investors to take better decisions .
I would like , however , to point out that the requirements governing small and medium sized enterprises differ from the requirements of investors in capital markets .
For this reason I agree with the rapporteur that the IFRS proposed by the International Accounting Standards Board ( IASB ) for SMEs are too complicated .
I would emphasise that I shall consistently oppose solutions that , instead of making things easier , create additional obstacles for companies .
The IASB proposal was prepared with fairly large SMEs in mind ( over 50 employees ) .
At this point I would like to mention some data published recently by EUROSTAT , according to which companies employing less than 50 workers constitute 98.7 % of all the companies active in the European Union , and just 1.1 % , about 210 000 companies , are SMEs with over 50 employees .
I would point out that I do not oppose the idea of IFRS for small and medium sized enterprises as such .
I believe , however , that the European Union should carry out a thorough investigation of what benefits SMEs might gain from adopting the IFRS .
I shall follow the continuing debate on this issue with considerable interest .
in writing . - Public oversight of bodies such as the IASCF / IASB is a controversial issue .
Work towards convergence as agreed in the IFRS can bring increasing benefits for companies working on an international basis .
Many millions of euros can be saved by avoiding double accounting .
However , the nature of such agreements being implemented by way of an untransparent and removed process calls into question public scrutiny of this procedure .
SMEs also need proper attention , and less is known as to their treatment than for large companies .
Furthermore , the principle of fair value is one which does not need to be eroded by alternatives and interpretations beyond that which it is reasonable to accept .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 12.55 and resumed at 15.00 . )

Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
1 .
Zimbabwe
The next item is six motions for a resolution on Zimbabwe .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , Zimbabwe 's President Mugabe was once the hero of the liberation struggle .
Thanks to him former Southern Rhodesia gave way to a new state of Zimbabwe which gave a democratic voice to the black majority population , after the end of British colonial rule and in the teeth of a white-led policy of apartheid which rebelled against that colonial authority .
For years Mugabe was an incredibly moderate ruler .
He did not pursue the pressing imperative of redistributing land ownership .
He was radical only in his objection to homosexuals .
Only when he was in danger of losing power did he remember his earlier promises about land reform .
Since then his ill-considered actions have reduced his country 's economy to total ruin .
The redistribution of agricultural land did not follow a proper plan , but was done entirely arbitrarily , with his most aggressive supporters grabbing the land for themselves .
Worse still is the way he has treated his political opponents .
They have been relentlessly intimidated and attacked but have so far managed to survive .
Last time elections were held there was already the suspicion that the results were rigged .
This time the opposition won the parliamentary elections , but it seems that the proposed recount is designed to rob them of their victory .
The result of the presidential election has been kept secret for a full month already , so the size of Mugabe 's defeat remains unknown .
In the last few days he has declared enthusiastically that he will never change anything in his country .
He can only make good that promise by violence and oppression .
He will do it using a shipload of imported Chinese arms .
Given these circumstances it is reasonable for the outside world to concern itself with this domestic conflict .
Support for refugees , support for the opposition and pressure on the ruling party are essential ways of achieving what Mugabe himself always claimed to want , namely political power for the majority .
author . - Mr President , can I first of all express my disappointment that the Council is not represented for this important debate .
It is almost a month since elections were held in Zimbabwe .
There can be little doubt that those elections were won by the Movement for Democratic Change .
Mugabe and his henchmen should now be out of office , but we have heard virtually nothing about the election results except that Mugabe 's people are once more reacting with violence and are desperately trying to fix the election outcome .
For years now , we have pointed to Zimbabwe as the great shame on the face of Africa , a testimony to the effects of tyranny , corruption and exploitation by one man 's appalling regime .
Mugabe has destroyed a once prosperous country .
Yet , during this time , over all those years , other African leaders have stood by and either done nothing or else they have applauded the tyrant whenever they had the opportunity .
What a disgrace !
And what a scandal this has been .
And what a tragedy - not just for the people of Zimbabwe , but for Africa .
For all those years , the first key to Zimbabwe 's fate has been held by South Africa , yet Thabo Mbeki has not only failed properly to discharge his responsibilities as a mediator but he has blatantly sided with Mugabe .
The world watched dumbstruck when Mbeki announced a few days ago that there was no crisis in Zimbabwe , just normal electoral politics .
While the EU has at least imposed targeted sanctions on the Mugabe regime , it went out of its way to ensure that no one took them seriously , even inviting Mugabe , banned from travel to EU countries , to its EU-Africa Summit in Lisbon last December for reasons that were wholly false .
What diplomatic or economic effort has really been made to persuade other African countries to do the decent thing over Zimbabwe ?
The answer is very little .
Well , there is still time to do the right thing .
Jacob Zuma , the ANC leader , has now called for action on Zimbabwe .
In our motion for a resolution today we are calling on men of goodwill in the governing Zanu-PF in Zimbabwe to see the light and recognise that a transformation is on the way .
Now is the time for us to make our voice heard .
Let us bring about that democratic change that at last is required for the sake of the people of Zimbabwe .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , both the political situation and internal security in Zimbabwe took a sudden turn for the worse after the March parliamentary and presidential elections in that country .
The very fact that the results of the elections have not yet been announced illustrates the breakdown of the rule of law and it also shows the totalitarian nature of authority in that African state .
Today , in Africa , democracy itself is under serious threat .
The regime has again used force against the opposition and against the democratic aspirations of Zimbabwe 's inhabitants .
For this reason a decisive reaction is needed from the European Union and this should include our Parliament .
We should react to the situation , but we should also condemn the action of China , which , by sending a cargo ship full of arms to the African coast , is trying to support the Mugabe regime .
For this reason I am pleased to support the clause in our joint motion for a resolution calling on China to stop sending arms to Zimbabwe .
Only in this way will it be possible to reduce the number of victims of the state terror to which the citizens of that country are being subjected .
author . - Mr President , following many years of British colonial rule and a period of apartheid dictatorship by Ian Smith , the then Rhodesia , now Zimbabwe , was led to independence by a group of freedom-fighting persons , including Mr Mugabe .

Nobody can deny the contribution of these people to achieving freedom for Zimbabwe but , as is so often the case , excessive and long-lasting power , along with opportunism and an uncontrolled appetite for personal materialistic gain , soon corrupted the altruistic spirit of freedom and democracy and turned the ruling regime of Mugabe into an oppressive governing body with no forward vision and with excessive totalitarian manifestations .
The result has been the international isolation of Zimbabwe and the continuing slide of the state into poverty and corruption misery .
In the recent elections the people of Zimbabwe demonstrated their desire for a much-needed change , but the Mugabe regime does not want to relinquish power and it is now seriously risking throwing the country into anarchy and civil war .
Through this motion for a resolution we are sending the message that the wish of the people of Zimbabwe , expressed through the electoral process , must be respected .
We are also making sure that those in Africa who say that they really care about the situation in Zimbabwe fully assume their responsibilities , view the reality of the situation , assess Mugabe , not as he was many years ago but as he is today , and act decisively to bring about democratic transition in Zimbabwe .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , in the light of events , I feel that the situation in Zimbabwe certainly deserves our consideration at this urgent sitting .
I therefore add my voice , how could I not , to the voices of those who have already condemned the violence on the part of government forces against opposition groups , journalists and human rights supporters
I also hope that this resolution will at least help to support those who are trying from inside and outside the country to restore democratic process to the situation .
However , there is one particular point to which I would like to draw attention and it concerns the famous case of the Chinese vessel An Yue Jiang , carrying 77 tonnes of arms and munitions destined for Zimbabwe , which was forced to leave the South African port of Durban after dockworkers refused to unload the cargo and a court ruled that the arms could not be transported through South Africa .
According to my information , the vessel is now seeking another port at which to offload its cargo , although it seems , in view of the opposition in the area to accepting the shipment , that the vessel might return to China without accomplishing its mission .
Once again , it is clear that the vessel should never have been allowed to sail and that all governments need to get together to devise an international treaty on arms transfers as soon as possible because , unfortunately , there are many places in the world like Zimbabwe , which should never be allowed to receive arms or munitions of any description .
Let this example act as a spur towards the negotiation of a forceful and legally binding ATT ( Arms Trade Treaty ) , which so many NGOs in the IANSA network have been calling for for years , as indeed has this Parliament .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , it will shortly be a month since presidential elections took place in Zimbabwe .
Surely this was ample time to count the vote and announce the result .
Currently a recount continues in 23 constituencies at the request of the ruling Zanu-PF Party .
There are serious concerns regarding how ballot boxes have been stored and it cannot be ruled out that ballot papers are being tampered with in the process of this recount .
Exit polls suggested that a second round would be necessary in the presidential race .
If Mr Mugabe now announces his victory , it must be questioned .
Let us hope that a second round will indeed take place .
However , the international community must keep up the pressure to ensure that this round is as free and fair as possible .
Election observers and foreign journalists must be allowed into the country .
In the longer term , reforms - including the creation of an independent electoral commission - will be needed to ensure that such a farce can never be called a democratic election again .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , the Constitution of Zimbabwe states that ' no person shall be subjected to torture or to inhuman or degrading punishment or other such treatment ' .
The violations of national and international law are so numerous that there is simply no time even to count them here .
I would like to address the following to two people : the Commissioner-General of Police , Augustine Chihuri , and army commander Constantine Chiwenga .
Torture and other cruel , inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment are prohibited absolutely under international law : for example , under Article 5 of the African Charter of Human and People 's Rights and Article 7 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
Zimbabwe is a state party of both instruments .
I call on you to bring an immediate end to human rights violations by police officers and soldiers , and I urge you to ensure that all allegations of police and military involvement in human rights abuses , including violent attacks on individuals , are promptly , independently and impartially investigated .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the dictatorial government of Mr Mugabe has transformed Zimbabwe from a country with a blossoming economy into a complete disaster .
Inflation has reached 100 000 % per annum .
GNP has fallen by a third in the last few years and the decree on reducing prices by 50 % has resulted in shops being empty .
Recently every single company in the country has been nationalised .
In addition , life expectancy in Zimbabwe is among the lowest in the world : 37 years for men and 34 for women .
One quarter of the population is infected with HIV and about 80 % live below the poverty line .
If we want changes in Zimbabwe to take place peacefully - and change is absolutely essential - then we have to ensure that this takes place through elections and not through bloody riots and revolution .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , on 29 March 2008 presidential and local elections took place in Zimbabwe .
However , no results have yet been announced .
The blockade on the publication of the results of the presidential elections and the accompanying repression of the opposition are an unacceptable form of stifling the democratic aspirations of the people of Zimbabwe .
The fact that on 14 April 2008 the High Court in Zimbabwe rejected an urgent application from the opposition group , the Movement for Democratic Change , for the electoral commission to release the results of the elections shows the dependence of the judiciary on the current incumbent of the presidential office , Robert Mugabe , who is afraid of losing power .
We roundly condemn the breaches of human rights and the use of force against the opposition .
To supply arms to this country at this time is to encourage the possibility of an outbreak of civil war and is equally deserving of condemnation .
For this reason , too , special appreciation is due to the port employees in South Africa , who refused to unload the arms sent from China to the security forces in Zimbabwe .
( NL ) Mr President , how many times is it now that the human rights situation in Zimbabwe has featured on our agenda here as a matter for urgent debate ?
How many times have we stood here impotently railing against the way in which Mugabe oppresses his people ?
We have not always been unanimous about everything , but on Zimbabwe we do have some kind of consensus .
The disgraceful spectacle of the recent elections is proof yet again that this unscrupulous dictator does not give a damn about democracy .
The policy of ethnic cleansing against white farmers continues unabated .
Mugabe holds the opposition , the international community , and his own people in contempt .
The weakest in Zimbabwe are the first to suffer , but we have known that for years .
And yet the European Community rolled out the red carpet for this man last December at the EU-African summit in Lisbon .
Only Britain 's Prime Minister Gordon Brown stuck to his guns and boycotted this unsavoury little get-together .
We all know it , but the nub of the lamentable situation is this .
Mugabe knows that he has support .
He knows he is backed by a number of fellow-heads of state , or shall we say fellow-dictators in Africa , who dismiss any criticism of his criminal policy as ' neo-colonialism ' .
South Africa 's role is especially perfidious here .
Until such time as the African Union unequivocally condemns him , Mugabe will carry on with impunity .
Mugabe knows he also has the backing of China , which wants to take over Europe 's role in Africa and does it by telling corrupt heads of state that China will not give them any grief about human rights and good governance .
The Chinese regime is showing its true colours not only in Tibet , but also in Darfur and Zimbabwe .
That is the essence of today 's debate and it is the shared culpability of China and Africa which we must condemn and highlight more forcefully .
Mr President , events in Zimbabwe would be ridiculous if they were not so dramatic and could in fact become quite tragic .
What is the purpose of elections ?
The purpose is the democratic election of a government .
This means the voting process must be free and fair , the votes must be counted , the results published and the people 's choice respected .
That is not the case in Mugabe 's Zimbabwe .
The non-publication of results and the recount in the way it has been ordered are completely absurd .
The international community must follow this attentively .
We must listen to the warnings of religious leaders who appeal to our sense of responsibility since they are afraid that this could result in a very violent crisis of genocidal dimensions .
This is also a test for international bodies and we must put pressure there - the SADC , the African Union and the UN .
Finally , concerning the Chinese vessel : there are reports that it may be going back to China , as Commissioner Michel informed us on Tuesday .
However , we need confirmation , and I urge the Commission to put pressure on China - it must be a political decision and not just a decision of the shipping company .
( DE ) Mr President , in the old Rhodesia there used to be a tourism poster urging people to ' Come to Rhodesia and see the ruins of Zimbabwe ' .
In later years , the slogan was turned around to make a double-edged joke : ' Come to Zimbabwe and see the ruins of Rhodesia ' .
Today the poster might well read : ' Come to Zimbabwe and see the ruins of Zimbabwe ' - referring not to the famous stonework , but to ruined hopes of prosperity and democracy .
I believe the European Union has a duty to use the current situation - in which , despite manipulation of various kinds , the Zimbabwean Opposition 's courage has , after all , won it a major victory - to advance democracy and the rule of law in this important African state .
The people there have suffered enough .
We must , however , find ways of supporting them that are not liable to be interpreted as neo-colonialism .
So it is important that what we do should also have the backing of neighbouring countries and of the Zimbabwean people themselves .
That is why I welcome the first positive steps on the part of the African National Congress - although it needs to do more !
That is why I particularly welcome the brave example set by the dockworkers .
We need to state very clearly that it is the shared task of the European Union , the African Union and the various powers of southern Africa to ensure that the opportunity now created , following the elections , is properly used .
Mr Mugabe already has his place in history ; each day that passes merely makes it a less impressive one .

( SK ) The opposition 's fears that Robert Mugabe would decide to use force to cover up the defeat of his ruling party in the elections of 29 March have come to pass : 36 demonstrators were arrested during a peaceful march to protest against the delay in the announcement of the election results .
China 's interest in Africa 's oil is another problem facing the country , which is in a deep economic crisis , with hundreds of thousands of people leaving to find a better life elsewhere .
In exchange for weapons , China supports corruption and a dictatorial regime , and is one of the largest trading partners of , and providers of aid to , Robert Mugabe 's regime .
I agree with the European Parliament 's resolution on Zimbabwe , which supports the opposition , condemns the frequent shows of racism by Robert Mugabe 's supporters and calls on China to make amends .
Mr President , the people of Zimbabwe deserve justice and the rule of law .
Last month 's elections indicate the possible end of tyranny .
I think the very fact that Mugabe 's government has delayed acknowledging the result and is trying to recount the votes indicates - and is proof - that they feel themselves defeated .
I am especially worried about the widespread violence in the meantime , directed against supposed supporters of the opposition - people having been beaten up and killed just for differing in their views from the government positions .
I would also like to mention the fact that this regime cannot survive without outside support , so the Chinese factor is very symbolic - the ships with armaments landing in African ports .
In theory , speaking time should be ' not more than two minutes ' according to the Rules of Procedure , but I have a third speaker and I am quite willing for him to speak .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to add to what my fellow Members have said today about the issue of Zimbabwe being one that we cannot ignore .
Europe has invested and continues to invest considerable funds in Africa with the good intention of establishing democracy there and raising the average person 's standard of living .
The example of Mugabe and Zimbabwe could infect other jumped-up bureaucrats in Africa and , even in those places where there is democracy but the opposition is armed with weapons from China or from some other representatives of the Socialist world , this poses a threat to these democracies and our task is to defend them .
For this reason we cannot just let Zimbabwe get away with it and I believe these voices are right and should be heard throughout Africa .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I have followed with interest the debate in this House and I welcome the resolution that will be voted upon shortly .
First of all I would like to recall the Commission 's continued commitment to the people of Zimbabwe .
In this sense , I also would like to emphasise that the European Union remains the most important donor to Zimbabwe and we are willing to continue playing this role .
The situation in Zimbabwe , notably following the 29 March elections , is a major preoccupation and , like the European Parliament , the Commission follows events very closely .
We are working closely with Member States , both in Zimbabwe and here in Europe , to coordinate action at the level of the European Union .
We believe that Zimbabweans and the neighbouring States are the main players in finding a solution to the crisis and consequently we encourage the regional peers of Zimbabwe to play a crucial role .
Therefore the Commission supports ongoing regional efforts and the conclusions of the SADC summit , held on 13 April in Lusaka , calling for the release of the presidential election results and , in the event of a run-off , the appeal made to the Government of Zimbabwe to ensure a secure environment .
We also welcome the redeployment by the SADC of an electoral observation mission to cover the ongoing electoral process immediately and until its completion , while regretting that the EU has not been invited to deploy its own election observation mission .
In the framework of his participation in the SADC summit on poverty , held in Mauritius on 19 April , Commissioner Michel took the opportunity to meet most Presidents or Prime Ministers from SADC Member States to discuss the crisis in Zimbabwe .
He thanked them for their efforts and encouraged them to strengthen their engagement to find acceptable solutions .
I would like to confirm the Commission 's willingness to continue to make use of any opportunity for dialogue in order to find a solution to the Zimbabwe crisis .
In the meantime , the Commission and Member States continue to provide unprecedented levels of humanitarian aid to Zimbabweans .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place after the debates .
2 .
Iran : the case of Khadijeh Moghaddam
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution on the case of Khadijeh Moghaddam .
author . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , one of the darkest aspects of the theocratic Iranian regime is its misogyny .
Since the Islamic revolution in 1979 , the Iranian authorities have successively eliminated all the most important women 's rights .
Stoning , mutilation and violation of privacy and of the most basic rights are now the rule .
Society is reacting increasingly clearly and forcefully to this situation .
In this context , the movement for a million signatures that began organising around two years ago in Iran is one of the most important manifestations of Iranian civil society 's wish to demonstrate its opposition to the regime in power .
In the last two years , we have witnessed around 100 prison sentences and other punishments meted out to people who have signed the movement 's petition .
Today , after we submitted our motion , we were informed by various human rights organisations that three women activists from this movement - Nashrin Afzali , Nahid Jafari and Zeynab Peyghambarzadeh - have been sentenced to suspended prison sentences and whipping .
This is an intolerable situation and I appeal to all my fellow Members to show their repudiation of the situation and express their support for Iranian women .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , Iran is a country where only people prepared to be terrorised by the military and conservative theologians can bear to live .
Freedom , democracy and human rights have no meaning there .
They do hold elections , but candidates have to be endorsed by the conservative clergy , so dissenters are by definition excluded .
Many Iranians have fled the regime of terror in their country and many of them would no longer be alive if they had not done so .
We should find room for these refugees in Europe instead of sending them back or treating them as terrorists .
At the same time there is no denying that a section of the Iranian population approves of the killing of homosexuals , discrimination against women and the suppression of ethnic minorities .
That section abhorred the western decadence in their country during the time of the Pahlavi dynasty , who were driven into exile in the late 1970s after making Iran an extension of America and Europe .
There was no talk of democracy then either , and opponents of the regime were persecuted or exiled .
The mistakes of the West were largely responsible for the present-day regime of terror coming to power .
If Iran had had a real chance of becoming a modern nation under Prime Minister Mossadeq in the early 1950s , it would never have become a breeding ground for the rulers of today .
There are movements for change in Iran , but they are subjected to generalised harassment .
Mrs Khadijeh Moghaddam was seized on 8 April and charged with ' the spreading of propaganda against the state , disruption of public opinion and actions against national security . '
She has since been released , but the tight restrictions on women simply continue .
We must show solidarity with the oppressed .
author . - ( FI ) Mr President , as is evident from the resolution , coercive measures are being used in Iran to try and silence those who speak up for women 's rights there .
They are arrested , interrogated and sentenced to prison .
Some are even threatened with stoning .
The work of NGOs has been made very difficult and there are restrictions on freedom of speech and assembly .
Furthermore , at the beginning of January Zanan magazine , which spoke for equality , was closed down .
It is also worrying that Iran has still not ratified the UN Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women .
The Iranian human rights lawyer , Mehrangiz Kar , has said that Iran 's legal system is incompatible with the UN Convention on women 's rights , because its constitution cannot go against Sharia law .
Most Muslim countries , however , have ratified the Convention .
The question arises as to whether Iran 's decision-makers and authorities believe that politically active women who are critical of the system pose a real threat to Iranian society .
These persistent and courageous women represent a huge force for change .
It is important that the EU shows its support for these Iranians who are fighting for fundamental human rights .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , there are serious breaches of human rights in Iran , in particular the threat to stone nearly ten women to death - I am speaking here of Iran , Khayrieh , Kobra N , Fatemeh , Ashraf Kalhori , Shamameh Ghorbani , Leyla Ghomi , Hajar and the sisters Zohreh and Azar Kabiriniat , and other people , too .
The use of the death penalty for children and for those who talk about women 's rights demands a strong reaction from the democratic world .
The arrest of those involved in the ' million signatures ' campaign shows how society is being prevented from exercising its right to speak out on important issues .
These actions must be condemned .
European Union bodies should monitor the human rights situation in Iran .
We would like to see a group of observers sent to Iran and for them to prepare a detailed report that the European Parliament can consider , so that it can define its own position and put forward its proposals for measures that could help to improve the human rights situation in Iran .
author . - Mr President , however much one tries to be understanding about the different society , lifestyle and circumstances prevailing in a deeply Muslim state like Iran , one cannot help but feel shocked and angry at the grossly undemocratic and brutal treatment of women in that country .
Some examples include the exclusion of women from most senior state offices and appointment as judges , the discriminatory rights of women in marriage , divorce , child custody and inheritance , the fact that evidence given in court by women carries only half the weight of that given by a man , the legal age of marriage of women at just 13 years and the condemnation of women to severe and degrading punishment , and even death , by primitive and barbaric means , even for such presumed crimes as having an extramarital relationship .
Instead of the governing regime of Iran making efforts to improve the situation , attempts are presently under way to make matters worse .
An example is the draft bill on family protection , which is currently under consideration and which aims at further legitimising polygamy , temporary marriage and the unilateral right of men to arbitrary divorce and child custody .
In addition , the Iranian authorities are conducting an ever-increasing campaign of repression of female activists and women 's rights defenders in general .
We call upon the Iranian regime to try to free itself from religious fanaticism and long superseded , failed political philosophies and , using common sense , to try to bring its country back into the 21st century , rather than plunging it further into the dark ages of the extreme Muslim totalitarianism of the past .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , I was aware of the case of Mokarrameh Ebrahimi due to the international campaign waged at the time by Amnesty International and Stop Stoning Forever , the purpose of which was to obtain the release of this woman who had been sentenced to death by stoning for having had an extra-marital relationship .
The good news is that thanks , at least in part , to that campaign , Ebrahimi was freed on 17 March 2008 after spending eleven years in prison .
The bad news is that her partner was less fortunate and was stoned to death one year ago , just as least ten other women and two men are threatened with death by stoning in Iran at the moment .
Sadly , this is not just an isolated incident in a country where breaches of human rights , including women 's rights , is achieving disturbing records .
Executions doubled in 2007 , making Iran the country with most executions per capita after Saudi Arabia and , together with Yemen , these are the three countries in which there were most executions of persons under the age of eighteen .
Since the start of the Stop Stoning Forever campaign , in October 2006 , six people have escaped death by stoning , others have been granted a reprieve and many cases are under review .
However , I should point out that a great deal of persecution and repression is being suffered by those who dare to be human rights activists in Iran .
The Islamic Consultative Assembly is currently revising the Iranian Penal Code , but even so , the sentence of death by stoning is to be replaced , in the most favourable cases , by other methods of execution or whipping .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , this imposing building here in Strasbourg is named after Louise Weiss , who fell foul of the police and the courts in the democratically enlightened France of the inter-war years because she campaigned for women 's suffrage .
We cannot , of course , compare that situation to the totalitarian dictatorship in Iran , but the memory should serve to teach us Europeans a certain degree of humility .
The regime in Iran is an unacceptable , totalitarian one , but Iran is a big , multifaceted country , where the forces of reform are steadily gathering strength .
The initiators of this petition , for example , are among the reform movements to which we must lend our emphatic support , and which have now spread to include even members of the Khomeini family .
There are already more women to be found in politics , in administration and in the academic world in Iran than in most other Islamic or Asian states .
That may not tally with the clichéd view but it is a fact .
We need to build on this plurality in Iran in order to bring about the ultimate downfall of the unacceptable , totalitarian regime there .
That is a tremendous challenge for us as Europeans .
I am therefore very grateful to my colleague , Albert Dess , for helping me on Monday to keep this important item on the agenda - because , ladies and gentlemen , we need to make Iran one of our priorities in the context of Parliament 's work to support human rights !
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , the situation of women in Iran is serious .
Religion is often used as an excuse for violations of human rights .
It is humiliating to learn that even today women can be punished by lashing or even with the death penalty .
It is essential for Iran to sign the United Nations Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women as soon as possible .
This important document has already been signed by 185 countries .
Iran , however , is a genuine ' blot ' in the region because all the countries which border it have already acceded to the Convention .
I warmly welcome the release of the champion of the fight against discrimination against women , Khadijeh Moghaddam .
But let us be honest , she had to spend nine long days in a detention cell .
The one-million-signature campaign she initiated was a forceful step towards establishing women 's rights .
It is unacceptable for women ever to be jailed for fighting for equal rights .
Violence against women in Iran must stop ; women must have their say on all issues .
Iran cannot class itself as an exception in the world 's global village .
( PL ) Mr President , today there was a meeting between Mrs Rajavi , head of the National Council of Resistance of Iran , and French politicians and representatives of the European Parliament .
In her presentation Mrs Rajavi clearly stated how important women 's rights are for the democratic Iranian opposition , showing once again that the opposition gives us hope that change will take place in Iran .
All that is necessary is for us to take certain measures .
The first step is to comply with court rulings stating that the Iranian Muhajedin should be removed from the list of terrorist organisations .
The second , which is perhaps even more important , is finally to recognise the National Council of Resistance of Iran as the representative of democratic Iran , and this is where we should place our hopes for peaceful change .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have to give in to the temptation to cite an example , and in my view a very tangible one , of the credibility of the Iranian government authorities .
Yours truly , Carlo Fatuzzo , standing before you now , was said to be a supporter of anti-Iranian terrorists , I repeat , anti-Iranian , to my great satisfaction of course , at a public and official meeting between the Iranian Foreign Minister and a Commission delegation from the European Union-Iran delegation .
That was five years ago , I repeat five years ago .
I leave it to you , Mr President , and my many colleagues , to judge the threat that I represent to the regime in Iran .
That is how credible the ministers and leaders of Iran are .
Mr President , for almost 30 years , the Islamic Republic of Iran has been a major menace to human rights and democracy .
Women have been the first target of this extremist branch of Islam .
Their rights have been hijacked by the mullahs ' regime .
Even young girls are not exceptions , and a nine-year-old girl is treated as an adult and punished by flogging , execution and even stoning .
However , many women have not complied with the regime .
It is encouraging to see that the main democratic opposition movement , the National Council of Resistance , is led by a woman like Mrs Maryam Rajavi .
Resolutions are good , but they are not enough .
We need to support such women in deeds .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to remind the House that when I was a national MP in the Italian Parliament , I had substantial dealings with the Iranian resistance and was in favour of the decisive action to protect human rights which its representatives advocated .
I received a veiled rebuke from the government at the time because I was told that clear-cut and explicit positions could not be taken for reasons of realpolitik .
I say this because this debate should ultimately be looking at a fundamental point : while we in this House set great store by the humanitarian commitment of Europe as a whole and of the European Parliament , concrete pressures to do with oil , self-interest and opportunism run counter to that commitment .
That is what needs to be combated !
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission shares Members ' concern regarding Ms Khadijeh Moghaddam and the cases of women and human rights defenders harassed by the Iranian authorities .
Ms Moghaddam is a leader of the One Million Signatures petition campaign , which lobbies to change Iranian laws which contradict the principles of gender equality and human rights .
We welcome the news of Ms Modghaddam 's release , albeit on a high bail .
However , we must underline the fact that two other members of the signature campaign , Ms Hana Abdi and Ms Ronak Safazadeh , have been detained since autumn 2007 .
Moreover , we deplore the recent sentencing of four more members of the campaign for allegedly acting against national security , following their participation in a rally outside a Tehran courtroom two years ago : Ms Zeynab Peyghambarzadeh to two years ' suspended imprisonment and Ms Nashrin Afzali , Ms Nahid Jafari and Ms Minoo Mortazi to six months ' suspended imprisonment and 10 lashes .
We vigorously condemn such sentences , which can only be seen as part of the ongoing effort to intimidate and humiliate these peaceful women campaigners .
The campaign for women 's rights and equality is very important and significant in the Iranian context .
Each of these courageous women deserves our full support .
I call on the Iranian authorities to release unconditionally Ms Abdi and Ms Safazadeh and drop all charges against them and their fellow women 's rights campaigners .
Alas , many other human rights defenders are at risk in Iran .
I specifically call on the authorities to release unconditionally Mr Mansour Ossanlou and Mr Emadedin Baghi and to end the harassment , intimidation and political persecution of human rights defenders .
The Commission reiterates its concern about the closure , two months ago , of the independent women 's magazine Zanan .
The Commission appeals to the Iranian authorities to re-allow the publication of Zanan .
The EU will consider Iran 's attitude towards Zanan , as well as towards the women 's campaign for equal rights , as an indicator of its willingness to seriously engage in the improvement of the human rights situation .
We call on the Islamic Republic of Iran to fully comply with its obligations under international conventions , notably the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
We also recall that , when standing for election at the UN Human Rights Council , Iran affirmed that it was considering accession to the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women .
The European Union has raised issues relating to human rights , including women 's rights and the promotion of gender equality , with the Iranian authorities and will continue to do so .
Without a systematic improvement of the human rights situation in Iran , our relations with Iran cannot develop properly .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place after the debates .
3 .
Chad
The next item is the debate on six motions for a resolution on Chad .
author . - ( NL ) Mr President , colonial rule in the former territories of French West Africa and French Central Africa came to an end between 1958 and 1960 .
This was not the outcome of a protracted conflict and the resulting emergence of a collective national consciousness , but rather a way of preventing the development of liberation movements .
It was a top-down rather than a bottom-up process .
From French overseas departments they first became autonomous territories and then independent states .
With the exception of Guinea ( Conakry ) , French influence has nevertheless always remained greater in these states than in other former colonies .
The big desert state of Chad still has a French military presence and that has certainly influenced who was allowed to rule the country and who was not .
This powerful European influence has not led to the development of European standards of democracy and human rights in these countries .
The states and their national borders derive not from domestic movements which shaped an independent state , but simply from the colonial past .
This means that ethnic differences can lead to ethnic confrontations .
In countries like these that means a continuing struggle for power , over who are the first-class citizens and who the second-class citizens .
Ethnic and geographical diversity is often not reflected , or only poorly reflected , in the composition of the government .
The problems this causes cannot , in my Group 's view , simply be resolved by stationing a new body of European troops there .
There has always been a military presence there , and it has made the present situation worse rather than better .
The answer lies not in stabilising the current situation , which only benefits the current rulers , but in making space for change from the bottom up .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , in the draft resolution we refer to the Cotonou Agreement and , specifically , to the section on humanitarian aid .
I must however remind you about an unfortunate occurrence during the last ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly in Ljubljana , which took place one month ago .
The ACP side rejected the Assembly 's compromise resolution on Chad .
What is more , those promoting the rejection of this resolution were delegates from countries that are Chad 's neighbours , even though their concerns had been taken into account in the compromise text .
It was difficult for us to understand why our partners from Africa decided to reject this resolution .
I hope that the European Parliament resolution , which we will adopt in a few minutes ' time , will fill the gap created by the absence of the much-anticipated ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly resolution .
I think we can all agree with the statement by Chad 's President Idriss Deby that looking after 300 000 Sudanese refugees and 170 000 internal refugees in Chad is a heavy burden .
European society is aware of this , and this is why 14 European Union countries have decided to carry out the UN Security Council mandate and are beginning to send 4 000 soldiers to Chad .
We are pleased that the European Union has taken responsibility and showed solidarity in this way , even though the scope of this solidarity could be wider .
Most of the 14 countries that have decided to take part in the mission , including , to name but a few , Ireland , Finland , Romania and Poland , have no historic or economic links with Chad .
These countries , in directing assistance to Chad , have displayed not just solidarity , but also selflessness in their desire to help defenceless civilians , victims of the conflict in Darfur and of the internal strife in Chad , refugees in camps on the Saudi-Chad border and staff in humanitarian missions working in the region .
I hope that this mission will be effective in resolving the conflict and will help the people of Chad and Sudan , and we wish the people of Chad successful , free , democratic and transparent elections in 2009 .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , since 3 February 2008 there has been no information at all about the fate of Ibni Oumar Mahamat Saleh , the spokesman for the Coordination of Political Parties for the Defence of the Constitution .
Torture , imprisonment and various types of repression are systematically used against the opposition .
There are restrictions on free speech , and the right to a free trial is also limited .
The security forces as well as armed groups from Sudan threaten civilians and attack humanitarian organisations , especially in the eastern part of Chad .
In Chad there are over 250 000 refugees from Sudan and about 57 000 refugees from the Central African Republic , as well as refugees from Darfur .
The conflict in Darfur has spilled over into Chadian territory .
The armed conflict is accompanied by a humanitarian catastrophe : there is not enough food for refugees , there are sudden increases in the price of food , barely 20 % of children attend school , children are forced into the armed forces , and violence against children is becoming increasingly widespread , especially sexually-motivated attacks on girls .
It is vital to enable refugees to return to their own homes .
It is vital to stop not just the armed conflict in Chad but also the fall-out from the crisis in Darfur .
Only a resolution to the armed conflicts can possibly give a chance to help the 4.5 million people in Darfur and Eastern Chad .
Only an end to war can make it possible to reduce violations of human rights .
Images of skeletal women sitting outside their burnt-out houses with hungry children in their arms , images that were common in Poland and in other European countries during the Second World War , are now a daily reality in Chad and Sudan . Europe was able to emerge from those tragic circumstances .
Let us help the people of Chad and Sudan to regain hope .
Let us stop further armed struggle with a peace mission .
author . - Mr President , Chad , the fifth largest nation in Africa , has had a very troublesome post-colonial history .
Civil conflict , guerrilla warfare , military coups , religious and ethnic divisions , combined with a hostile , semi-desert environment and a problematic regional neighbourhood , have led to almost continuous unrest in the country .
Consequently - and despite the fact that Chad is rich in gold , uranium and oil - Chad is a state suffering from severe poverty and resultant poor health and social conditions .
The present governing regime , led by President Deby , having come to power after a coup in 1990 and with a number of dubious electoral wins since then , has been reportedly involved in numerous acts of severe oppression and persecution against opposition politicians , human rights activists and journalists .
Arbitrary arrests and detentions , torture and extrajudicial killings have been documented .
Let us hope that this motion for a resolution will send a clear message to Mr Deby , as well to all other parties involved in that troublesome part of the world , that the time has come for national reconciliation , the strengthening of democratic processes and respect for human rights .
At the same time , this resolution aims at trying to reassure the people of Chad that the European Union stands by their side in their hour of need and will continue to do its utmost in order to assist in the achievement of peace and prosperity for all the citizens of their country .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , according to consistent witness evidence , Omar Mohamed Saleh was arrested at his home by armed men in uniform on 3 February 2008 .
Since then , there has been no official word and his family and political colleagues fear that after his arrest he was cold-bloodedly executed .
This lack of information cannot be allowed to continue and President Idriss Deby must pass on the information that he has .
We are therefore calling on the French Government in particular , which has , as we know , provided aid to the President of Chad , to obtain all possible information on the disappearance of Mohamed Saleh , about whom we are extremely concerned , and also on the fate of all the other political prisoners .
That cannot , in any event , disguise the tragic situation of over a million people caught in the crossfire .
For that reason , it is imperative to open dialogue between all the parties , the Chad Government , the opposition and the rebels , to which they committed themselves with a view to free elections in 2009 , in accordance with international standards .
The aim of the Eufor mission is to keep the peace between Chad and Sudan and to guarantee the security of humanitarian operations to aid refugees on all sides .
The mission cannot succeed without the active participation of all the European Union countries .
In addition , since Eurofor includes a large contingent of French forces , it is essential to distinguish between the Épervier plan and the European forces .
It is also imperative for the millions of refugees , as an initial emergency measure , but also in the longer term for the countries of Central Africa , that political stability should be restored by a ceasefire , reopening of dialogue and respect for human rights .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , the resolution highlights the two areas of the crisis which the government and international agencies need to focus their attention on .
Firstly , the humanitarian crisis is widespread and for a long time now the aid organisations there have been sending back reports about the growing numbers of internal refugees .
The poor levels of security in the refugee camps , the widespread sexual violence , and the difficulty of delivering food aid have made the situation even more critical .
Secondly , there are massive restrictions on freedom of speech and many journalists have had to leave Chad for fear of arrest .
Supporters of the political opposition have been threatened and have disappeared .
This fact often remains in the shadow of the humanitarian crisis , although if things were to improve in this area it would be one important step along the road to a more stable regime .
A genuine solution will of course require strong political will and concrete action on a large scale .
Just as important , however , is the need to invest time and effort in the children of Chad and their future by trying hard to prevent them from being recruited into armed gangs of insurgents and investing in their basic education , which could include human rights studies , for example .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ET ) My speech too links up with the previous speaker 's .
I also wanted to raise a point of the utmost importance to today 's agenda and it is precisely the situation of children in crisis hotspots .
A large number , if not the majority of the hundreds of thousands of people who been left homeless are children .
And what is their everyday life like ?
We have all seen the dispiriting images on our television screens .
The European Union has an obligation to show solidarity with the whole nation , of course , but we must strive to focus our attention on the children because they cannot look after themselves .
It is depressing that only one in five children in Chad attends school and that thousands upon thousands of them carry weapons .
I fully support the call for a plan to make human rights an integral part of the school curriculum .
It is important for the government of Chad to do all it can to prevent the recruitment of children by rebel groups ; the importance of the role of EUFOR will prove crucial here in , for example , communicating with community leaders and focusing their attention on the situation of children in this area .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the subject of today 's debate is breaches of human rights in Chad .
The situation there is as dramatic as in Darfur , Sudan or the Central African Republic , where , in addition to the conflicts fuelled by ethnic , language or religious differences , there are also other conflicts of interest , especially to do with politics and oil .
African countries that are economically poor and poorly developed , even though they may be rich in natural resources , including crude oil , precious gemstones and metals , become not just an arena for trading in these resources or in drugs , but an eager market for the sale of arms , one of the principal causes of human rights abuses .
In an atmosphere of growing conflict and war , many unscrupulous local and foreign traders exploit this situation , enriching themselves at the cost of chaos , refugees and the suffering of millions of innocent people , and even genocide , rape and the exploitation of women and children .
This situation is made worse by the passivity of the international community , which is controlled and exploited by great powers that play out their interests on the global stage .
Humanitarian missions of various types can do little to help , and sometimes even go against their initial objectives and calling .
Such a situation appears hopeless , as long as life and human dignity lose out to practical materialism , liberalism and the growing civilisation of death , which is sometimes propagated even by so-called humanitarian organisations providing education in the name of sexual and reproductive health .
For these reasons , various resolutions and reports may help to ease the consciences of their authors , but will not improve the situation in Africa , until African leaders and the great powers , from both the east and the west , stop benefiting from war and the growing hatred in the African continent .
( PL ) Mr President , despite the signing , a year ago , of an agreement between all the political parties in Chad on strengthening the democratic process , and despite the later non-aggression pact with the Sudanese authorities , the situation is still highly charged .
Government forces regularly clash with rebels from armed groups from Darfur , who attack transports of humanitarian aid .
The state of emergency has been used to imprison the opposition with impunity and to impose savage restrictions on press freedom and freedom of speech .
Of particular concern is the worsening humanitarian situation in the country where , as a result of the conflict in Darfur and its cross-border consequences , there are over 300 000 refugees in 12 camps along the eastern frontier between Chad and Sudan .
As a result of continuing battles , supplies of food to the camps are interrupted , and refugees are left to vegetate in terrible conditions .
Following mass displacement , the civilian population is prey to aggression and breaches of fundamental human rights .
In the light of the obvious impasse in stabilising the situation in Chad , international institutions should strengthen their efforts to promote dialogue between all sides in the conflict .
Only a global agreement has any chance of averting a humanitarian disaster in the country .
It is vital to begin the European forces mission as quickly as possible in order to step up humanitarian activities in the region and to provide increased protection for the civilian population and for refugees .
( FR ) Mr President , I should like to refer again to the Ljubljana resolution , which our African colleagues voted against .
I was really disappointed and saddened .
I think and hope that values for Africa do not come from China , with its aggressive economic invasion that we are witnessing at the moment .
It is impossible to know how to treat our African partners when they treat Chad in this way , but one thing is fairly clear : we have to persuade them about human rights .
That is the only choice we have .
It seems that this will be a long and costly process , but there is no other choice .
( SK ) I also want my voice to be heard in the debate about the complex situation in which the people in Chad find themselves .
As we know from the latest information , apart from 300 000 refugees in eastern parts of the country there are 200 000 internally displaced people who live in these camps in conditions barely fit for humans , facing a humanitarian crisis .
When we take into account the lack of food and medicine , the dramatic misuse of the fact that these people have lost their freedom , the spread of drug abuse and diseases among the people kept in these conditions , we have no other option than to call for the support of the democratic process and for the defeat of the rebels with the help of the European forces .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , even though agreement had been reached on a joint motion , it was rejected by the African side at the Joint Assembly in Ljubljana .
The drama lies in the reasons that were put forward : because the Chad delegation was not there , or so it was said .
That was clearly a pretext and that pretext was instrumental , but it served to hide the reality of events , the reasons for which the African side rejected the resolution .
What that means , in substance , is that political opportunism prevailed over fundamental human rights and the protection and guarantee of the fundamental freedoms .
I believe that the value of Europe - and the new history that Europe is creating - is that it not just observes , but that it also fights to ensure that it is not expediency but human reasons that prevail over all the deceptions of politics .
In my view , that is what we should be supporting and affirming and what should once again become a plan for the very life of the European Union .
Mr President , a few short years ago I was with a delegation in Chad , in the aftermath of their civil war and the violence , looking at the optimism that was coming from the arrival of oil and the pipeline .
The wealth of that country was hitherto the mango trees of a village , nothing more , and oil was bringing opportunity to this country .
The international community was supervising that in such a way that we had hope that this would bring stability and wealth and a future to this country .
Now we have a mess , and we have a mess partly because of what has come in from outside - Darfur and so on - and , I have to say , partly from what has come from inside - the corruption , the poor governance and the violence .
As a result , it is the people of Chad who are suffering , and we must urge everyone - int