Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 17 December 2009 .
Statements by the President
It is with great sadness that I have to inform you that Mrs Boal , deputy head of the European Union Delegation to Haiti , is , unfortunately , still missing .
The search for Mrs Boal continues .
She used to work in the European Parliament .
Today , the Haitian nation , hit by the great tragedy of the earthquake , is in the thoughts of every one of us .
Individual countries of Europe , as well as the whole European Union , have pledged substantial financial assistance for Haiti , along with deployment of 150 police officers as part of the European Gendarmerie .
Teams sent by individual EU countries are also working there .
This is the worst cataclysm in the history of Haiti , and one of the worst in the history of humanity .
In addition , many of our fellow citizens , citizens of Europe , have died there , and many are believed to be missing .
I would like you to commemorate the victims of this unimaginable catastrophe with a minute 's silence .
Please stand .
It was also with great regret that I received information of the execution in China of Akmal Shaikh , a British citizen .
He is one of nearly 7 000 people who are executed in that country every year .
He is also the first citizen of the European Union to be executed in China since 1951 .
The European Parliament condemns , and has always condemned , the death penalty , and will continue its efforts to achieve a moratorium on executions .
Yesterday , the first round of presidential elections was held in Ukraine .
Representatives of the European Parliament are observing the elections and were present yesterday .
We have not yet received official information on the progress of the elections .
Our colleagues have not sent any official information , but we are expecting some at any moment .
We expect this to show that the elections have been conducted fairly , and that the same will be true of the second round , which will be held at the beginning of February .
On 1 January , Spain assumed the Presidency of the Council of the European Union .
I am sure that , under the new treaty and in cooperation with the new President of the Council , the Spanish Presidency will be a success and will achieve the objectives which have been set .
In the programme of our session , we have a meeting with Prime Minister Zapatero , and we are going to talk about the Trio Programme .
Therefore , we will not only be talking about Spain , but also about Belgium and Hungary .
Ladies and gentlemen , please allow me , finally , to express my most sincere wishes for prosperity and success in the new year 2010 .
May the beginning of this new decade be an inspiration to us all to work strenuously on behalf of our citizens .
As I said a week ago in Brussels - a new year , a new treaty , and a new era for the European Union .
Our Parliament bears particular responsibility for the future of the European Union .
We are all aware of this .
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Composition of political groups : see Minutes
Names of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Composition of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Oral questions and written declarations ( submission ) : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday , 14 January 2010 pursuant to Rule 137 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed :
Tuesday :
I have received a request from the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament on winding up the debate on Haiti with the tabling of motions for resolution , to be put to the vote during the first session in February .
Mr President , naturally , we also wish you all the best for the New Year .
I would like to know whether you will be coming back to the resolution on Haiti .
We should like to move a resolution on Haiti , which must , at all costs , be decided in February .
Wednesday :
I have received a request from the Europe of Freedom and Democracy Group to place on the agenda for voting time the motions for a resolution on defence of the principle of solidarity , to wind up the debate held on 15 December 2009 .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , there are two reasons in favour : firstly , the importance of the subject - I find it a little strange for Parliament to refuse to vote .
Everyone has their own opinions , everyone can think as they see fit , but as a Parliament , I think that we have a duty to give an opinion on this subject as each of us feels is appropriate .
Secondly , this House has already requested and voted on the inclusion of this item as a voting item , moving it from December to January .
Now I believe that the Bureau , or , rather , the Conference of Presidents , should not have gone against a precise and timely decision by the House , and I therefore think that the House should express its views on this point shortly .
Mr President , we have had some very heated debates .
We have seen that there are actually very differing opinions on these findings of a court of justice that is not an EU court .
We should not now lapse once again into a debate on this very serious topic , a debate that divides us more than it unites us .
We should let the subject rest .
We had differing opinions , we still have differing opinions , and that is why we should not come back to it to try and arrive at a new resolution .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would just like to ask my fellow Members to keep this item on the agenda : the massacre of Coptic Christians on the day after or , in fact , on the night of Coptic Christmas , and the many killings of Christians in Malaysia are signs of a very clear problem : religious freedom in those countries .
In itself , the resolution is not an initiative directed against individual , specific governments but a way of highlighting how the issue of religious freedom constitutes one of the foundations of our civil harmony , and it is therefore right for Parliament to express its views on this subject .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , we would like to request that the debate on relations between Tunisia and the European Union be postponed until the February part-session as , in the meantime , a meeting of the Subcommittee on Human Rights will be held on relations between the European Union and Tunisia , and , perhaps , new material will be available to us during that debate .
Mr President , it is not the intention that we should now arrive at a resolution .
It is good that we have had a discussion , but one without a resolution .
It is also my considered view that we should draw up such a resolution only after such a visit , if we do so at all .
The discussion , however , should certainly take place now , so that the Members who will visit that country can take with them some of the feeling in this House .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
Mr President , you referred to the death penalty earlier on .
We often talk here about the number of death penalties being carried out in China , in Iran , etc .
I would like to refer to the case of a man in Ohio in the United States who , after serving 30 years in prison , also ' served ' the death penalty , because he had to follow the due process .
Serving two of the major sentences is , according to European standards , very cruel treatment .
I think that , in our dialogue with the United States - our major ally - this issue of the death sentence should come up .
We should also consider the other case , of somebody who served 35 years in prison and was then proved innocent .
With the death penalty , there is no deterrence ; there is no correction ; there is no coming back .
( RO ) During recent weeks , Iceland has been appearing on the front pages of the press because , at the start of the year , the president of this country exercised his right of veto on the Icesave legislation and decided to submit it to a referendum .
This decision has provoked reactions of disapproval from the British and Dutch Governments .
I think that this is a strictly bilateral dispute which should not influence Iceland 's EU accession process .
I believe that the Commission should set out its position clearly with regard to the implications which adopting or rejecting the Icesave legislation will have in terms of Iceland 's fulfilment of the economic criteria drawn up by the Copenhagen European Council .
Mr President , ' let us not allow fear to guide us ' , we often say .
Some people question whether our airport security measures are too tight .
Well , the Detroit terror attempt made us realise that our security systems are not excessively tight , but are still rather unsatisfactory .
As you all know , the Slovakian secret service placed plastic explosives in the bag of a Slovakian citizen .
The passenger , as well as the bag , got on board without any problems and landed in Ireland .
No doubt the test was spectacular , but certainly it did not strengthen the belief of citizens that security , on the one hand , and the right to privacy , on the other hand , are taken seriously by the authorities .
Citizens are flooded with conflicting information and misinterpretations in the press on a daily basis .
After Detroit , to give you an example , the spotlight is on body scanners as the best solution .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( RO ) The Lisbon Strategy stipulates that the EU should become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in 2010 .
Here we are now in 2010 .
The strategy 's objectives are far from achieved and the EU is facing the deepest economic crisis since 1933 .
Although these objectives have not been met , they must remain a priority on the European Union 's agenda .
The Spanish Presidency , in the person of Prime Minister Zapatero , has assured us that the strategy 's objectives will continue to be pursued , setting 2020 as the deadline .
It is unacceptable , after this time , for us to wait another decade to achieve the anticipated results .
One of the strategy 's key points is investment in education and research .
No economy in the world can develop without having an educated society .
This is why I believe that the funding of education systems must be a priority for Europe .
I deplore today in this Chamber this policy devoid of any vision , pursued by governments who are reducing their education budgets , because not only are they doing harm to today 's society , but they are also creating long-term problems .
I would like to take this opportunity to announce that I am also submitting a written statement which can be signed starting from the next sitting .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to come back to the subject of the installation of body scanners in airports .
Today , this is presented to us as the solution to the terrorist threat but , at the same time , it fuels a sense of fear .
Some Member States are charging ahead , without having even studied the impact of such a measure in terms of public health , security and , above all , civil liberties .
Let us be realistic , there is no such thing as 100 % security .
There may be a momentary lapse of concentration , a human error .
Moreover , the example of the failed attack on the Amsterdam-Detroit flight has particularly demonstrated the flaws in information systems .
It is therefore in this area that we must find solutions in order to move towards a culture of exchange and of trust between the different authorities and parties involved .
Finally , targeting only airports means completely ignoring the possibility of acts by ill-intentioned groups in railway stations , underground systems or in any other places where people gather , and there are a great number of these .
Therefore , before making any rash and costly decisions , let us first regain the initiative with a wide-ranging and transparent debate that is objective and unemotional .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as an MEP for the north-west of Italy , I would like to point out to Parliament and the Commission some suspected infringements of existing treaties and democratic rights which are being perpetrated by the Italian Government and by Piedmont 's local authorities in relation to the plan for a new railway line between Lyon and Turin .
The substantial funding from Europe for this line was conditional upon the project being backed by local populations and the existence of funding from private Italian investment .
These two conditions have not been met because , on the one hand , the private Italian funds do not exist and , on the other , the local communities have been silenced by a government decree which allows them to talk only if they agree with the existence of the railway line .
Since these two conditions have not been met , the suspicion is that Italy is , in a way , defrauding Europe .
( FR ) I am sorry , Mr President .
This is my first time , I checked that the procedure was correct and meanwhile ... please accept my apologies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , at the start of the year that the UN has declared the ' International Year of Biodiversity ' , I would like to draw your attention to the failure of the 2004-2010 European Strategy to halt the loss of biodiversity .
40 % of our natural heritage is under threat .
The state of biodiversity is a measure of the state of health of the planet , of the state of health of our development system , and the crisis phenomenon is accelerating .
Therefore , I hope that , today and tomorrow , the European Union and the European Parliament will be able to rise to the challenges and come up with ambitious and wide-ranging objectives to halt the loss of biodiversity in all sectoral policies in 2010 .
We must act , there is still time , and 2010 is a year in which anything is possible .
I hope we will be able to do better than we did in Copenhagen .
( DA ) Mr President , since Turkey banned the Kurdish DTP party , many party members have been arrested , including democratically elected mayors and former members of parliament .
I myself visited Turkey between Christmas and New Year in order to be present at the legal proceedings against the Chair of the DTP , Ahmet Türk . The police were sent after him despite the fact that his parliamentary immunity had not been rescinded .
Last week , the mayor of Diyarbakir , Osman Baydemir , was banned from leaving the country .
As a result , he is unable to attend the conference on Kurdish issues that is to be held here in this Parliament on 3-4 February .
That is why I call on the President - and I hope the President has time to listen to my entreaty - to lodge a protest with the Turkish authorities and demand that the democratically elected mayor of Diyarbakir be allowed to visit the European Parliament next week .
Thank you for your remarks .
Please send me a note about this to my e-mail address , so that I know exactly which matter you have in mind .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the freedom of expression is under great pressure in the Netherlands .
The leader of our party , Geert Wilders , has to appear before a Dutch court next week .
This is not because he has committed any crime , but because of his political views .
The Party for Freedom warns of the consequences of Islamification .
Islam is no religion , it is an ideology that wants to take us over .
Islam has no love for Western freedom and democracy .
Expressing criticism of Islam is often costly for politicians and opinion-makers because of threats by fundamentalists .
The fact that politicians in the Netherlands , by criticising Islam , will now even have the Public Prosecution Service and the courts on their backs , and potentially find themselves in prison , is catastrophic for our freedom and our democracy .
We cannot let that happen , and that is why we are sounding the alarm bells for the Netherlands and the free Western world .
End Islamification and end the prosecution of politicians on the basis of their political views !
This coming Wednesday , we will be in the Netherlands to demonstrate for our freedom .
Support Geert Wilders and attend this outrageous political trial of a brave politician , Geert Wilders !
( RO ) I welcome that the Spanish Presidency is undertaking , based on the programme it has proposed , projects which will strengthen and transform the European Union through innovation and legitimisation .
However , I regret that the Spanish Presidency 's programme does not contain any specific reference to inland waterways , in particular , the Rhine-Main-Danube waterway , even though , during last year , the European Commission undertook to draft a strategy for the Danube in 2010 .
I am aware that the Spanish Presidency has numerous other priorities to tackle such as the Treaty of Lisbon 's entry into force and the changes in case-law , institutional amendments , management of the crisis mitigation process and restoring sustainable growth .
However , I think that the transport infrastructure , primarily that for inland waterways , which includes the Danube , along with multimodality , are specific , viable methods of ensuring sustainable development and new jobs .
For this reason , I believe that the lack of such an element in the Spanish Presidency 's programme is a failing which must be urgently rectified .
( PT ) Mr President , fellow Members , several Member States have been severely affected by bad weather , with catastrophic consequences for farming , particularly during the last month of December .

Portugal is one of those countries , having been hit by heavy rain on 23 December , along with hailstorms and gales which devastated the western and Algarve regions .
This caused over EUR 80 million worth of damage and affected around one thousand farmers , who lost their crops and have been left with no way of resuming production in the coming months .
For instance , the greenhouse crops campaign has been irretrievably destroyed for 2010 , and 90 % of the infrastructure cannot be repaired .
Against this backdrop , and bearing in mind , firstly , the cyclical nature of natural catastrophes , which we can expect to increase in number and intensity due to climate change ; secondly , the inadequacy of the aid that is always needed due to losses ; and thirdly , the fact that these catastrophes are not covered by the European Union Solidarity Fund , we believe that the establishment of a European security system is imperative and urgent so that ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) Mr President , I would first of all like to express my condolences and solidarity for the victims of the earthquake in Haiti .
This devastating earthquake , which has come after the four hurricanes last year , should not cause us to forget the situation that the country was in beforehand , with 80 % of the population in poverty .
With the highest infant mortality rate in America , poverty , violence and exodus were already a part of daily life for a large proportion of the Haitian population .
Under these circumstances , not only do we need to send humanitarian aid , but we also need to ensure that the efforts continue when Haiti ceases to be front page news , and that Haiti develops in a sustainable , coordinated and balanced way .
( RO ) Three years after their accession to the European Union , Romanians and Bulgarians do not enjoy full rights as European citizens .
Although the free movement of labour is a fundamental principle of European integration , 10 Member States still maintain barriers against Romanian and Bulgarian citizens .
The decision has been made to extend the restrictions on access to domestic labour markets , in spite of the recommendations made by the European Commission , which indicate that the mobility of Eastern European workers has not upset labour markets and has actually generated economic growth .
Unfortunately , the economic crisis is now being used as an argument for maintaining these restrictions , with references to domestic unemployment and the pressure exerted by immigrants on labour markets .
However , the reality is that the possible consequences of the influx of labour from the new Member States are being exaggerated and , furthermore , maintaining the barriers is hampering the deployment of the full labour potential available for exiting the current crisis and facilitating the European economy 's recovery .
This is why I hope that the new European Commission will act with greater conviction against these protectionist measures which are restricting in a discriminatory manner the free movement of labour in the European Union .
( ES ) What would you think , ladies and gentlemen , if police officers accompanied by cameras from the country 's main television channels broadcast your arrest live ?
How would you feel if you were accused of belonging to an armed group , arrested and kept isolated for five days , and then you had your assets frozen and were put in prison for up to a year and a half for being the directors of the only newspaper that was published at the time in the Basque language , which was closed down without a hearing ?
Moreover , the majority of the prisoners have reported that they were tortured .
What would you think if , seven years later , despite the public prosecutor asking for the case to be closed due to a lack of evidence , you were still awaiting trial ?
What do you think about there being another part of the case , the financial case , which is also awaiting trial ?
This has been the situation for ten people , the majority of whom are journalists , since February 2003 , when the Spanish National High Court decided to close down the newspaper Egunkaria without a hearing .
After all this , a trial is currently being held , which , given the time that has passed and the circumstances described , is anything but fair for the defendants and their rights .
( DA ) Mr President , nearly a year ago , this Parliament adopted my report on the consequences of the violent and brutal urbanisation policy in Spain .
The report , which was adopted with a very broad majority , expressed serious concern at the many breaches of common EU legislation that had occurred in this connection , as well as of the fundamental principles on which the EU is based .
For example , many citizens living in Spain - including a large number of EU citizens from other Member States - are finding that they are having to pay the price for the corruption and other abuses carried out by property companies , entrepreneurs , officials and even elected representatives .
They are seeing their homes demolished .
These are houses that they purchased in good faith , but they are not even being compensated for this .
We have not yet had any response from the Spanish Government to all the criticisms raised in the report .
I would therefore ask that you formally ask request the Spanish Government to state its position on the conclusions of the Auken report to the European Parliament .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to draw your attention to the horrifying events unfolding in Italy , where immigrants working illegally in the agricultural sector are falling victim to an unprecedented wave of acute xenophobia and racist violence .
To be precise , over 1 500 immigrants have abandoned their homes or are being forcibly removed by the authorities in the town of Rozzano .
The recent criminalisation of illegal immigration in Italy is translating into greater exploitation of illegal immigrants and is restricting their access to employment , housing and basic services .
I therefore call on the Commission and the Council to investigate the possibility of transposing the provisions of the UN Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of Their Families into the legislation of the European Union .
Our objective must be to prevent such situations in the European Union .
Ms Auken , could I ask you to send me some brief information on the matter so that I can do that in the very near future .
( PL ) Mr President , several weeks ago , the European Commission rejected a request from the Polish Government to provide assistance for the restructuring of agricultural holdings which produce tobacco .
That decision means the collapse of around 15 000 small family holdings which produce tobacco , mainly in the south-eastern part of Poland .
This area is one of the poorest in the European Union .
I do not know the reasons for this decision of the Commission , but even if it was because of formal errors made by the Polish Government , bureaucratic procedures should not bring living people and their situation to ruin .
Therefore , I would ask the European Commission to look at the matter once again and to consider granting the Polish Government 's request out of concern for poor farmers .
( PT ) Ladies and gentlemen , my colleague , Mr Triantaphyllides , has already described the exploitation of foreign labour that is occurring in Calabria , southern Italy .
I must add that there is a worrying racial aspect to this issue : the black immigrant labourers work separately , live separately and were removed separately by the police , having been fired upon and urged to leave the area around Rozzano , Calabria .
Now that some of them are in deportation centres , waiting to be deported , we must ask whether the Italian authorities acted in good faith when they said that they would protect them , given that they are now deporting some of them .
Can we , with a clear conscience , deport people who have been the victims of racial persecution ?
Can the Republic of Italy , a Member State of the European Union , put an end to the ethnic cleansing that was started by criminal members of the Calabrian mafia , the N 'Drangheta ?
Moreover , is it acceptable that the victims were not even informed of their rights ?
We must carry out a thorough investigation into this matter , and for this to take place , none of the victims of the events in Rozzano may be deported .
Mr President , the current focus of global politics is the future of our planet .
Yet , amidst discussions about an increase in world population , the European Union has failed even to give clear direction on concerns that surround migration .
Instead , measures to promote the movement of people are promoted with the usual justifications of filling brain drains and boosting economies .
According to EU figures , 1.7 million European migrants came to the UK last year , nearly double the number five years ago .
Just before Christmas , Serbia applied for EU membership , and Croatia could join as soon as 2012 .
We have yet to feel the full impact of the freedom of movement for workers enshrined in the Treaty of Rome .
In the case of the 10 countries which joined the EU in 2004 - among them Poland , the Czech Republic and Latvia - the door is not fully open until next year .
In the case of Bulgaria and Romania , it is 2014 .
Given that the living standards in both countries are very low , I can only imagine that this will have a significant impact on the more developed Member States .
The rest of Europe may look on critically when we demand vetoes on immigration policy .
The Lisbon Treaty gives the EU almost as much power over such issues as the CAP gives to our agricultural policy , and it would be totally irresponsible to ignore the impact of all the ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( HU ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , In theory , the European Union is based on the principles of freedom , democracy , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms and on the rule of law .
These principles are shared by all Member States .
Unfortunately , this is so only in theory , because Slovakia is in contempt of the principles of the EU every day .
I propose therefore that the EU take the necessary legal measures to suspend Slovakia 's EU membership until they revoke the extremist , racist language law which humiliates Hungarians every day .
Unfortunately , Slovakia is not the only country in the Carpathian Basin that excels in offending EU principles .
Romania is also waging a political campaign for the oppression of Hungarian minorities .
Due to the total dispossession of the more than 300 000 Hungarians in the region known as Partium ( Western Romania ) , the time has come to open wide the topic of local Hungarian self-government in these regions , as well as of autonomy for the Székely Lands ( in Transylvania ) .
( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on 22 October 2008 , the President of the European Parliament and the Council declared 2010 to be the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
At present , 78 million people in the European Union are at risk of poverty , of whom 19 million are children .
Today , in the light of the effects of the economic crisis , including the increase in unemployment , there is a need to make the fight against poverty a greater priority .
The priority of our political work should be the people and human dignity , and we cannot ignore the fact that there are people in Europe who are going hungry .
For this reason , I believe that the European Union must now evaluate the current social situation , and , if necessary , increase the funds for implementing the initiatives needed to combat poverty .
In order to achieve this , we need a budget .
( PL ) Mr President , you congratulated us on adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon .
This is very important .
Today , when Haiti so desperately needs our help , we realise afresh how important it is that the European Union function efficiently .
We must not pretend that we do not see how public debate on the treaty in many Member States was so impoverished .
Knowledge of the treaty is very poor , and the demagogic accusations of opponents of the treaty and opponents of a strong European Union often go unanswered .
Myths about the treaty are still circulating in public opinion .
Today , when the Treaty of Lisbon is now in force , we have a wonderful opportunity to run an information campaign about the treaty and the Union .
Nowhere in the European Union must this opportunity be squandered .
We must not miss this chance .
Therefore , I would ask the bodies responsible for social communication in the European Union to use this moment of transformation to run an effective information campaign , to raise the level of knowledge about the Union and to create a European identity .
( ES ) Mr President , only a few days ago , two ETA commando units were arrested by French , Portuguese and Spanish police .
They were going to launch terrorist attacks in Spain using explosives .
I would like to publicly express the thanks of all victims of terrorism in Spain for the cooperation of Portuguese and French police in this important event .
This is also what it means to be part of Europe .
I would like to say , ladies and gentlemen , that almost a thousand people have died in Spain due to the terrorist activities of ETA , and that there is no reason , either political or moral , no reason at all that justifies terrorism .
I would like to thank France and Portugal for their cooperation in the fight against ETA .
Mr President , I would like to draw your attention to the situation at the eastern border of the Baltic States .
For many years now , before each Christmas , there has been a continual blocking of trucks from all over Europe at the EU 's eastern external borders .
This situation causes serious disturbances both for the carriers and for the EU companies .
It places even more strain on relations between the EU and neighbouring third countries .
I believe that the newly established European External Action Service needs to react to this current situation and to cooperate more actively with the third countries involved to resolve this situation .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Gaza Strip is being threatened with strangulation .
Subjected to a strict Israeli blockade since 2007 , in 2009 , Gaza 's population suffered the bloody attack that prompted the Goldstone Report , which was damning for the Israeli military authorities accused of war crimes .
Today , it is the Egyptian authorities that have set about building an underground metal barrier in order to prevent any supplies getting through the tunnels .
When will there be a stop to this collective punishment imposed on men , women and children , whose suffering is being manipulated on a political stage from a different era ?
The European Union must act .
The European Union has all the trumps as Israel 's main economic partner and the principal contributor of aid to the Palestinian Territories .
The Israeli Government will only accept a change of policy under pressure from the international community .
The EU can play a decisive role in the resumption of the peace process and in the creation of an independent , sovereign Palestinian state within the borders established in 1967 , with East Jerusalem as its capital .
( SK ) Mr President , at the end of last year , the Slovak Republic was gratuitously , shamelessly and repeatedly slandered by members of Parliament from the Republic of Hungary for adopting a law which allegedly deprives Hungarians living in Slovakia of their rights .
While unsubstantiated rumours were being spread from Hungary about a fabricated law from Slovakia , the Slovak Republic turned to the High Commissioner for National Minorities , Knut Vollebæk , to make an objective assessment of the legislation actually adopted in Slovakia .
Early this year , on 4 January 2010 , the OSCE High Commissioner for National Minorities , Mr Vollebæk , issued a major statement on the State language act .
His major statement confirmed that the State language act complies with the Slovak Republic 's international commitments .
It says that the act also complies with international standards and pursues a legitimate goal .
It goes on to state explicitly that the steps to promote the state language do not undermine linguistic rights of persons belonging to national minorities .
The OSCE High Commissioner for National Minorities , Knut Vollebæk , praised the Slovak Republic .
( DE ) Mr President , most European Union Member States are also experiencing a devastating earthquake ; one , however , that is not recognisable on the surface .
I refer to the continuing upheaval of the financial markets .
We now hear that in a bank in Carinthia which went bankrupt or was taken over by the state , EU funds were also in circulation .
I hereby demand that OLAF mount the appropriate investigation .
Under the new Presidency , there is perhaps a chance that it can act a little more independently than previously .
In this context , I should also like to bring to your attention a study by the Corporate Europe Observatory on the ' captive Commission ' , that is to say , to this continuing central problem : namely that large corporations are far too heavily represented in the expert groups that should actually be looking for ways to protect us from just such upheavals .
Small and medium-sized enterprises , not to mention consumer associations and trade unions , can say next to nothing .
Generally , the ratio in these groups of experts is 80 to 20 .
That must be changed without delay .
Mr President , I would like to join with colleagues who raised the issue of Haiti .
I know we will be having a debate on this during the part-session but there is one particular aspect I want to raise now and it is the fact that the United States is far better organised .
Yes , they are nearer to the region than the European Union .
Individual Member States have responded very well .
We see , for example , the Belgian Air force in the vicinity .
We are the biggest donor of aid in the world and when it comes to humanitarian aid , we should be efficient in that donation .
I believe it is time , under the new Lisbon Treaty , to look at having , on a rolling basis , a six-month standby team including large and small Member States that will be able to deliver humanitarian aid where it is needed , on agreement between the institutions .
It does not have to be the same standby group for each six months , it could change with the Presidency , but there should be a standby group so that we can deliver aid under a humanitarian EU flag .
Mr President , we must urgently renew our call - and when I say ' we ' , I mean Parliament , the Council and the Commission - on Israel to end the siege of Gaza .
A year ago , over 1 400 died in the war in Gaza , mostly civilians , including over 300 children .
Yet Israel still prevents the rebuilding of homes , businesses , medical facilities , and the provision of clean water , sanitation and electricity while also blocking adequate food supplies .
Europe must also intervene to prevent the expulsion of journalist Jared Malsin , a US citizen , and insist that he should be allowed to continue his work with Ma 'an , the non-profit news agency in the West Bank .
The Commission has blocked the fisheries agreement with Guinea because government actions there resulted in the death of 150 demonstrators .
Why do we treat Israel differently ?
It is time for Europe to tell Israel that our patience is at an end and that they must comply with international human rights law , including the right of the free press to be free from government interference .
( PT ) Mr President , last November , the European Commission launched a public campaign about the European Union 2020 Strategy , which will follow the so-called Lisbon Strategy , whose objectives , as we know , were much vaunted at the time , but have not been achieved , as attested by the increase in unemployment and poverty .
The public consultation ran until the end of last week , that is , 15 January , and we are still conducting hearings for the new Commission , who will only take up their posts next February .
Where is the sense , then , in closing a public consultation on a document of this importance at a time when the new European Commission is not yet in power ?
We must come back to this issue , and so I would ask you , Mr President , to give particular attention to the proposal that the European Commission reconsider its position .
Mr President , the Spanish Presidency is , in fact , launching a new institution in the European Union - the Trio Presidency .
There have , of course , been earlier Trios , but this is the first to have elaborated a coordinated programme and , equally , the first under the Lisbon Treaty .
The two other Member States making up the Trio Presidency are Belgium and Hungary .
From the Hungarian perspective , what is particularly valuable in the new institution is the opportunity to offer our own distinctive contribution to the process .
Among other questions to be dealt with by the Trio Presidency and of particular concern is the growing problem of water shortage in Europe .
For the first time in its history , Europe is facing a potential water shortage .
Given its strategic location , Hungary is uniquely placed to put this issue on the European agenda .
Mr President , two months ago , my constituency was hit by disastrous floods .
Deceitfully blamed on climate change , the real reason for the devastation of the town of Cockermouth was the EU-imposed privatisation / theft of public services .
The proper management of reservoirs has been replaced by cost-cutting negligence by United Utilities , leading to safety margins being ignored and a panic-stricken decision to open sluice gates and release a man-made deluge on the town .
The fact that only one brave man died in the floods was little short of miraculous , but such disasters will increase in frequency as more and more public services are looted by greedy corporations .
Finally , my constituents are shocked that they will not receive a penny from the EU Solidarity Fund , because the UK cannot apply unless the damage exceeds EUR 3 billion .
Since Britain is not in an earthquake zone , it is almost impossible to conceive of a disaster which would trigger such a payment , so British taxpayers - who contribute a disproportionate amount to the funds - have no realistic chance of benefiting from it .
So much for solidarity .
We want our money back !
I should like to explain that I am also taking into account whether Members spoke during the one-minute speeches at the last part-session or two part-sessions ago : this has also been taken into account .
However , since the ALDE Group has probably not had enough speeches , the last speaker is Mr Gallagher .
Mr President , Haiti is a country in desperate need of help - whether it be medicine , food , water or shelter - at critical levels .
( GA ) Many people in the area affected by the earthquake are waiting for help that has not yet arrived .
The European Union must be to the forefront of the international response aimed at providing support and help to the people of Haiti .
To help alleviate the growing problem of food shortages , I strongly urge the European Commission to include food aid - such as processed canned fish products - as part of the EU response for the people of Haiti .
I know that canned fish products are high in protein , have a long shelf-life and could be provided at short notice , as they were in the past .
( GA ) As such , I ask the European Commission and the Commissioners , particularly those that are responsible for development aid and fisheries , to consider this proposal as a matter of urgency .
Mr President , thank you very much for your indulgence .
Thank you for your speech .
Ladies and gentlemen , the hearings are about to start .
You are invited to attend .
I have given the floor to 32 speakers today .
Please remember that you have to put your name on the list in advance .
I received a list of 72 people , and asked you to speak in exactly the order in which the names appeared on the list .
Please put your names down as soon as possible for the speeches which will take place in a month .
( EL ) Mr President , I think that the way in which you select speakers under the standard procedure provided for in the Rules of Procedure of the European Parliament is biased .
You argue that speakers are selected in order and on the basis of the following criterion : whether or not speakers were given the floor during the previous sitting of the European Parliament on the same issue under the same procedure .
If you cross check your papers , you will see , firstly , that you gave the floor today out of order and , secondly , that you gave the floor to persons who spoke at the previous plenary sitting of the European Parliament ; consequently , your arguments do not stand up .
Finally , it is unacceptable for the President of the European Parliament to censor MEPs .
We shall not accept that under any circumstances .
Mr Toussas , let me explain .
I did not give the floor to those who spoke a month ago .
Please check the list .
I would ask you , please , to check the list . Members who spoke a month ago were not considered .
In addition , those who spoke two months ago had a smaller chance .
Please check that fact .
You can come to my office and we will check it together .
I am not afraid of such an inspection .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
( The sitting was closed at 18.15 )
Opening of the sitting
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Recent earthquake in Haiti ( debate )
The next item is the statement on the earthquake in Haiti by the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , and Vice-President of the Commission , Baroness Ashton .
We will also hear from Commissioner De Gucht , but the first to take the floor will be Baroness Ashton .
It gives me much pleasure to welcome her because I have worked extensively with her elsewhere , and I wish her all the best in her new position .
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy / Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , thank you very much indeed for your kind words .
Honourable Members , I asked for this debate to be able to update this House on the situation in Haiti following the terrible earthquake of 12 January .
The losses are devastating and the damage is enormous .
Up to three million people have been affected by the tragedy , and the death toll continues to mount .
This is a massive humanitarian and political disaster .
Our immediate focus is on working with the United Nations and the Haitian leadership to ease the suffering of the Haitian people .
Our commitment to rebuilding Haiti is long term .
Many European citizens have also lost their lives , and around 1 000 are still unaccounted for .
The EU has responded quickly , not seeking headlines but with a total focus on getting help to the people in need .
On advice from the United Nations , we resisted the urge to travel to Haiti immediately .
That would only have diverted attention and scarce resources away from the relief effort .
We will , of course , travel to Haiti as soon as it is appropriate , and I have agreed with Commissioner De Gucht that he will travel to Haiti this week to extend the EU 's condolences and underline our commitment to the people .
He will also take the opportunity to review our aid efforts so far and discuss with the United Nations and our people on the ground the most pressing needs for the weeks and months to come .
In the meantime , we continue to work flat out on all tracks : humanitarian , political and security .
Over the past days , I have been in constant contact with Secretary of State Clinton , with the United Nations leadership , with EU Foreign Ministers and with Canada , which is leading the ' Friends of Haiti ' group : all this with a view to ensuring an effective and coordinated international response .
I will travel to the United States this week to follow up on this and other issues with the United States Administration , and with the UN Secretary-General and others in New York .
The UN has asked for urgent financial aid - USD 575 million - as well as logistical assistance to transport humanitarian aid .
Yesterday , the United Nations Secretary-General asked for police and military reinforcements of the UN peacekeeping mission as well .
To help mobilise and coordinate our response , I asked the Spanish EU Presidency to call an extraordinary Foreign Affairs Council yesterday .
For the first time since the Lisbon Treaty entered into effect , we are now pulling together the efforts of the Commission and the Council Secretariat , and the Member States , in a comprehensive approach , under my overall coordination .
This is ground breaking .
We had a productive Council meeting yesterday .
Everyone agreed on the need for a rapid response and close coordination with the United Nations .
In terms of financial assistance , the Council reached the following conclusions .
It welcomed the Commission 's preliminary commitment for immediate humanitarian assistance of EUR 30 million , in addition to EUR 92 million in preliminary commitments by Member States .
It welcomed the Commission 's preliminary commitment of EUR 100 million for early non-humanitarian assistance , for instance , in rehabilitation and reconstruction , and it took note of the Commission 's preliminary indication that EUR 200 million would be available for longer-term responses .

It called for , in due course and after post-emergency needs have been fully assessed , an international conference on Haiti .
In total , this is a big response in a short time .
Assistance will be targeted , too , to the Dominican Republic .
Finding enough money is going to be less of a problem at the moment than getting it out to the people who need it .
We must ensure that it is properly targeted towards sustainable political and physical reconstruction .
Following the UN Secretary-General 's request for help with transport of humanitarian aid and for additional police units , the Council invited me to identify EU Member State contributions and make proposals for this mobilisation .
I am working on this .
We convened a Political and Security Committee meeting immediately after the Council meeting to follow up .
Early indications of Member State contributions are already now available , including possible contributions through the European Gendarmerie Force .
Work will continue in the Council preparatory groups during the coming days with a view to a rapid , targeted response .
The Foreign Affairs Council will meet again next Monday .
We will follow up on Haiti and consider further actions .
This is a major test of EU foreign policy in the new world of the Lisbon Treaty .
The people of Haiti - and our own people - expect a swift , effective and coordinated response .
This is what we believe we are delivering .
I look forward to working with Parliament on this and am pleased to be here today to give you this information and to hear your views .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me start by underlining the unprecedented nature of this disaster - in terms of humanitarian impact , but also in terms of the impact on the country as a whole .
Haiti is one of the poorest countries in the world .
It is a country in a chronically fragile situation whose existing basic functions and capacities have been very seriously disrupted .
Also , the international community has been hard hit .
Staff of the United Nations and NGOs and our own Commission staff are still missing , and this also explains the difficulties of organising aid on the spot .
People have to understand that it is not out of a lack of competence , but because the aid community has itself been hit .
Relief operations are not flowing as speedily as one would wish , although one sees that this is getting better by the hour .
In other words , this is not only about saving human lives .
We have , in fact , to save the country as a whole .
That is why the High Representative , Cathy Ashton , called for this extraordinary Council meeting , which was a very useful tool in addressing the problem .
Let me just very briefly focus on four main challenges .
First , we have , of course , to address humanitarian needs .
These are enormous and concern chiefly emergency medical care for the injured , water and sanitation - because there is risk of cholera , for example - food and shelter .
What is lacking most is surgery , primary health care and drugs , water treatment kits , food assistance , emergency shelter and logistics support .
What is in enough supply is search-and-rescue capacity .
The organisational coordinating effort 's priorities are to complete the needs assessment , to have a better picture of the detailed needs and to organise the transport logistics .
That will also be addressed within the framework of the EU institutions .
Lastly , we have to organise the coordination of international relief efforts .
That is always very difficult in these kinds of circumstances .
Let me stress that , only hours after the earthquake , European ECHO and MIC teams were deployed on the spot .
They have been working there ever since to contribute to needs assessment and aid coordination .
We are working with teams from OCHA , a United Nations organisation , and are in constant contact with John Holmes , the UN Emergency Relief Coordinator .
The second point is to build , or rebuild , the basic state capacity .
This is very important .
This country has to function again , not only physically - most of the buildings have disappeared - but with a lot of high officials having gone missing and state structures having been severely disrupted .
The Council welcomes the fact that we will urgently send a team of EU experts with the specific task of assessing the most critical needs of the Haitian state and civil administration in order to provide technical assistance .
Our diplomatic and cooperation staff on the ground are , of course , best placed to do that , but their capacity is overstretched .
This is something that will become more and more important in the coming days .
As the European Union and the European Commission , together with the Council , we could play a leadership role in re-establishing state institutions physically , and also in terms of people .
Third is , of course , the plan to reconstruct the country , where we have to look beyond the immediate relief phase .
In a few weeks , many emergency teams and means deployed at the present time will have left and there is a risk - very typical of this kind of disaster - of a second-wave disaster if we do not sustain our assistance and support .
We must immediately set up massive , coordinated medium- and long-term common EU response plans for the crisis .
Our services are working on this .
This should be designed to ensure a proper division of labour among EU institutions and Member States and to ensure a linked relief rehabilitation and development approach , with a sustained and seamless transition between immediate relief and post-emergency response .
We have been calling on all the Member States to fully engage in these efforts , and to turn into actions all our commitments for coordination and aid effectiveness .
This is a time when the strength of our commitments will be tested and must come out strong if we are to succeed .
Lastly , the financial response .
As the High Representative has already outlined , the European Commission will make a major contribution , first of all in terms of humanitarian aid - EUR 30 million , of which the largest part - EUR 22 million to be exact - is completely fresh money that comes on top of the already existing humanitarian engagements we have with Haiti .
The early recovery assistance - which is not humanitarian assistance , and what I just said about the state institutions of course comes under this umbrella - amounting to EUR 100 million , with a 50-50 balance between money redirected and fresh money , and then the longer-term reconstruction assistance , where there is now an initial amount of EUR 200 million .

Then we will have to see where we stand .
Now one is hearing figures in the region of USD 10 billion .
That seems a lot to me and , in any case , cannot be matched by the Commission budget .
We will have to see with the Pledging conference and with the Member States how exactly we are going to eventually participate in higher sums .
That is the EU-wide package that has now been prepared on top of all the contributions that are already being made and will be made by the Member States .
As the High Representative said , I will be going to the region - Haiti and also the Dominican Republic - tomorrow morning to have discussions with the authorities , including on the efforts to try to rebuild the state institutions .
The President and major NGOs are on the spot .
I will also go to the Dominican Republic .
It is important that we also see those authorities , because they are the neighbours .
You can already see that the situation might eventually create some overstretching at the border , so I will also see the Dominican authorities .
That is all I have to say at the moment .
On my return , I will report back to the Development Committee , on the Monday afternoon .
on behalf of the PPE Group . - Mr President , I am sure the House would like to remember the missing UN and EU staff and all of those who are missing and suffering in Haiti at this time .
I am also glad that Commissioner De Gucht is going there and that he will report to the Committee on Development when he returns on Monday .
That is a very welcome development .
To use his own terms , the nature of the impact is unprecedented , and I think that that is a fair point to make in a country of this kind , which is why - and I mention this just in passing - I really do think that the European Union has to be more visible .
Now that we have a High Representative who is a Vice-President of the Commission , that person must be more visible on issues of this kind .
The European Union is the biggest aid donor in the world , donating 60 % of aid , and we are probably the biggest donor of humanitarian aid as well .
But , while one sees the US hospital ships there , all we see from the EU is Member States going in from Belgium and Ireland and Britain or wherever .
There should be some visible EU presence .
Why not battle groups ?
Why not some standing groups , on a rotating basis , who would be ready to go into the area when these sort of things occur ?
The last thing I want to say is that what has happened in Haiti is grounded in poverty , and , when this terrible tragedy eases and it goes off the screens , let us not forget Haiti .
It is time to tackle the underlying poverty situation in Haiti once and for all .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , our thoughts today are with the people of Haiti in their tragedy , and I am sure all Members will want to send their condolences to the people of Haiti .
It is a tragedy but , as Gay Mitchell has said , it is a tragedy in a country where 75 % of people already live below the poverty line .
As we look to the future , that is something we really need to be looking at .
The public has responded magnificently to the challenge of helping Haiti .
In the UK alone , GBP 30 million has been raised in just a few days - from the public , during the financial crisis - so we know that the public is behind us in our efforts to raise funds for Haiti .
High Representative , I want to thank you for the work you have done in pulling together a quick EU response on this matter .
We learned at the time of the tsunami that , in fact , good coordination is as important as the actual funds we put on the ground .
It is not about which flag goes on the aid , it is about getting the aid out there , working with the United Nations to get it delivered .
Looking to the longer term , I am pleased that there will be an international conference on Haiti .
I think we need to look at the whole issue of Haiti , about its outstanding debt , and I hope the debt problems of Haiti will be on the agenda at the international conference .
Haiti owes USD 890 million to the international creditors and a large part of that is to the IMF .
The IMF has given Haiti a USD 100 million loan .
Can we convert that into a grant ?
There is no point impoverishing this country for another 100 years .
So I hope you will put that on the agenda of the IMF meeting .
I hope as well that we will address other issues , and I think you are right that the issue of the border with the Dominican Republic is equally important .
So , thank you once again for your efforts , and I hope the whole House will work hard to find a good coordinated effort .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , can I begin by wishing the High Representative , Baroness Ashton , well in the many challenges that she faces during her mandate .
As she knows well , and as the United Nations has stated , the situation in Haiti is the worst humanitarian disaster in decades , as the numbers of missing people , victims and deaths continue to rise .
The human cost of this tragedy is immeasurable .
While relief aid is beginning to arrive , we are all aware of the significant problems that aid workers are facing in trying to get assistance to those that need it most .
Increasing security , logistical and bureaucracy problems have been identified by the NGOs on the ground as hampering aid and making a disastrous situation worse .
These are the problems that are swaying the balance between life and death for Haitians .
In all the frayed work to alleviate the suffering and chaos , clear leadership and coordinated assistance are needed .
NGOs , government bodies , international organisations and local authorities must work together to deliver multisector emergency assistance to those in need .
It is clear that the country needs massive international support immediately .
The response from European citizens and their record generosity and solidarity have been immense .
Yesterday 's announcement of over EUR 420 million in European Union humanitarian aid for Haiti shows leadership and commitment , but its delivery must be coordinated and effective .
The European Union 's stated aim is to consolidate and strengthen the global relief effort .
I hope that you , Mrs Ashton , and Commissioner De Gucht , work strongly towards this aim in the respective visits to the United States , Haiti and elsewhere later this week .
The long-term development of the poorest nation in the western hemisphere must become a priority .
The allocation of EUR 200 million in European Union aid to help Haiti rebuild in the long term is a positive start , but , when the cameras have left and the world 's attention is turned elsewhere , the European Union , as a global leader , must act and live up to its responsibility .
Mr President , High Representative , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this new humanitarian crisis that Haiti is enduring is perhaps on a greater scale than all previous ones , so much so that I doubt that it is possible to find the right words to talk about the victims , to speak to the survivors and to reach out to families in order to tell them how much we share their pain and are aware of our responsibility .
However violent the earthquake was , it alone does not explain the extent of the damage .
The latter is also linked to the chronic poverty that Haiti has endured for many years .
Until now , the international community has been incapable of changing anything there .
Worse , by imposing policies on Haiti that we now know did not work , international institutions , Europe and its partners have exacerbated the fragility of its social fabric , its economy and its institutions .
In the 1970s , Haiti was almost self-sufficient where food was concerned .
It used to produce 90 % of its agricultural needs .
Today , it imports more than half .
This must surely have had a detrimental effect on local production .
Before this earthquake , Haiti was a country without resources because it was deprived of the resources to which it was entitled .
We must therefore firstly provide Haiti with as much support as possible in order to deal with emergencies .
From this point of view , we cannot but lament the fact that international aid has been very difficult to put into place .
In future , we must improve our procedures .
However , we must , above all , be aware that long-term development aid will not be effective if we impose what we consider to be the right priorities while everyone on the ground is telling us that we are wrong .
We must proceed by calling our own methods into question , and that will not work unless we increase the funds that we are putting aside for development policies in the long term .
The European Union has announced the amount of aid that it will release for Haiti , and the Member States have done the same .
We are talking about EUR 130 million in the short term , and EUR 200 million for long-term needs .
I would like to compare these figures to other figures , to the USD 155 billion that the banks of the City and Wall Street are getting ready to pay to a few thousand people who work in the banks .
That raises the question of the development model that we want to promote at global level .
Urgent humanitarian aid is necessary , but it alone is not enough .
It must not , under any circumstances , supplant development aid , which itself must not be experienced by the countries that are supposed to benefit from it as a veritable diktat .
The first way of assisting countries in great difficulty is to continue to respect them , to allow them to benefit from their own resources .
We must cancel Haiti 's debt and pay off our debt to that country .
Mr President , High Representative , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is our duty to the victims of Haiti to help them rebuild a country that was devastated even before a natural disaster turned it completely on its head .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , our hearts and minds go out to the people of Haiti in their hour of suffering .
I commend Baroness Ashton and Karel De Gucht for what they have already said has happened and is being done .
There is no question that there will be funds coming .
I was present at the tsunami which hit Sri Lanka and then later Indonesia .
I have witnessed earthquakes in Turkey .
I watched what happened in China .
Every time one of these things happens , we are caught short , not with water purification tablets or tents or clean water but with infrastructure .
We say , oh , the infrastructure is destroyed .
Of course it is destroyed .
We need to be able to supply very rapidly an emergency infrastructure .
How can this happen ?
What about an aircraft carrier ?
It has electricity , it has nuclear power , it has generators for water purification and it has helicopters .
Could we set up a global rescue operation , ready to go at a moment 's notice , that can provide makeshift harbours , temporary shelters and all the infrastructure that gets destroyed ?
We need to think afresh as to how to save lives immediately afterwards .
Mr President , Vice-President and High Representative , Commissioner , I would like to say , once again , that we have been deeply distressed by what the Haitian people , the children of Haiti are having to endure .
For seven days now , they have been living , surviving in an absolute hell .
The surge of global solidarity warms the heart , but it still has to be consolidated and better coordinated for the sole purpose of helping the Haitian people , who are thirsty , starving , homeless and deprived of the most elementary medical care .
We salute all those men and women who are involved in this .
The European Union has decided to release some initial funds .
However , we cannot leave it there .
European Union aid must be increased considerably , and the global banking system must become involved .
European food surpluses must be shipped out to the Haitian people as a matter of urgency .
Let us be frank .
Our continent is truly indebted to Haiti and has a duty to make amends for so many years of domination and plundering .
Lessons must be learned from the way this island , the pearl of the Caribbean , has been controlled by international financial institutions that have stifled it with appalling debt and the equally appalling interest linked to that debt .
Our Parliament should declare itself in favour of the immediate and unconditional cancellation of this entire debt .
Our group would like the conference that will soon take place in Montreal to make effective preparations for an international conference on the repair , reconstruction and sustainable development of Haiti with the people of Haiti .
This reconstruction must be placed under the auspices of the United Nations , so that the Haitian people can recover their economic and political sovereignty .
Haiti must not be the prize in a battle for domination between big powers .
Thus , while we commend the United States ' support efforts , we must be on guard and refuse to allow the North American leaders to use this terrible disaster as a pretext to occupy the island , to run it and to establish military bases there .
Europe must lead by example .
It must have only one objective , one sole concern : the people , the children of Haiti .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my deep solidarity with all those who have been hit by this natural disaster .
In situations like this , with the large-scale destruction of buildings and infrastructure and with thousands of deaths , it is almost impossible to deliver aid effectively without having minimum conditions of public order and security .
Any aid efforts are difficult without close coordination in collecting the necessary items and ordered distribution of aid .
It is essential to understand what is needed , by whom and when .
Another point to think about is that on too many occasions , the generosity of public and private donors has been betrayed and huge amounts of money have not gone to those who really needed them .
It is therefore necessary to have a strict system of controls to prevent money being squandered or stolen , particularly in fragile countries with high levels of corruption and low levels of governance .
Europe ought to demonstrate its own efficiency .
I hope it is successful .
Mr President , the horror of Haiti is shocking .
It is only human to feel compassion for the innocent victims of the natural disaster there .
All of us here are well paid and can afford to give .
I will give my attendance allowance for today if every British MEP will do the same .
However , with their taxes , our constituents cannot afford your generosity .
Globalism has destroyed our industries .
The banks have ruined our economies .
EU red tape is strangling our entrepreneurs and the carbon-tax scam is plunging millions into deadly fuel poverty .
The death toll in Haiti is shocking , but this winter , more than 50 000 pensioners in Britain alone will die premature deaths because of the cold and the cost of heating .
Across Europe , the death toll will run into hundreds of thousands , but , because this truth shames the political elite and because it highlights the inconvenient truth of global cooling , this scandal will be buried as quietly as are our elderly dead .
Hundreds of thousands of our own people are dying because of government neglect and EU cold taxes , yet you insist on throwing other people 's money at a disaster in somebody else 's back yard .
That is not compassion : that is stinking hypocrisy .
I know this place is uneasy with our Christian heritage , but as always , our Bible reveals an eternal truth that most here would rather ignore - first book of Timothy , 5 : 8 : ' but if any provide not for his own , and especially for those of his own house , he hath denied the faith and is worse than an infidel . '

( FR ) Mr President , High Representative , as was said earlier , the disaster was on an extreme scale due to the violence of the earthquake , doubtless one of the most serious in history , and we therefore fear a terrifying human death toll .
I am nevertheless pleased with the rapid reaction of the European Commission and the Member States and with the commitment they have made to earmark a massive aid package of EUR 429 million for the emergency humanitarian aid effort and the reconstruction of Haiti .
However , it is regrettable that the Europeans have acted in an uncoordinated manner and that the actions of the European Union are not visible enough , something that contrasts sharply with the efficiency of the US aid machine and makes us forget that the European Union is the world 's biggest donor of humanitarian aid and development aid .
The European Commission has also activated the Community Civil Protection Mechanism , which coordinates offers of assistance from the Member States and currently represents the crux of our crisis response system .
Recent events confirm the need to improve the European Union 's response to crises .
A real organisation with civil protection capacities is essential , and for this reason , I would remind you of Mr Barnier 's proposal , which dates from 2006 and proposes the creation of a European civil protection force ; it is ready and just has to be applied .
Moreover , the President of the European Council , Mr Van Rompuy , today spoke in favour of a rapid reaction force .
Within a matter of days , the United States has assumed a dominant role in rescue and coordination matters .
It is essential to recall the role of central and global coordination played by OCHA , the United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs , which is best placed to carry out this coordination .
Do not be mistaken , this is not about waging a war of flags .
However , good organisation means saving time and money , and I think that European citizens have the right to know what the European Union is doing .
( FR ) Mr President , is Haiti condemned to misfortune ?
Since its independence , natural disasters have given way to political catastrophes there , and here we are today faced with a tragedy of historic proportions .
There are dead , injured , countless destroyed buildings and the ruin of national political structures and cooperation structures .

We must beat fate .
The European Union must participate in this twin emergency and reconstruction effort .
We owe it to our numerous ties with Haiti , ties that are , first and foremost , historic : a former colony , Haiti was the most prosperous of them all ; secondly , diplomatic : the Cotonou Agreement makes the island a privileged partner ; and , finally , geographical , since Haiti is a neighbour of the European Union thanks to the outermost regions .
Moreover , the crisis in Haiti represents the first test of the new European External Action Service , which you head up , Mrs Ashton .
That has been conclusive up to now .
This disaster also underlines the challenges and the improvements that we must make to this structure , since the solidarity movement of our continent aside , the US reaction raises questions about our mobilisation capacity .
Thus , the remarkable efforts in favour of European coordination , the Member States ' contributions , must not conceal the difficulty of the discussions concerning the deployment of the European Gendarmerie Force .
While it is crucial for the European Union 's expenditure to be guided by the United Nations , these difficulties lead to the conclusion that the European Union must equip itself with an autonomous , integrated structure with the means to deal with tasks as complex as a humanitarian emergency .
Finally , the reconstruction phase represents an immense challenge .
There is no shortage of tasks : political , administrative , economic , social and environmental .
We are perhaps at year zero of a new era for Haiti .
This is a major political challenge for a Europe that must assert itself as a visible leader in this process .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , every evening , the 8 o 'clock news reminds us of the unspeakable suffering in Haiti .
The suffering is perhaps matched only by the near worldwide compassion that surrounds it .
This compassion is certainly spontaneous and sincere , but it is short-lived .
The moment of truth will come in a fortnight , once the media have chosen to focus on other events .
If someone does not pick up the baton , then Haitians will once again risk finding themselves alone , abandoned to their own fate .
In a country in which everything remains to be done , starting with rehabilitation and reconstruction , it is important to act so that the different sequences lead to genuine development .
As for the European Union , it has an extensive range of tools and solid experience in this area .
This is why the challenges faced by Haitian society , which is desperately poor , also represent a moment of truth for the European Union .
It is in the coming days and months that we will have to act in an effective and determined manner .
This is the most important aspect from the point of view of recovery once we have restored conditions of security and public order , which are essential for any coordinated action in a country in which everything has been damaged by the earthquake , including its institutional structures .
I therefore feel it is wise to stress one essential aspect : the recovery , the reconstruction of the Haitian state , must be the work of the Haitians themselves .
It is their development that we are talking about .
We can help them in a spirit of partnership .
Europe would do well to confirm this in the international conferences planned on this subject .
Yes to partnership , no to paternalism and neo-colonialism !
( CS ) All of us will certainly agree that this is one of the greatest disasters in that region in the last 200 years .
And speaking on behalf of my colleagues in the European Conservatives faction , and on behalf of my fellow citizens in the Czech Republic , I would like to express sympathy and compassion for all the victims and those who are suffering .
Nevertheless , regardless of this tragedy , there are signs that even after the ratification of the Lisbon Treaty , the European Union is still uncoordinated and incapable of prompt action .
It distantly reminds me of a four-headed dragon .
We have a President , Prime Minister of the presiding country , President of the Commission , and Commissioner-designate .
Ladies and gentlemen , I personally believe that in this particular case , we have to recognise that the European Union has been caught flat-footed .
Those who have not been caught napping are the citizens in the individual Member States who have been providing material as well as financial aid day after day .
( PT ) Mr President , we join with the rest of the world in expressing our sympathy and regret at the tragedy that has befallen the people of Haiti , and wish to show them complete solidarity , but we must highlight certain issues that we believe to be crucial .
We should begin by denouncing anyone or any country that seeks to profit from this catastrophe by returning to neo-colonialism .
Such an attitude seems to be behind the deployment of thousands of armed North American troops , despite the fact that the majority of the population live in poverty and remain victims of exploitation by multinational companies and the interference of external bodies , particularly the United States .
This is a time for all the humanitarian aid , cooperation and support for reconstruction that the people of Haiti deserve , through their dignity and courage .
We should remember that Haiti was the place where 400 000 Africans , enslaved and trafficked by Europeans , revolted against slavery and brought about the first great social revolution on the American continent .
Coordinated aid should be sent as a matter of urgency , but it should be done without giving in to neo-colonialist temptations .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , an enormous tragedy is taking place in Haiti , caused by nature , but also by the lack of a State worthy of the name , unable to manage even to a minimal extent the disaster and the humanitarian emergency , unable to manage aid for the civilian population which is now prey to unscrupulous people .
The Red Cross has issued a warning call .
At the Montreal conference to be held on 25 January , the EU must speak with one voice and request single , coordinated management of the humanitarian action ; otherwise , we risk chaos and the aid going to waste , including these enormous and valuable amounts mentioned today by the Commission , and the aid from the Member States .
Baroness Ashton , an exceptional effort should be made for the children , above all the orphans , who deserve priority assistance , including in terms of psychological support ; otherwise , they will be condemned to poverty and exploitation .
We should also ensure that the international community is not merely prepared to simplify adoption procedures .
That would lead only to a form of legalised deportation of children , which is not what Haiti needs .
Mr Frattini , the Italian Minister for Foreign Affairs , is right to propose constructing buildings and care homes so that they can grow up with dignity in their own country and facilitating temporary trips abroad for holidays and , chiefly , for education .
I will finish with a question : are we prepared , internationally , to reduce or cancel Haiti 's debt ?
( RO ) The whole world is indeed at this moment showing solidarity and compassion to the victims of the catastrophic earthquake in Haiti , highlighting once again the need to act promptly and in a coordinated manner in such situations .
Loss limitation now depends on how effective intervention is and , as has already been mentioned here , the way in which international agencies and organisations , along with the EU 's Department for Humanitarian Aid , have acted is exemplary , not forgetting the individual gestures by Member States .
I believe that a European Union rapid intervention operational force must be created because the situation in Haiti demonstrates to us the need to maintain public order and ensure the population 's safety , in addition to the assistance required by the survivors .
We are certainly in a situation at the moment where many voices are protesting and making accusations that the alleged intention is to carry out a military occupation under the guise of humanitarian assistance .
However , in a situation where UN forces are insufficient or have been overtaken by events , the European Union should take further involvement , especially as it enjoys a large amount of credibility in the region .
I believe that , as a European Union , we must face up to a wide-ranging process of reconstruction in Haiti , while , at the same time , boosting the stability of the state 's structures .
It is , of course , very important to show compassion to the country 's inhabitants going through this difficult ordeal , which includes finding specific solutions to facilitate the procedures for adopting children who have been left orphaned after this disaster and offering concrete assistance to the population which has been so sorely tried .
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Ashton , we are listening to voices from different parts of the House , but they have one matter , one theme , in common : the reaction of the European Union , the political reaction , was not sufficient , and it was not coordinated well .
I think we should thank the charities that they so spontaneously and , as always , without fail , took responsibility for the need .
In addition , we should think about what could be done better .
In fact , I have just one question for Mrs Ashton : this is the first such situation you have been faced with in your new position .
What is your main conclusion from this event , and from the mistakes which we are all talking about here ? More importantly , what can be changed in future ?
I think this is the most important thing we should think about , and it is , to a great extent , our role to do so .
( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Ashton , that is enough !
That is enough .
It is the same with every disaster , the French send a plane and assistance , the Belgians , the Italians , the Germans , everyone does the same thing , and every time they do it alone ; it is the same story every time .
On the ground , the result is always the same : there is no coordination , missed opportunities for the victims and a lack of organisation .
When is this going to end ?
When is the Commission finally going to act ?
Do not come and tell us that this is complicated , because the projects are ready .
We just need to use them .
In 2006 , Mr Barnier proposed the creation of a European civil protection force , with Member States contributing on a voluntary basis , without having to wait for hypothetical unanimity from the 27 , by pooling existing national civil protection units , by training them together with joint rescue techniques , joint communication methods and a joint headquarters .
It is easy , Mrs Ashton : do this with those who want to do it !
As for the others , they will join us when they realise that this is the future .
Commitments were entered into after the tsunami and yet , today , nothing has been done .
I do not say this lightly ; the Commission 's inaction is criminal .
Mrs Ashton , why is Europe doomed to repeat its mistakes ?
Mrs Ashton , no one questions your goodwill , but announce here , today , the creation of this European coordination force .
Parliament will follow you .
If you need support , we are there to help you .
But for pity 's sake , stop talking to us about coordination ; make this coordination happen !
Do not wait for the next disaster !
Mr President , I have to say there are people who do , and there are people who talk .
I therefore want to congratulate the Council , the Commission and the High Representative on the action that they have taken .
None of this was foreseeable .
We are looking at something that was unimaginable .
I have sat here and listened to cheap political points being made against the High Representative , against the Member States and against the Commission via the notion that somehow , because it is an American hand rescuing someone from the rubble and saving a life , that you should brush that hand away and say ' no neo-colonialism ' and that somehow , by attacking Haiti itself , you make the lives of the people who are suffering there better .
Shame on you .
Let us make sure that we coordinate .
Give the coordination over to the Americans - if it saves lives , it saves lives .
Forget the political rhetoric .
Congratulations on committing this amount of money .
Congratulations , Baroness Ashton , on not playing to the audience and using up air space to get into Haiti just to go there and show that you are there .
What does that do ?
It does absolutely nothing .
Therefore , angry on behalf of those people who want rescuing , let us coordinate with the Americans .
Let us kick the butt of the United Nations so that it delivers aid , and let us stop making cheap political points .
( Applause )

( PL ) Mr President , I would like to add my voice to that of Mr Juvin - the humanitarian aid is poorly coordinated .
I do not want to talk only about humanitarian aid , but about what is called technical , structural or development aid .
The catastrophe was not foreseeable , but we did know what a terrible state Haiti is in , and to make matters worse , it has been struck by this misfortune .
We have known for a long time what a bad condition Haiti is in , and how badly its structures function .
We know , too , that if they had been functioning better , and if , before the earthquake , we had organised aid and technical cooperation with Haiti in a better way , those structures would have been working better and , as a result , it would have enabled better use of our aid now and would have saved many thousands of people - but that did not happen .
Does Mrs Ashton , as High Representative and a Member of the Council , intend to take specific action , with specific dates , to coordinate the technical cooperation of various European countries so that the third countries to which we give aid really use that aid well ?
Are we going to use any kind of exchange of best practices between countries which have a lot of experience , where technical cooperation functions very well , and countries which are only beginning to use that technical cooperation ?
Will a good , common , strong European policy come into being , which third countries will really make use of , so that we will not give humanitarian aid in the dark and in haste when , unexpectedly , hundreds of thousands of people find themselves in a tragic situation ?
( IT ) Mr President , High Representative , ladies and gentlemen , the enormous tragedy that has struck Haiti requires an immediate response and many aid and rescue activities are under way , carried out by individual Member States , even if there is a good deal of competition between European countries .
The new Europe with its High Representative ought to be capable of providing its own aid to the people who are suffering .
The earthquake , moreover , has struck the poorest country in the western hemisphere , where 80 % of the population live below the poverty line and 54 % live in absolute poverty .
Within this emergency , however , there is another : the emergency involving the children , the weakest sector of the population , who have been left with no family , no protection and no State .
I would therefore like to call upon the High Representative for Foreign Affairs to examine actions intended to allow Haitian children up to the age of 10 to be taken in and looked after by European countries .
Lady Ashton , Europe can take them in and offer them adequate living conditions ; I mean for a limited period , until the conditions are adequate for them to return to their own country .
All this could be organised , all this could be easy for the European countries , and it would be a fair way to respond to the need for solidarity , but also to avoid speculative and illegal actions being taken at the expense of children .
We are talking about children , the most precious resource that we should protect in Haiti .
Mr President , in recent days , there have been a number of complaints about the ineffectiveness and slowness of the response to the Haitian crisis .
Many point to the increasing insecurity , the growing despair among those who survived the quake , and the appalling lack of food and clothing .
It is true that these problems exist and we need to solve them as soon as possible .
However , we should applaud the engagement of various international actors , ranging from governments to civil society organisations and to individuals worldwide .
The European Union is certainly among those who have expressed their wholehearted solidarity with the Haitian people .
Again , many have criticised the supposedly slow reaction of the EU to the crisis even today , but the EU is not only about decisions made in Brussels .
National governments have already sent thousands of men and women to help the Haitians and have allocated millions of euros in aid .
The role of the EU should be concentrated more on medium- and long-term aid and aimed at the reconstruction of Haitian towns and villages , of their infrastructure , schools and hospitals .
The EU can certainly be the forum , the umbrella under which Europe 's medium- and long-term aid can be distributed and coordinated .
The pledge recently made by the Commission and the Member States to earmark almost EUR 500 million is certainly a big and significant step in this direction , and we should all stand behind it .
( ES ) Firstly , I would like to extend my condolences and solidarity to the people of Haiti , who have been so hard hit by this catastrophe .
We in the European Union are not a military power , and neither do we wish to be one .
Yet we are a force in the world due to our social model .
We are also a power to be reckoned with for our development cooperation and humanitarian assistance , and we are proud of that .
Today , Haiti , or at least the catastrophe that has hit this country , poses a challenge to the new institutions created by the Lisbon Treaty .
Now is the time for humanitarian aid , but very soon the time will come to rebuild , promote development and offer assistance to governability and institutionality .
And we must respond to the expectations of the people of Haiti with one voice .
We must respond by combining the functions of the High Representative with the functions of the Commissioners for Development and Humanitarian Aid .
Why ? Why should we all act together ?
To coordinate the aid from countries more effectively , to ensure our aid is more efficient , to speak with a European voice that is identifiable in the world and to live up to the world 's expectations of us at such times : to support this humanitarian crisis and promote development . What is happening today in Haiti could be another catastrophe tomorrow and could affect every part of the world the day after tomorrow .
Mr President , one of the poorest countries in the world ravaged in just 15 seconds , the victim of bad government , the victim of dictatorship and corruption .
Fifty thousand people dead , thousands still missing and three million homeless .
The United States ' response has been commendable , the United Nations ' slightly less so , but I have to agree with everything that has been said .
We are not being political in this , Mr Cashman : our response has been less than adequate .
We have been left in the slipstream of the United States .
The logistical difficulties will be overcome - clean water , medication , food and shelter - these will all happen in due course .
But what Haiti needs to emerge from this disaster is a fully functioning democracy with an economy that can sustain its people .
Its recovery must be measured over the years , and not just in the weeks and the months after this crisis .
As has been said time and time again , it will disappear from the television sets .
It will go from item one over the next two or three weeks to item three , and then it will be gone .
But that is where the real challenge is , because in 2008 , Haiti was hit by two devastating hurricanes .
Poverty and desolation were left in their wake .
The world leaders at that stage promised EUR 600 million .
Only EUR 40 million was actually delivered .
What we need is the rebirth , the resurgence , the re-emergence and the redevelopment of Haiti .
It must be led and it must be managed in a proper fashion but , above all else , it must set down a clear and deliverable strategy to make Haiti the proud , independent and democratic entity that it should be , but which it is not and has not been up to now , thus leading to the present catastrophe .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the unprecedented humanitarian disaster in Haiti affects us deeply and the European Union has a duty to contribute as best it can to the efforts by the international community , using all the tools at its disposal .
As far as financial resources are concerned , significant progress has been made in recent days and hours .
What deserves more thought is the other aspects of Europe 's response to the crisis , but we should avoid worrying about our image and concentrate instead on the substance , as the High Representative rightly said .
The central role of the MINUSTAH mission has now emerged clearly , in terms of both civil protection and security , ruling out an autonomous CSDP mission , but the EU 's coordination role in support of the UN mission remains key .
On this point , I would like to remind Mr Juvin that this coordination exists , and that the Monitoring and Information Centre is performing it in the area of civil protection , and the Situation Centre is performing it in the area of security , and it is to be hoped that this work will result in deployment of the European Gendarmerie Force , as has been expressly requested by the United Nations .
What it is useful to understand from the High Representative and from the Commission is how the MIC and the Situation Centre are responding , in practice , in the face of such onerous tasks and tests , how their coordination is working , and whether their instruments and resources are adequate .
This will also help us at a later date when we will have to consider the adequacy of these instruments and the capacity of consular protection , but now is not the time for these debates .
Now is the time for action and commitment , and we fully support the action being taken by the High Representative .
( SL ) I , too , would like to express my sympathy for the events in Haiti , as well as congratulate the European Commission and European institutions for their relatively appropriate response .
Nevertheless , like some of my fellow Members , I , too , wonder whether our response has been rapid enough .
It might perhaps be a good idea if Mrs Ashton , Vice-President of the Commission , personally visited the scene of the tragic event , as that could prove important for several reasons .
I disagree with those of you who argue that the presence of soldiers and other law enforcement personnel might herald the beginning of a colonial approach on our part towards Haiti .
In my opinion , such talk is neither fair nor appropriate .
What is important , however , is that , at the next International conference on Haiti , we adopt long-term measures for the re-establishment of state institutions , to enable them to work again .
Here I refer , in particular , to health and education policies .
Only policies of this kind , and only development in these areas and institutions , can shape Haiti into a more stable country than it has been to date .
( ES ) Mr President , I wish to emphasise the importance of the European Union providing leadership : not merely immediate emergency humanitarian aid but also long-term cooperation for rebuilding the country .
We must work with the local authorities and with the government of Haiti , as the country is already fragile enough without us making it even weaker by having the international organisations stand in for its authorities .
We must also work alongside local non-governmental organisations .
I would like to acknowledge the fast response of the Spanish Presidency , both in terms of coordinating aid and making available to the European Union the aid resources Spain already had in the country and the region , since it is the foremost European aid donor , not only in Latin America but also specifically in Haiti .

( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Ashton , politics is , first and foremost , about symbols , and that is why I think you should not be here , but in Haiti ; that is why I think you should not be travelling to the United States , but to Haiti .
I feel - and I say this with a great deal of sadness - that you have not gauged the magnitude of the event , of this terrible tragedy , and , deep down , when we consider all this , Europe has never been so absent .
We are the biggest donors , and yet we do not exist .
My second feeling is that the more we nominate , the more we create functions and titles , the less we exist , and this should prompt us to ask ourselves some questions .
How many disasters must there be before the leaders of the European Union finally measure up to their responsibilities ?
Mr Barnier 's report has been on the table since 2006 .
What are we waiting for to adopt it ?
What are we waiting for to apply it ?
Mr President , I think all our thoughts have been expressed and they have to go out to those who have lost their lives : the people of the United Nations , the people of Haiti itself and the people who are suffering although they are still alive .
What we need is a good , strong coordinated effort and nothing - but nothing - should get in the way of that .
Can I say that I welcome the commitment that we have made in Europe to the people of Haiti .
I hope we follow that through because I was touched - and it is quite right - what happens in two weeks ' time when they cease to be part of the media and they cease to be part of the news ?
What are these people going to do then ?
Yes , there is a clear need to rebuild Haiti , both in the short and long term , but most important now is to get the aid distributed to the suffering people on the ground , the people who are hurting .
I have to say that I agree totally with the comments of Mr Cashman earlier on .
This is too important to score cheap political points .
( ES ) Please allow me a few seconds to begin by congratulating the High Representative , the Council , the Commission and the rotating Presidency of the European Union for the speed , coordination and effort they have shown from the outset .
Perhaps they did not enjoy the great media attention prompted by 10 000 US marines arriving on the island , but everything took place very quickly and effectively in my opinion , and I have plenty of experience .
I would just like to mention one thing , which has not come up throughout the debate : 50 % of the survivors recovered from the rubble during the first 78 hours were saved by teams from Europe and the Member States .

( FR ) Mr President , as Mrs Joly has already said , there are circumstances in which words and figures lose all meaning and become ludicrous : two million refugees - as we have heard - perhaps more , more than 200 000 deaths , a country that has been laid waste , a capital that has been almost erased from the map .
The urgency now is to dig out the last survivors - if there are any left - to bury the dead , to feed the living , to distribute water , to treat , to operate and to rebuild .
Every country departed quickly , very quickly , with its resources , its equipment , its dogs , its people and its generosity .
It is an immense , magnificent effort , but it is a national effort .
Europe absolutely must now gather momentum and give substance to this idea that some of us , many of us , have been defending here in the European Parliament and elsewhere for several years , namely the implementation of a European civil intervention body , green helmets or white helmets - the colour is of little importance - people , resources and common strategies .

EU-FAST , the initiative launched by Mr Verhofstadt in 2003 , or EuropeAid , launched by Mr Barnier in 2006 - the paternity ultimately does not matter - the idea is to be able to act quickly , to be ready together .
( FI ) Mr President , I find it odd that people here have spoken of visibility and have doubted the motives of the United States of America , because right now help is needed .
I think that it is especially tragic that among the ruins at the moment , there are people who could still be rescued .
Everything that can be done to improve the situation should be done .
When , a while ago , the crisis management forces were established to bolster the European 's foreign and security policy , including its defence policy , the reason I was given for this , at least in Finland , was that these forces were also there in the event of natural disasters , and that they could help when such catastrophes struck anywhere in the world , including Europe of course .
Now , however , crisis management forces actually have nothing to do in the different parts of Europe in which they are stationed .
They have nothing to do .
Fortunately , there are no crises in Europe , and so they have nothing to do .
What is stopping these crisis management forces from being used for crises like this if help is being requested ?
( LT ) Today , after the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , we are probably dealing with the biggest tragedy that has ever taken place and we need to understand the position of the High Representative when , at the very beginning of their term , they have to solve a rather complicated task which , I would even say , they have never had to deal with before .
Yes , it is true , today we see some shortcomings and in future , we need better prepared European Union joint forces , who could take part in rescue operations .
I think that the greatest contribution today would be for that money that was mentioned today to be sent to the Republic of Haiti , to be put to use as soon as possible and spent on the rebuilding of infrastructure , as the President of Haiti mentioned , and it can perhaps be put towards removing some of those collapsed homes that are lying in the streets today .
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy / Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , as I began , I wanted to come to this House to hear the views .
I take on board and understand the frustration that honourable Members feel , that there are issues which could be handled better .
Members asked questions about visibility and coordination .
There is no question that , because America is closer , because it has the capacity to mobilise as quickly as it did , then the pictures you will see on your television screens will be of them .
The fact that we worked so closely and collaboratively with the United States is also an important part of what we do now and in the future .
And there is also no question that , as I was woken in the night to be told of the earthquake , we mobilised our people as quickly as we possibly could .
Twenty-one Member States were mobilised to respond .
We had work done , with the Council and Commission side coming together for the very first time , and may I just say , it is only eight days since I was before you in my hearing here .
Twenty-one Member States with 11 search-and-rescue teams , five field hospitals , six advance medical posts , 40 medical teams , six water-purification units ; we despatched these as quickly as we could and I pay tribute to the Member States for the work they do .
I also pay tribute to the officials who worked and have continued to work day and night to pull this effort together .
I put the question very early to the United Nations on the ground , and to Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon , where best my efforts could be .
There was no doubt that I had nothing to contribute on the ground other than to take up valuable space when planes were circling the airfield unable to land because of the state of the airfield at the present time .
I am not a doctor . I am not a fire-fighter .
My place was to bring together the coordination , to be talking to the Friends of Haiti Group , to be coordinating with the United States to make sure that we put in the maximum effort on the ground .
I also pay tribute , as honourable Members have done , to the NGOs and to the people on the ground .
The devastation that happened on the ground had enormous impact on the United Nations , which has lost many members of their senior staff , and on NGOs , which have been unable to respond as quickly as they would simply because people of theirs have died .
That has made it very difficult , as you have watched and we have watched people desperate for help , wondering where the help is .
Getting the help out in these circumstances has been incredibly difficult , and again people have worked tirelessly to provide it .
Now things are getting easier , the help is getting out , but do not underestimate for one moment how difficult the circumstances have been on the ground .
Did it work well ?
Yes .
Am I satisfied ?
No .
As I start my first weeks in this job , I say to you very clearly : I hear what you say .
I hear the frustration .
I understand it .
And you are right to criticise me that it is not as good as it can be in the future .
You are right .
It should , and must , get better and better .
What I have to do is take what happened and learn the lessons of it now in order to make sure that we do more in the future to pull together , but I take nothing away from the tremendous work that was done and is being done hour by hour and day by day .
For the long term , honourable Members are absolutely right .
When the cameras have gone , we need to be there .
We need to be there physically , we need to be there in terms of the support we can give .
I agree that debt issues need to be a part of the discussions that take place .
I agree that what is done must be done in partnership with the Haitian people with due respect for them .
I agree on the importance of rebuilding the infrastructure , and I agree that we have to ensure that the role of the United Nations is recognised and make sure that they are able to fulfil it well .
That is why I am going not only to the United States to see Secretary of State Clinton but also to the United Nations to talk with the Secretary-General and the key people about what we can now do to pull together for the future because that , as you say , will be of enormous importance .
Let me finish on the reality of the situation .
As honourable Members have said , this is a country where over 70 % of people were already living below the poverty line .
It is very important , as honourable Members have said , that the children , the orphan children especially , are cared for properly , and the devastation will require support in the years ahead .
Let me just tell you a little bit about the infrastructure at the moment .
Hospitals , electricity , communications , water supply , seaports and airports have been badly damaged .
The main official buildings , the Presidential Palace , the Parliament , Ministries of Treasury , Justice , Planning , Health and Interior are completely destroyed .
Many of the high government officials are missing .
The capacities of the Haitian Government are not functioning .
It is , as you said , already one of the poorest countries in the world , and because we need to rebuild that infrastructure , I share your commitment to make sure that we do .
( Applause )

Mr President , first of all , I would like to tell Mr Le Hyaric , who is calling for food surpluses to be shipped to Haiti , that this is not the European Union 's approach , for the simple reason that the Commission prefers to purchase these products in the region .
We will begin by seeing whether we can purchase them in the region rather than transport our surpluses to Haiti .
Secondly , concerning the whole matter of coordination and civil protection and so on , let me just say three things .
First , civil protection is a competence of the Member States , and all coordination initiatives must be built on this basis .
This was also proposed by the Barnier report but , up to now , we have not reached a conclusion .
It is a competence of the Member States and not of the Commission as such .
Secondly , as far as civil protection and its coordination is concerned , since the 2004 tsunami , EU civil protection coordination has grown stronger and much more efficient .
Virtual exercises can , of course , never test enough the effectiveness of our cooperation as much as natural disasters do , sadly enough .
In this crisis , non-EU Member States are calling the MIC to see how they can contribute to the relief effort with EU facilities .
Thirdly , let us not forget that , in the second Barroso Commission , humanitarian relief and civil protection have been combined under one Commissioner , which is , I think , a very valuable effort .
In addition we also now have a High Representative , who will have a double hat .
What we have seen in the past about coordination is that it is not lacking inside the Commission for example - I will come back to that in a minute - but it is sometimes between the European institutions and the Member States and between the European Commission and Council .
The whole idea behind this double-hatting was precisely that the Council and Commission could work better together , and I think it has been demonstrated in this crisis that this has , in fact , been quite an advance .
Lastly , I would also like to say that I am a little bit sad about what some speakers have said .
Of course as a Commissioner , I cannot be sad , I just have to take notice of it , but it does not pay enough tribute to all our people who have been working , on the spot and in Brussels , from hour one , day and night , during the weekend , without any complaint , without asking for any compensation .
They have been working very hard and within hours they were also active on the spot , although their facilities were also hit hard .
So please consider that this is the kind of massive disaster that is not foreseeable , that you can only respond to when it occurs , and for which you have to demonstrate that you can organise a response in a very short period of time .
I think the Commission has been demonstrating this .
I think that the Member States immediately and massively supported our action and I think we should also be a little bit less critical about those services .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the February part-session .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I would like to express my solidarity with the people of Haiti affected by the earthquake that hit the country on 12 January , and I welcome the aid commitments made by the EU .
The European Union is the world 's largest provider of humanitarian and development aid .
A few hours after the catastrophe , the EU provided EUR 3 million of aid for the initial relief operations .
A sum of EUR 134 million was released for early rehabilitation and reconstruction efforts .
EUR 200 million has been set aside for rehabilitation in the longer term , adding to the EUR 92 million that has been given by different EU countries .
These amounts , totalling EUR 429 million , may be further increased , depending on the needs assessment .
I would like to congratulate the European Commission on their coordination of the aid , but I am disappointed that the European Union has not been visible enough on the ground .
This is detrimental to the image of the EU in international public opinion , and is in contrast with the image of the US , which contributed EUR 91.6 million .
During this crisis , there has been a clear need for medical care , so I am calling for an increase in the quota of doctors and health technicians , along with greater logistical support .
I am surprised by the absence of the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy from the scene of the natural disaster in Haiti .
In spite of the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Union still has difficulty in showing its face on the international stage , and that is most regrettable .
It seems to me that the European crisis response system is too fragmented , too complex and not successful enough .
In terms of the rehabilitation of Haiti ( for which EUR 100 million are earmarked ) and the reconstruction of the country ( EUR 200 million ) , what exactly will the EDF and the Stability Instrument fund ?
Furthermore , to respond to the UN request in terms of logistical and security support , the European Union must , in my view , be in a position to use all the instruments provided by the Treaty of Lisbon , including military response .
I call for the rapid establishment of a European civil protection force as devised by Mr Barnier in 2006 with the aim of arriving at a European response that is planned , genuinely coordinated and effective .
The recent statements by Mr Van Rompuy are along the right lines .
He advocated the creation of a humanitarian rapid reaction force .
What will be the exact nature of this project and when will it see the light of day ?
Ladies and gentlemen , the reports reaching us from Haiti are shocking .
It is one of the most horrifying catastrophes we have heard of .
However , we can already draw certain conclusions which may be useful in future .
It can be clearly seen that the mechanisms which coordinate humanitarian aid are not the best .
Aid for the Haitians could have been more effective if the donors of humanitarian aid had been able to use better means of coordinating their work .
Improving cooperation is not a matter just for the European Union , because progress in this area requires constructive analysis and action on the part of all substantial donors .
In situations such as the one in Haiti today , what is important is speed , adequacy and elasticity .
Today is not the right time to deliberate , for example , about who should control the airport in the capital of Haiti .
That is , of course , important , but decisions on the use of specific solutions should be made at another time .
Now , we must do everything possible to concentrate on the most important objective - saving human lives .
in writing . - The recent earthquake in Haiti demonstrates to us all how fragile living on this earth can be .
We have all been moved by the pictures and stories coming from the media in recent days .
The response of the global community to this natural disaster has been amazing and I commend all of those who are helping with the relief effort or funding the relief effort from home .
It will take generations for the people of Haiti to fully recover from what will hopefully be a once in a lifetime event .
It is important that this House shows solidarity to those people .
It would be my hope that the European Union could play a leading role in giving those people hope of a better future .
Emergency aid in the short term must be backed up with longer-term aid to help the future generations recover from this most horrific ordeal .
The way Members of this House , across all political groups , have responded to date has been extremely heartening .
I look forward to working with my colleagues to do what I can for the people of Haiti .
The EU must aim to be an example of the well off always willing to give a hand-up to those less advantaged then ourselves .
Mr President , tragic information about the disastrous earthquake in Haiti reaches us every day .
From this news , it is absolutely clear that Haiti , plunged into total chaos and left without support , is not coping with the effects of that terrible tragedy .
The entire international community , including the European Union , is obliged to give humanitarian aid to the victims of this disaster , who are completely bereft of basic necessities .
Therefore , I would like to appeal strongly for the appropriate European Union structures to take immediate and effective action in order to send , as quickly as possible , essential aid and support for the fight with the results of the earthquake in Haiti .
Situation in Iran ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy and Vice-President of the Commission on the situation in Iran .
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy / Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , honourable Members , this is an important opportunity to raise the situation in Iran .
The European Union wants normal relations with Iran , and our efforts on the nuclear issue are part of that .
In this context , I will continue , in my capacity as High Representative , the role of my predecessor , Javier Solana , in the international talks with Iran .
Iran is an important country with a deep history and rich culture , and a remarkably talented population .
The films and books coming out of Iran are impressive , the level of education of women is high , there is a capacity for public debate and the young population is vibrant and active .
In many ways , Iranian society has the hallmarks and the capacity of a free society .
The threat to the society has been reflected in the turmoil that followed what many in Iran saw as a fraudulent election last year .
That , of course , is a matter for the Iranians .
Our concern is that international norms and standards on civil and political rights must be respected .
In this respect , I am deeply concerned over the reports of violent suppression of demonstrations and arbitrary detentions in Tehran and other Iranian cities during the recent Ashura commemorations at the end of December .
The use of violence against demonstrators seeking to exercise their freedom of expression and rights of assembly is not acceptable .
These are universal human rights that must be respected and those detained for peacefully exercising those rights should be released .
I also note with deep concern that many arrests seem to have targeted human rights defenders and journalists , and that many detained are denied access to legal representation and contact with their families .
Iran must live up to its international obligations and treat detained persons in accordance with international human rights standards .
Another recent issue is the detention of another 12 members of the Baha 'i religious community .
These people must be assured a just , open and fair trial in accordance with international standards .
The EU has spared no opportunity to ask the Iranian Government to respect those international obligations which they freely and voluntarily adhered to .
We issue public statements and use other diplomatic means .
We work through the United Nations : the General Assembly adopted a resolution condemning the situation only last month .
We will make full use of the upcoming review of Iran which will be held at the UN Human Rights Council in Geneva in early February .
On the nuclear issue , we regret that Tehran has not followed up on the last meeting between Javier Solana and Jalili , the chief negotiator , on 1 October in Geneva .
We all assessed that the meeting was positive .
But , in effect , Iran has now rejected a draft agreement proposed by the IAEA and has been refusing to pursue talks on the nuclear issue .
The EU and its negotiating partners are all committed to finding a diplomatic solution to the Iranian nuclear issue , and to that end , we must continue to implement the dual-track approach .
We need a serious engagement in meaningful talks from Tehran 's side .
Our objective remains to build confidence that the nuclear programme is exclusively for peaceful purposes .
The confidence deficit was further increased by the revelation that Iran has been building another enrichment facility without informing the IAEA in due time .
In addition , Iran continues not to cooperate fully with the IAEA and not to respect its international obligations .
It is vital that the EU and the international community stand united behind the negotiating effort , including by supporting that effort through appropriate measures .
The widest possible unity is key if we are to achieve our objective .
If Iran sets out on a more constructive course on the nuclear issue and on regional stability in general , it could play an important role in the Middle East and Gulf region , which would reflect its rightful place and proud history .
In conclusion , the challenges posed by Iran weigh very heavy in my portfolio .
This is a country which has enormous potential - and our readiness to engage with Iran constructively has been made over and over .
I shall continue to make that case .
I sincerely hope that , during the time of my mandate , I will return to this House with a more positive picture of relations with Iran .

Baroness Ashton , you are quite right to be concerned , because the situation in Afghanistan is extremely severe , particularly from the viewpoint of human rights .
I refer particularly to civil rights and political freedoms , where we are seeing a truly incredible breakdown : the arbitrary exercise of violence , mass imprisonment of opposition members , murders , executions , non-governmental organisations prevented from doing their work , and the impossibility of exercising press freedom .
A European Parliament delegation was even banned from entering .
Mr President , in view of the present circumstances , I wonder whether it is worth visiting the country at this time .
Your remarks on the nuclear front , Baroness Ashton , were very clear and also very forthright : Iran continues to produce enriched uranium despite warnings from the international community .
It rejected the outstretched hand proffered to it by President Obama and rejected the latest plan suggested by the Six , which involved Russia and France .
My question , Baroness Ashton , is very simple : Do you believe that we have exhausted our patience with this country yet ?
Do you think we should now move on to adopt more hard-hitting measures or do you instead consider that a softly-softly approach is the best way of negotiating with the Iranian regime ?
I should like to tell you that I sincerely welcome your statement in favour of defending human rights in that country .
The breaches are extremely severe and I believe , Mr President , that Parliament must condemn the human rights situation in the country without pulling its punches .
I hope that it will be able to do this by approving the resolution on this topic .
It must continue to hold firm , very firm , in its tireless defence of freedom .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in view of the developments in the situation in Iran , one cannot help but express serious concern .
These concerns relate to the increasing infringements of political and civil rights , which we strongly condemn , and concern over the failure to perform the duties resulting from Iran 's membership of the Non-Proliferation Agreement , upon which even the country itself states it does not want to cast any doubt .
We do not question Iran 's right to the peaceful development of nuclear energy , nor do we intend to underestimate the important role that Iran can play on a regional level , its legitimate security requirements , or the need to create a credible system of regional security that involves all the nuclear powers in the area .
It is precisely because of this , though , that we do not understand the reasons for the failure to comply with the request by the International Atomic Energy Agency for the uranium to be enriched abroad , and we regret this decision .
Faced with this situation , it falls to the Security Council to determine the international community 's response and the possibility of new sanctions , which should be focused on non-proliferation and designed to be an instrument to support the path of difficult but unavoidable dialogue , and not designed and used to beat down the regime .
With regard to this course of action , the European Union should play its part by giving thought , at the appropriate time and in the appropriate form , to possible technical measures to complement the UN sanctions and , at the same time , by confirming its readiness for debate and dialogue , which should never be lost , even at difficult times .
We will fully support action by the European Union and the High Representative in line with the approach that was set out clearly in the High Representative 's speech .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , last summer , I got elected to the European Parliament by voicing criticism against my own government .
A young woman in Iran , having done the same , would have likely been killed , imprisoned , tortured and raped since .
Thanks to new media , we have all seen the clips of the brutal way the Iranian regime cracks down on citizens who speak out peacefully for democracy and freedom .
Recent arrests of human rights reporters by the intelligence office of the Revolutionary Guard show that the Iranian regime takes an increased interest in closing off the country .
Their reports were heavily relied upon by international journalists .
Yesterday was Martin Luther King Day .
We commemorate a man who , too , marched the streets peacefully and said : ' a time comes when silence is betrayal ' .
High Representative , this time has long arrived .
President Barack Obama broke off his holidays over Christmas to speak out against yet more brutal attacks on citizens after Ashura .
In the proposed two-track approach to Iran , balancing the nuclear question and human rights , the United States is increasingly emphasising human rights .
Europe should take a stronger leadership position here , not only when it is politically safe to do so .
The disaster in Haiti is a terrible tragedy , and I am glad you are taking action .
However , the man-made disaster that is ongoing in Iran has not been met with leadership and coordination from the European side thus far .
Last month , a delegation of this Parliament was supposed to visit Iran , but the regime did not want us to see with our own eyes its own weakness and division .
It is high time that Europe takes one stance regarding Iran , and the world is waiting .
Is Iran 's current regime , which has lost its legitimacy and is divided internally , a credible actor in negotiations ?
What measures do you propose in the nuclear question that will target the government without harming the population ?
Are you willing to call an emergency talk in Europe on Iran ?
To ensure that human rights will remain Europe 's priority , how will you use the EU instrument for human rights ?
I believe we need to support citizens , civil society and journalists .
The ' Shelter City ' programme , proposed by the Czech Presidency , might be a useful tool to support Iranians under threat in Europe .
In the hearings with Commissioner Kroes , I asked her whether she is willing to work with you to make free speech on the Internet an integrated part of Europe 's foreign policy .
I ask you the same .
Mr President , Baroness Ashton , the European Parliament has paid close attention to the internal and foreign policy developments in Iran .
The Iran delegation has been engaged in dialogue with representatives of the government and of civil society and had made preparations for a delegation trip to Iran at the start of the month , although , unfortunately , this was cancelled at short notice .
The very dissatisfaction with the fraudulent elections and the constant increase in state repression and violence had caused the representatives of Iranian civil society to turn to the European Parliament .
In their courageous move , they are seeking our support for the upholding of democratic freedoms and they are calling on us to take our own fundamental values seriously .
The protests are many and they are still going on .
The Iranian Government is being called on to give political answers to these unsolved questions , yet instead , we see an increase in the worst violations of human rights , such as torture and the assault of detainees , and we hear of the deaths of demonstrators , while unfair trials take place .
Many Iranians expect us to not only keep an eye on foreign policy and the nuclear programme , but also to see and to take action on the political situation within Iran .
It is to be welcomed that countries such as Spain and Ireland are prepared to issue visas in an unbureaucratic way to the persecuted defenders of human rights , thus helping them out of acute danger .
Other Member States should follow this example , and we also ask the Commission to provide rapid help to the politically persecuted .
From the outside , what we can do is limited .
The crucial changes must come from within the country itself .
We must , however , keep the communication channels to the outside world open .
In that context , we must be highly critical of foreign companies such as Siemens and Nokia , whose technology is helping to make censorship possible and even more effective .
As no agreement has been reached in the negotiations on the nuclear issue , there is more and more talk of imposing sanctions .
It is not clear , however , what sanctions would have the desired influence on the political leadership .
If the sanctions lead to a worsening of living standards for many people , an example being sanctions on petrol , they will not achieve their objective and will give the regime the opportunity to blame what it would call the hostile outside world for the deteriorating economic situation .
It is , therefore , very important to develop targeted and intelligent sanctions , including against individuals .
Thus , for example , the Council can blacklist individuals responsible for the repressive measures of recent months .
In the EU 's policy on Iran , what is crucial is that we create , and stick to , a dual-track policy .
Despite the rebuffs , we need to seek political dialogue .
Isolating Iran would help neither its people nor its neighbours in the region .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , President Ahmadinejad 's ruthless ambition to develop nuclear weapons represents , in my view , the gravest threat to world peace today .
Only through a united and coordinated approach will the EU 's diplomacy eventually succeed .
Renewed sanctions must now be targeted and must be extremely damaging to the regime in Tehran .
But , equally , we should recognise that Iran 's people and the Iranian regime are not the same thing .
Since Ahmadinejad stole the presidential election last year , we have seen many dissidents and brave young protestors take to the streets .
These people need our support because they identify with our values of freedom , democracy and the rule of law .
Indeed , such is the desperation in Iran that opposition leader Mir Hossain Musavi , hardly known to be a democrat in the past , has said he is prepared to sacrifice his own life for the future good of his own country .
Meanwhile , outrageous human rights abuses continue unabated as juveniles and homosexuals are executed routinely .
We MEPs in this House long to see a democratic and free Iran , which no longer exports terrorism via Hamas and Hezbollah , and takes its rightful place in the international community .
The EU should redouble its efforts to expedite that process in every way possible .
Mr President , the media presented me with an awkward proposition last week : Israel , they say , is going to attack its arch-enemy Iran sooner or later .
While this debate was going on in Europe , the media in Iran was also intensively discussing the military option against Tehran 's controversial nuclear project .
All Zionist lies and exaggerations , was the conservative newspaper Kayhan 's verdict on the purported nuclear threat .
Meanwhile , there is no doubt that the Islamic Republic 's nuclear programme represents a serious security threat - for Israel , first and foremost , but for the wider region , too .
I still hope , therefore , that the international community will no longer just recognise this , but will actually take action in this regard .
In my view , all options must be on the table in this connection .
An effective sanctions regime , which the German Chancellor , Mrs Merkel , was still calling for yesterday , will mean , at all events , that the Jewish state will absolutely not have to take unilateral action .
That brings me to a crucial question for the Council , for you , High Representative .
Is there , in fact , a European basis for the rigorous tightening-up of the sanctions against the Iranian regime ?
Close commercial links between a number of prominent EU Member States - I need not name any names as you , too , must be aware of who they are - and the Islamic Republic could always pose major obstacles to seriously tackling the nuclear issue .
Over recent weeks , the newspaper The Wall Street Journal has written a number of cutting opinion pieces about this that practically constituted charge sheets against Europe .
In brief , Baroness Ashton , is there a basis for tightening up effective sanctions against the Islamic Republic of Iran ?
I await your answer .
( DE ) Mr President , the most recent events , in particular , have made clear that the handling of civil liberties in Iran has clear failings , from the European point of view .
The death sentence handed down to the recently sentenced protesters is a sign of how differently fundamental rights and their observance are handled in that country .
It is also important to stress , however , that the EU 's external policy must not be lopsided , as we often gladly turn a blind eye to such things in the case of economically and geostrategically important partners - such as China or , perhaps , Saudi Arabia - despite the fact that serious deviations from our European ideas of democracy and the rule of law take place in these countries , too .
As a member of the Iran delegation , it is a particular concern of mine that the delayed trip to Iran be reinstated as soon as possible in order to improve bilateral communications with the EU and , in so doing , possibly also make a contribution , through the dialogue , to defusing the dramatic situation in Iran .
( PL ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , Iran 's internal situation is worsening dramatically from day to day and from week to week .
Human rights are being brutally violated before our eyes , and we are seeing terror of a kind we have not had to deal with for decades .
An unprecedented wave of state repression is trying to silence those who are fighting for democratic reforms in Iran .
In the fight against its citizens , the government is also using the specially trained , armed young people of the Basij militia .
The European Parliament must condemn the government 's excessive use of force and increasing breaches of human rights .
It is also unacceptable to use the death penalty against the opposition , including under the pretext of the crime of ' moharebeh ' , offending God . Therefore , the European Union needs a new approach to the situation in Iran .
The European Union 's High Representative , Catherine Ashton , should send a strong and clear message to the citizens of Iran , confirming our desire to defend human rights .
The question of a nuclear weapon is extremely important .
However , we should not stop defending fundamental values simply to gain a tactical advantage in negotiations .
In talks with Iran , we must not marginalise the rule of law , freedom of speech or the right to information .
These values must not be treated as of less significance .
I come from Poland where , over 20 years ago , in 1989 , tyranny gave place to democracy .
This came about thanks to the non-violent action of the opposition Solidarity movement and peaceful dialogue between the government and the people .
I do not now see a better way forward for the residents of Iran .
( PT ) The Iranian question is one of the most important issues in modern international politics .
Everything must be done to prevent the Iranian regime , which has been so detrimental to peace and security in the Middle East , from gaining access to nuclear weapons .
However , the role of the European Union in its relations with Iran must not be wasted on the nuclear question .
Since the rigged elections in June , we have witnessed a popular movement against the repressive , obscurantist and anti-democratic nature of the Iranian regime .
Europe must be consistent in promoting the universal value of human rights , for which many people are risking their lives on the streets of Tehran .
Without questioning the people 's sovereign right to decide their own destiny , it is imperative that the European Union takes steps to encourage those who are fighting for liberty and democracy in Iran .
There is nothing more effective than free and alternative channels of information for combating censorship , which is the preserve of all oppressive regimes .
In view of this , we expect the Farsi television channel , awarded to Euronews by the European Commission , to be up and running very soon .
We also expect that Baroness Ashton , as the new High Representative , will push ahead with creative initiatives that will contribute to greater political transparency in Iran , and taking on board the recommendations made by all those who have been struggling for a free Iran , including exiled Iranians .
Moreover , this concern with the political future of Iran should guide any new sanctions that are decided upon within the context of the nuclear question .
As the Iranian intellectual , Akbar Ganji , explained here in Parliament , it is imperative that we avoid economic sanctions that weaken the people , and especially the Iranian middle class , which makes up the rank and file of the opposition .
Nothing can do more for security in the Middle East , Europe and the world than an Iranian democracy that has been built by Iranians .
The European Union must make this one of its objectives .
( FR ) Mr President , Iran is undoubtedly going through the most serious crisis in its history since 1979 because of this regime , which is impervious to any kind of change and which has increased the number of targeted assassinations of opponents , of raids and of imprisonments of peaceful demonstrators , as well as journalists , since the electoral farce of 12 June 2009 .
At the start of the debate , Mrs Ashton mentioned the NGO reports , disastrous reports in this regard , without even talking about the parody of justice meted out to the French woman , Clotilde Reiss , and to the Baha 'i minority - seven of whom have been on trial in Tehran since last Monday .
They risk life imprisonment or worse , simply because their religion is different from that of the ruling power .

The report is harsh , the presidential elections have changed nothing , or rather they have : they have radicalised the Iranian regime even more , if that were possible ; there is also radicalisation with regard to the outside world , with the volte-face of the Iranian authorities on the draft nuclear agreement negotiated in October 2009 in Vienna .
When are we going to consider mentioning - I say mentioning here - intelligent and targeted sanctions , such as those referred to by Mrs Lochbihler ; sanctions , therefore , against this regime , which is openly anti-Western and anti-Semitic ?
I know that this is a narrow window of opportunity , Mrs Ashton , but do you not think that we must do more and do better here , that we must help Iran 's young people , who are proclaiming their outrage on the Internet , that we must denounce the recurring calls for the destruction of the State of Israel and , above all , that we must support this civil society and the opposition , this democratic movement which is defying this vote-robbing president and his militias ?
We must avoid an escalation , I am very conscious of this , but we must also avoid evasion and not repeat the error that we made in Afghanistan where Europe was unable to protect Commander Massoud .
It is our duty to support the leaders of the Iranian opposition so that they avoid a similar fate .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation inside Iran is continuing to deteriorate .
At least eight people have been killed recently , the regime has stepped up arrests of women - female journalists , trade unionists and intellectuals - 30 mothers who were demanding news of their disappeared children have been arrested , and the grave of the young martyr for freedom , Neda Agha-Soltan , has been repeatedly desecrated by firearms bullets .
It is clear that the regime intends to increase repression and establish a climate of terror .
In addition to this domestic situation , Iran demonstrates a lack of international cooperation , refusing the International Atomic Energy Agency access to Iranian sites for uranium enrichment .
This clearly shows the real intentions of the Iranian atomic programme ; if they were solely peaceful , there would be no need to hide them .
Europe should therefore forcefully voice its concerns because a military , nuclear power could jeopardise the continent 's security and have significant political consequences for all the countries in the region .
( DE ) Mr President , even if the conflict in Iran often appears to be a power struggle between the old and the new establishment , it is still very clear to see that this very closed social system has very clear cracks .
The situation in Iran is certainly proof of the significance of democracy , namely the ability of every single citizen to give expression to his or her political will .
Those with political responsibility in Iran are currently responding to this legitimate will of society with repression by the State extending as far as the death penalty .
These assaults on the citizens must be stopped immediately , as State repression will certainly not bring an end to this will of society .
On the contrary , Iran 's long history shows us this .
On the subject of the planned trip of the European Parliament 's delegation to Tehran that was cancelled by the Iranian Government at short notice , I would just like to say that , at this point in time , this trip was really important in order , above all , to lead to talks and dialogues with everyone , including , and in particular , with the local citizens and civil society .
( FR ) Mr President , the Iranians stated that they were ready for a gradual exchange of low-enriched uranium for fuel .
This kind of production has been rejected by the Group of Six , even though it was not actually all that different from the proposal that this same group had drawn up shortly beforehand .
I do not at all underestimate the Iranians ' negotiating qualities , in particular , with regard to the definition of the gradual nature of the exchange they were proposing , but given the stakes , Mrs Ashton , do you not think that this refusal by the Group of Six could perhaps have been the subject of a precise European Union common position ?
Why did we not seize this opportunity ?
I would like you to voice your thoughts on this matter to us .
I do admit to being very puzzled by Europe 's discretion in this debate .
We have legitimacy , Europe has legitimacy .
Let us use it to help reach an agreement .
( ES ) My first speech in Parliament , in June last year , was on the subject of Iran , in the wake of the latest wave of executions .
At that time , I called for the European Union to bring all the instruments at its disposal to bear in order to protect human rights .
Now we find that the repression is still continuing against the Baha 'i religious minority , against homosexuals - and I particularly call for the release of imprisoned homosexuals , who are sentenced to death in some cases - against the opposition - with more than 2 500 of the opposition imprisoned - against press freedom - only this Monday we saw the newspaper Farhang-e-Ashti closed down for publishing a statement by Mr Mousavi , the opposition leader - and against the Kurdish minority .
Iran remains a great challenge on the European agenda , and not merely because of the nuclear threat : the international community is already taking action against this .
The challenge is that Iran possesses a great ability to influence practically all the areas where efforts are being made to find a peaceful and diplomatic solution in the Near East , and also in Iraq and in Afghanistan .
Through its repressive actions , Iran is destroying any opportunity of normalising its foreign relations , so that it can be accepted by the community of nations and play a constructive role in international relations .
That is the situation we socialists desire , but it can only be achieved if Iran meets its international commitments , beginning with the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights .
According to the terms of this covenant , Iran must recognise political parties , trade unions , non-governmental organisations , the right to association , freedom of expression , etc .
The support and solidarity of the European Union , which I now call for on behalf of those who demand more rights and for those repressed by the regime , must not be mistaken for any type of Western interference .
Instead , it represents a wish for Iran to meet the minimum requirements necessary to enable it to negotiate with the rest of the world .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in European Union publications and on EU websites , we often say that human rights are the heart of the process of European integration and the key element of its external relations .
The countries that have entered into political or trade agreements with the European Union are bound to respect these rights .
Baroness Ashton , we ought to ask ourselves whether these requirements still exist in our relations with Iran and whether it really makes sense for us to send a delegation to Tehran without agreeing a programme with the Iranian Government which both sides endorse , one which will allow us to listen to the arguments and voices of the opposition , too .
With regard to what we can do , we must , however , be careful even about talking of sanctions , because history shows that economic and trade sanctions have often strengthened regimes instead of weakening them , and that they have , in fact , weakened the people and , above all , the poorest of them .
When we listened to certain people as a delegation , and heard testimony regarding the rights of women and minorities in Iran , they told us that perhaps it would be better to impose symbolic sanctions , such as cultural sanctions .
In recent days , many representatives and intellectuals throughout Europe have been writing to call for UNESCO not to hold World Philosophy Day in Tehran .
I think that this could be a commitment taken on by this Parliament too , remembering that Neda Agha-Soltan was a student with a degree in philosophy , and that this symbol could unite the European Parliament as it calls upon UNESCO to take this action .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , over recent weeks , we have seen the Iranian Government , or the Iranian regime , commit serious violations of human rights and the most basic democratic freedoms .
So , for this Parliament and for Europe , the issue is no longer simply that of relations with a country which is thinking about a nuclear policy outside the accepted rules and the specific control elements which , as a rule , are laid down by the international community for these matters .
There is something new , or something old is becoming more acute , relating to an even more worrying issue : human rights .
I am convinced that Iran could potentially have a much more important role in the region in which it is located .
However , this fresh wave of infringements of rights must , I believe , constitute a priority for us and for the High Representative .
The clamp-down by the government has not subdued the voices of democratic dissent .
Now it is appropriate for the international community to play an active role and to provide assistance to those who oppose the regime and believe that their fundamental rights must be respected .
We should therefore have a permanent presence there .
The European Parliament 's delegation can , by identifying very precise objectives , go to Iran to show its solidarity with the Iranian democrats , and certainly not to back , even involuntarily , the clamp-down by the Iranian Government .
I think that we should discuss all this further and achieve our aim .
I have decided to use most of my time for this intervention to highlight the names of people who , reportedly , are in detention in Iran , some convicted to death , for criticising the political regime or for defending civil rights .
Ali Mehrnia , Parviz Varmazyari , Majid Rezaii , Alireza Nabavi , Ali Massoumi and Shirin Alavi Holi are reportedly being detained and subject to the death penalty for ' Mohareb ' , which means enmity against God .
Thirty-three women belonging to the Mourning Mothers of Iran , whose children have been killed , disappeared or detained in post-election violence , are being harassed .
Other women activists and their families are detained : Atefeh Nabavi , Shabnam Madadzadeh , Mahsa Naderi , Fatemeh Ziaee Azad and Nazila Dashti .
Eight activists from the Committee of Human Rights Reporters are detained : Saeed Kalanaki , Saeed Jalalifar , Shiva Nazar-Ahari , Kouhyar Goudarzi , Saeed Haeri , Parisa Kakayi and Mehrdad Rahimi .
Four others went into hiding after being summoned to the Ministry of Intelligence : Hesam Misaghi , Saeed Habibi , Navid Khanjani and Sepeher Atefi .
Others from the Liberal Student and Alumni Association are detained : Mehrdad Bozorg , Ehsan Dolatshah and Sina Shokohi .
What these people have in common is to have reported on , or voiced , their concerns about the situation in Iran .
What is the Commission or the Council going to do for the release of those imprisoned for political purposes ?
What funding does the Commission provide to human rights NGOs working in Iran ?
( RO ) I personally believe that there is great potential for close economic , cultural and political ties between Iran and the European Union .
However , this potential remains untapped .
Relations between Iran and the European Union encounter major difficulties when sensitive subjects are touched on , such as Iran 's nuclear programme or human rights .
I think that the Iranian side needs to respond to the desire for dialogue expressed by the European Union .
Its refusal to engage in dialogue can only limit the transfer of ideas and knowledge on subjects of mutual interest .
I must remind you that the European Union is Iran 's number one trade partner and , given that Iran 's objective is to join the World Trade Organisation , a closer commercial partnership with the European Union would help Iran in its attempt to comply with the organisation 's standards .
However , as long as the Iranians display a lack of openness towards cooperation , constructive dialogue between Iran and the European Union will not be possible .
( IT ) Mr President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , you , Baroness , have drawn a dramatic picture of the situation in this great country which has a great history , a great culture , and a great civilisation .
There is the suppression of dissent and of the opposition , there are very serious restrictions on civil rights , there are infringements of freedoms , there is a worrying nuclear programme and there is a threat relating to Israel and peace .
Unfortunately , I have not understood which initiatives Europe intends to implement in order to put an end to this situation , to defend peace , freedom and civil rights .
I hope that in the debate 's conclusions , you can list some facts and some initiatives , some positions to be taken , and perhaps also reply to the suggestion made by Mr Scurria .
Mr President , as for Parliament , I am part of a delegation which struggled to obtain permission from the Iranian Government to go to Iran , which , when it had to cancel the trip as a protest , was not able to do so , and which also suffered the shame of being forbidden by Iran from visiting .
I am in favour of dialogue with Iran , but the Italian Parliament and the delegation must forcefully set out our position regarding the defence of freedom and the rights which are under threat .
( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , Iran 's current administration blatantly violates human rights and tramples on the fundamental rights of its citizens .
The most recent evidence of this is the slaying of eight people in connection with the Ashura event and the fact that five members of the opposition are currently awaiting the death sentence .
Iran 's current regime is the biggest threat to world peace .
It is quite incomprehensible that the international community should be watching from a distance while the Iranian Government has been allowed calmly to develop a military nuclear programme and to disregard the views of the International Atomic Energy Agency .
The country 's current leadership is allowed publicly to threaten to destroy another Member State of the United Nations , Israel .
It also supports the Hezbollah terrorist group , which is active in Lebanon and Syria .
In a way , these events recall moments from 60 years ago .
We do not need to think about what we might have done differently to be able to prevent the hatred .
Today , however , if we take effective action , we can prevent the same thing from happening .
We have to start to impose economic sanctions against the Iranian administration as soon as possible .
The situation being as it is , it would be better if the EU 's Iran delegation were prevented from going , as the trip would only be exploited by the Mullahs for the purposes of propaganda .
Let us remember : the problem in this case is not so much that there is so much bad - it is more the case that the good keep silent .
( PL ) Mr President , the end of last year saw the biggest opposition protests in Iran since the demonstrations which followed the presidential election in June , when the serving president was announced victor .
In clashes with security forces , eight people died , hundreds were injured and hundreds were detained .
Students supporting the opposition were attacked on the university campus , which brought a reaction from 88 of the university 's professors in the form of an appeal to Ayatollah Ali Khamenei to stop using force against the demonstrators .
The situation in Iran is causing rising alarm , and this is also true at international level .
Imposition of sanctions against the government in Tehran is being considered by the Germans , whose Chancellor , Mrs Merkel , has said that Iran has not replied to the West 's proposal of cooperation on ending its nuclear programme .
Israel 's Prime Minister has also appealed for the introduction of severe international sanctions against Iran .
In his opinion , a regime which tyrannises its own people may soon become a threat to the entire world .
While respecting the sovereignty of Iran , we should strongly stress the responsibility resting on the country 's authorities to respect human , political and citizens ' rights , and we should also stress the fact that in exercising its right to develop its own nuclear programme , Iran must not , at the same time , pose a threat to international security .
The patience which the international community has shown in conducting dialogue with Tehran is now coming to an end .
The world must not be held hostage by the aggressive and provocative policy of the current political leadership in Iran .
The Spanish Presidency and the head of diplomacy , Mrs Ashton , should initiate talks on this matter with Russia , to include Moscow in a common policy of pressure on Iran .
( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Ashton , the events on Ashura Day and the bloody repression of the recent demonstrations in Iran have shown that it was a total mistake to make a very artificial distinction between the hardening of the regime internally and the inflexible policy that it pursues externally , in particular , on the Iranian nuclear issue .
Consequently , the prospect of additional sanctions seems inevitable , or even desirable .
I would like to know your point of view on the timetable and the nature of possible sanctions precisely so that we can make a clear link between the internal events in Iran and the nuclear issue .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I do not want to carry on listing the reasons for our disagreement with the Iranian Government .
Since it has not been referred to here , I will only emphasise one of the most serious violations of civil rights , which relates to young people .
The Iranian Government , having signed the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child , nonetheless continues to impose capital punishment on minors .
After this debate , I would like , firstly , Baroness Ashton , to take on the task of setting out a common approach for Europe as a whole and the European Parliament as a whole on events in Iran and , secondly , the inter-parliamentary delegation for relations with Iran to note that it must change its line .


I , together with my friends Mr Scurria and Mr Tatarella , protested to the delegation : in an official statement , it stated that it wanted to visit Iran in any case , even though it had made a peremptory request to have the opportunity to meet and talk to the opposition .
From now on , I would like the delegation to start singing from a new hymn sheet and to sustain relations of assistance , support and debate with the exiled representatives of the opposition , not least Mrs Myriam Rajavi , who typifies this situation .
This is what the European Union should be doing , rather than imposing sanctions .
Mr President , I have to say to Mrs Ashton that our hopes of convincing the Iranian regime of our concerns will , I am afraid , be in vain .
In fact , we are dealing with a dictatorship of yesterday and what is needed now is to concentrate on the opportunity for change .
The regime is coming apart at the seams , and the Iranian people have courageously shown , since last June , that they do not trust and do not support this deceitful and aggressive dictatorship .
Why should we continue to do so ?
We need seriously to support civil society and the democratic opposition , including the Council of National Resistance , which is the only organisation that has come out with a very clear democratic programme for a nuclear-free Iran .
( DE ) Mr President , the German newspaper , Süddeutsche Zeitung , reported today that yesterday , Monday , the office of public prosecution in Tehran demanded the death penalty for five opposition figures .
According to Amnesty International , these five opposition figures are 17-year old Ali Mehrnia , 54-year old Parviz Varmazyari , plus Majid Rezaii , Alireza Mabavi and Ali Massoumi .
If a regime like the one in Tehran , which is not only anachronistic but also cracks down on its own population with the death penalty , stonings and other methods , and we , the European Union , do not take the necessary steps , we make ourselves culpable , above all , towards those who would build a reasonable society there , towards the children who grow up under conditions that are anything but those which we - in agreement with my fellow Member , who is , unfortunately , no longer present - would wish for a future society .
I would like to hear firm and clear words from the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy here , and I would like to see us not only call for sanctions against Iran but also to implement such sanctions .
Mr President , I think it is clear to all of us here that the Iranian regime is a dictatorial and criminal regime .
The question is : how to deal with it ?
I would like to state very clearly my support for the delegation that would have gone to Iran from this Parliament .
The delegation would have met , for one whole day , members of the opposition and dissidents .
It would have strengthened them .
They wanted that .
So I really feel very sorry that this delegation visit could not take place .
I have one very concrete question to you , Baroness Ashton .
Several Members here have talked about sanctions .
From the experience I have as a member of the national parliament and talking with many people for a long time , I would really be in favour of smart sanctions - targeted , for example , at specific members of the Revolutionary Guard , putting them on a veto list for visits , or at other specific persons .
I am very much against imposing sanctions on the whole country as that would probably strengthen the government , because then poverty would increase - they would not have access , for example , to petrol - and that would help to support the regime instead of weakening it .
Mr President , I want to agree with Tunne Kelam and Mr Alvaro .

The day of dialogue and engagement with Iran has long since passed .
People are dying in the streets almost every day in protests against this fascist regime .
Only yesterday , as you have heard , a kangaroo court in Tehran called for the death penalty against five protesters arrested during the Ashura riots on 27 December .
Enough is enough .
No more talk ; no more appeasement .
We need tough sanctions .
That is the only way that we will show the ordinary people of Iran that we back their protests .
( EL ) Baroness Ashton , I was delighted to observe your sober stance , informed by respect for a country with the history and pride of Iran .
Iran is a special case and I am delighted that you are applying the diplomatic approach known as ' smart power ' , namely sanctions on the one hand and dialogue on the other .
I would urge you to continue with the dialogue .
Usually , countries which condemn such countries are very far-removed from the culture and mentality of the countries of Iran , Iraq and Afghanistan .
I would suggest that you expand the group which you have set up in order to continue with open dialogue with Iran by adding countries that traditionally have good relations with Iran , such as my country , Greece , especially now with its present socialist government .
The region will not be able to withstand another war .
I convey here the anxiety , not only of Israel , but also of the Emirates , about Iran 's nuclear programme .
Continue with the dialogue and I think that we shall get somewhere .
( HU ) Three short questions .
First , the leading Iranian nuclear scientist was recently murdered in a brutal terrorist attack .
What is the European Union 's view about this case ?
Curiously , there was no mention of it today .
I deplore that fact very much .
Secondly , just why is the Iranian nuclear potential a greater problem , more of a danger to peace than , let us say , Israel 's ?
Why is the EU not dealing with that too ?
Thirdly , in 2006 , the socialist liberal government of Hungary of the time ordered shots to be fired into crowds of peaceful demonstrators .
14 people suffered eye injuries , among others .
Many of them were blinded .
Despite our repeated requests , the EU refused then , and refuses still , to deal with this event .
What is the difference ?
Similarly , they do not deal with the hundreds of political prisoners that have spent time in jail in Hungary .
Even today , there are dozens of political prisoners in jail in Hungary .
Thank you very much , and I look forward to the answer .
( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Ashton , the death and disappearance of the body of Seyed Ali Mousavi , the nephew of the leader of the Iranian opposition , is one of many tragic examples that show the current malaise of the Islamic Republic of Iran .
The legitimacy of the Iranian regime following the very dubious elections last June is questionable to say the least .
Thus , our task is to support Iranian civil society as far as possible in its resistance movement .
Mrs Ashton , you can be sure of the full support that our Parliament will give you in order to reject this type of behaviour .
I want to stress that by continuing to deny the role of the opposition , the Iranian regime will be unable to convince us of its will to work for the good of the Iranian people .
The opposition 's right to exist and its right to free competition among parties , allowing the plurality of opinions in Iranian society to be represented , are positive signs that we have long been waiting for .
However , we are far from seeing that in Iran .
Certainly , at present , many believe that it is entirely up to the Iranian regime to heed the demonstrators ' calls and the wishes of the international community in order to carry out a democratic transition .
Europe must be the main witness to what is the rule of law .
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Ashton , Iran is a key country , affecting the stabilisation of peace worldwide and in part of the Middle East .
Of course , it is beyond dispute that we must defend human rights and resolutely express our concern about the violations of the rights of the opposition which have been going on for several months .
However , I want to say that the European Union should , above all , actively implement an antinuclear programme , because Iran with a nuclear weapon would be a huge threat to a whole part of the Middle East .
In addition , we know that the instigation of revolution in Yemen and support for Hamas in the Gaza Strip and for al-Qaeda in Afghanistan are probably also the inspiration behind part of Iranian policy .
In relation to this , what is needed here more than anything is a certain balance , and I think Saudi Arabia should also have an important role to play .
I think we should see very active dialogue and engagement in this matter on the part of Mrs Ashton .
( DE ) Mr President , in this context , as always , I would like to point out that we here in Europe actually only recognise individual liability and reject blanket suspicion on principle .
I am sure that , as a Briton , Baroness Ashton might well have great sympathy for the idea of targeting the guilty parties in situations like this with a blockade , but not an entire people , who have found themselves in this situation more or less innocently .
We should seek talks .
My question is as follows .
Do you see possible contacts for dialogue in Iran with whom you could make contact in order to hold a serious and objective discussion in proper political form ?
I hold no brief for the regime of the Ayatollahs in Iran or for its anti-democratic stances .
But I would say two things : one is that there is repression of non-violent freedom of speech even in Europe and even among EU members .
Furthermore , the activities in Iran and the events in Iran are being used quite cynically by the United States and its allies to foment a war movement against Iran , and I think that response would be entirely disproportionate .
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy / Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , I think this has been an extremely important and timely debate , first of all , because we have reiterated the commitment that we have in the European Union to the importance of the values of human rights .
And indeed , in our dialogue with Iran , we ask nothing more than that they live up to the international agreements which they have willingly and voluntarily signed , and that is a fundamental part of the way in which we have to approach these questions , and Members have , both by naming individuals and by describing events in Iran , highlighted the issues which are of the greatest concern to us .
Members , too , have made the point that in the end , as you said , Mr Gualtieri , the dialogue must be inevitable .
It is very important that we continue to offer the approach that says ' meaningful dialogue ' .
But I do so recognising that my predecessor , Javier Solana , spent six years in dialogue , six years offering to continue that debate ; so , dialogue , but not as an excuse for inaction on behalf of Iran , but rather as a means of making sure that we develop the strength of that relationship and that we achieve what we believe to be important .
And as part of that , the talks on World Trade Organisation membership , which have been going nowhere for a long time , could be a way in which we could find the kind of debate and discussion and support to enable the regime to move forward .
Many Members have talked about the importance of sanctions , but I think particularly - intelligent , smart sanctions : the critical importance to all of us of ensuring , as we begin to think about what next , and , if we do , and as we do , consider the possibility of sanctions , that we do so recognising that they must be aimed and targeted specifically to achieve what we wish and that no one in this House wishes to see ordinary people in Iran suffer as a consequence of that .
That makes that debate very important , but also requires us to invest energy and time within it .
The E3 + 3 senior officials met in New York on Saturday and we were able to have the dialogue , including , of course , with Russia , on that issue .
There is no doubt , as I have said , that , though we wish to take forward the meaningful relationship with Iran through dialogue , ultimately , if Iran rejects this , then , under the dual-track policy that we have , the question of sanctions arises and , indeed , as a consequence of that meeting , consideration of the appropriate further measures has already begun .
This , too , will be an item for discussion at the Foreign Affairs Council on Monday , and that is partly why I was so keen to hear honourable Members ' views as I prepare for those discussions too .
In terms of the delegation going to the country , Mrs Lochbihler , you are indeed the chair of the delegation .
It is very important that it has not yet officially been cancelled .
I think it would be important to consider whether we should pursue that .
I hope that meeting can take place soon , again in the spirit of trying to keep the dialogue open .
We do , as a result specifically of the action of this Parliament , have Euronews beginning its broadcasts in Farsi in the middle of 2010 .
That is important , too , in terms of communication and looking at how we use communication and technology effectively .
It is difficult to think about blocking access if , at the same time , we block the access to the information that people wish to get , and that , I think , is something we have to be mindful of .
And in terms of looking at what we do for the future , honourable Members have made it clear what they wish us to consider .
As I have said , the E3 + 3 is already considering these options .
We have the Foreign Affairs Council .
I have indicated we want to look at smart , intelligent sanctions as we consider this dual track .
I have made it clear , and I continue to make it clear , that I am open and ready to have the dialogue - and I described in my opening remarks the potential of this great country - but we do so in the certain knowledge that we cannot continue to use dialogue as a way of preventing action .
I have to end by saying I was very struck by the phrase that President Obama used in his Nobel Prize reception speech when he said that , when we look at the value of continuing with engagement , ' engagement with repressive regimes lacks the satisfying purity of indignation .
But [ ... ] no repressive regime can move down a new path unless it has the choice of an open door ' .
The door is open for that meaningful dialogue in order to move forward but , in saying that , I am absolutely committed to recognising the twin track that my predecessors laid out and to pursuing that as necessary .
Dear colleagues , these discussions last from 15.00 to 20.00 , which is five hours .


I suggest that we take a five-minute break in order for the High Representative and everybody else who has been in the Chamber , and will continue in the Chamber , to catch their breath , and that we resume at 17.35 : five minutes from now .
Mr President , before we break , I would just like to give a point of information .
Baroness Ashton , you were talking about the Iran delegation .
The delegation was due to go to Iran from 8-10 January , but that delegation visit was cancelled .
In fact , it was cancelled by the Iranian authorities .
Many of us pressed for the delegation visit to be cancelled earlier than that - though , in fact , the chair of the delegation took no notice of us - in the light of the testing of long-range missiles , the shooting of demonstrators and all the other disturbances that took place over the Christmas period .
As a point of information , therefore , that delegation visit has been cancelled , and that action should actually have been taken earlier in Parliament to cancel it .
I was unaware that there was a ' point of information ' procedure .
Mr Van Orden . I allowed you to go on , but in all fairness to everyone else , this was not a point of order .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the February I part-session in Strasbourg .
( The sitting was suspended at 17.30 and resumed at 17.35 )

Situation in Yemen ( debate )
The sitting is resumed .
The next item is the statement by the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy / Vice-President of the Commission on the situation in Yemen .
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy / Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , we know the reason why Yemen is on our agenda today .
We traced the Detroit bomber 's trail from the United States to Europe , to Africa and Yemen .
Thus , we were reminded , once again , that our own security is at risk if we do not help countries like Yemen , who are struggling to meet multiple challenges at the same time .
Terrorism is the immediate focus but is only one of an interlinked set of challenges .
There is instability in the north , fuelled by armed conflict with the Houthi rebels .
There is conflict over land and water rights and longstanding tensions with the southern region , which has felt marginalised since unification in 1991 .
The government has so far been able to maintain overall stability but , as oil revenues have dwindled , the state is struggling to maintain control over parts of the national territory .
To this we can add piracy in the Gulf of Aden , smuggling , migration and people-trafficking from the Horn of Africa and , now , a rise in jihadist terrorism .
Yemen has substantial population growth and an increasingly discontented young population .
An inclusive internal political consensus on the way forward remains elusive .
Amidst all this , one thing is clear : none of us can afford a zone of near-lawlessness stretching from the Horn of Africa to Afghanistan .
We would pay the price ourselves .
Over the last 18 months , the European Union has highlighted Yemen as a priority case in its counter-terrorism strategy and its comprehensive approach to state-building and development .
The Council adopted extensive conclusions on Yemen in October .
We are now seeking to rally all our key players around the strategy .
The UK initiative to organise a high-level meeting with and on Yemen next week could , therefore , not be more timely .
A key focus of the meeting will be security .
A significant package is now being prepared to help boost government efforts : training and equipment for law enforcement , a better legal framework and criminal justice system , work on anti-radicalisation and conflict prevention .
This will come on top of EUR 11 million allocated , in the Commission 's development programme , to police training and juvenile justice in the last two years .
The establishment of al-Qaeda in Yemen is a symptom of deeper problems .
The linkage between economic , political , social and security challenges are crucial .
This is why we need a comprehensive approach .
It is also vital that the Yemeni state boosts its capacity to meet the needs of people throughout the country .
The EU will propose to increase by one third its development funds foreseen for the period 2011-13 .
Humanitarian aid from ECHO will continue in 2010 .
We continuously raise with the government the problems of access to the many displaced people .
No amount of aid , however , can substitute for commitment and action by the government itself .
President Saleh 's stated commitment to national dialogue amongst all relevant actors has the potential to build a new national consensus , if all actors are included and their interests are taken into account .
The international community should lend sustained support to this dialogue .
It is the only sustainable way forward .
Last , but certainly not least , key regional players need to be engaged in the common effort to work with Yemen - chief amongst these is Saudi Arabia .
The London meeting offers an invaluable chance to include the Saudis , the United States and others in a meaningful international dialogue on , and with , Yemen .
I look forward to our debates .
After the formidable stunt that the Taliban pulled off yesterday in Afghanistan , where , lest we forget , we have 100 000 troops fighting for freedom , and the failed terrorist attack in Detroit this Christmas , I believe , Baroness Ashton , that it is legitimate to wonder whether terrorism is stronger now than when freedom was attacked by the barbarous toppling of the twin towers in New York .
We have just had a debate on Iran , we can see what is going on in Afghanistan , in Pakistan , in the Middle East , in Somalia and even events in the heart of our own continent with the attacks in Madrid and London .
The question we must ask ourselves - for we must all try to draw conclusions from these events - is whether we are doing well .
It is true that there is a new factor , Madam President , which is that now we have armies with no apparent enemies and enemies who do not have armies .
Yet President Obama quickly went into action after the failed attack in Detroit and General Petraeus made his third visit to Yemen within a very short space of time .
We can see that the United States has mobilised a significant economic aid package and has developed a policy that is producing results .
You have just spoken to us , Baroness Ashton , of the concrete measures that the European Union is thinking of implementing and you have told us about sums in addition to the EUR 11 million .
The amount spent by the United States increased from USD 67 million in 2009 to USD 167 million in 2010 .

For this reason , Baroness Ashton , my question is this : do you believe that , when we are faced with terrorism , notions of foreign policy , security , defence , development cooperation and aid , trade - and I would even include culture or civilisation - all merge together and we have to realise that , when faced with dangers and threats that affect us all equally , the response should also be shared by us all equally ?
You have talked about coordination with the United States .
Could you tell us the terms on which this cooperation , which is so important and so necessary , is taking place ?

Madam President , High Representative , ladies and gentlemen , our group is very worried by the situation in Yemen because there is a global threat there : the failed attempt to blow up a US aircraft , the threats directed towards foreign embassies and the intensification of attacks by al-Qaeda , the most recent being in Afghanistan , must be taken very seriously .
Unfortunately , Yemen 's domestic situation does not help , and we should bear in mind the fact that it is one of the poorest countries in the world , with serious water shortages , high unemployment and an economy heavily dependent on revenue from oil and gas , which it is estimated will be exhausted within the next 10 years .
I therefore believe action by the European Union is vital , in the shape of close collaboration between the European Commission , on humanitarian aid and development aspects , and the High Representative for Foreign Affairs , in relation to common security , collaboration with police forces and border control .
I must also mention our concern over the clamp-down on representatives of the political opposition in that country , journalists and human rights defenders , which the humanitarian organisations operating in Yemen have been speaking about for a long time .
Baroness Ashton , I therefore consider it a priority to ensure that humanitarian organisations can enter Yemeni territory and work in complete security .
I also hope for an effort by the European Union to ensure that Yemen abides by the commitments made in 2006 at the international donors ' conference , namely to step up the process of political and economic reforms , to increase democracy and people 's living standards .
Since the September 11 attack , we have realised that making at-risk areas secure depends on how much we are prepared to gamble on better living conditions .
Baroness Ashton , democracy starts from here , from the ability to close the gaps between the rich countries and the poorest countries .
Madam President , it seems to me to be a little symptomatic for the EU in general , but also for Parliament in particular , that we should have knee-jerk debates about situations in certain countries that are in no way new .
Unfortunately , it is very often the case that overnight events lead to us here in Parliament spouting out waves of political demands that I sometimes find somewhat dubious .
I think that it does not give a good impression of us if a failed bomb attack on an aeroplane only leads us to a general debate on Yemen .
We should be clear that it would be fitting to consider a strategy for how to deal with this situation .
I also think that the situation in Yemen requires a precise analysis , specifically with regard to the fact that this is a failed state in which the government does not have control of large parts of the country We should analyse for ourselves what risks this involves for Europe .
The risks appear to be that terrorists are trained there and the risks also appear to relate to the Yemeni coast , where piracy is clearly taking place .
We - and perhaps Baroness Ashton , also - must consider what we can do to counter these risks .
As I see it , the main question might well be : how can we bolster the Yemeni Government so that it can regain control of the country and thus contain these risks ?
All the other debates about the long-term building-up of the country also need to be held , of course , but I do not think that there is really any point in us putting forward a catalogue of demands clean across all political areas - from the freedom of the media to women 's rights - here in Parliament at this point , or that we will be taken seriously if we do so .
Doing so will not achieve our goal in Yemen , so instead , we should concentrate on what tangible assistance we can provide in the current situation in order to solve an urgent problem .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - I will continue a bit on what the previous speaker said .
Yemen is certainly not a new crisis : it has been deteriorating for decades , and the worsening political situation was clearly stated in the Commission 's mid-term review .
I think we really need to focus on the political context : the longstanding conflict in the north between the government and the Houthis , the unrest in the south , you mentioned these - and now the northern conflict is spreading in the region and concerning Saudi Arabia and Iran .
So the question is : what , precisely , to do .
I have heard calls just now for the stability instrument for a CSDP mission to pour money into training more people , but I think that this is not sufficient as an approach - at least it is not a crisis response , unless we accept the concept of permanent crisis .
I think we should push for greater involvement by the Gulf Cooperation Council in Yemen , not just Saudi Arabia .
We need this organisation to bring together the various Yemeni parties , the government , the opposition , southern secessionists , Houthis and regional actors in some kind of peace-like process , and I think that should be supported and financed by the Stability Instrument for example ; that is what I think the stability instrument should be for .
If we have another CSDP mission and another round of Stability Instrument training without a political process leading somewhere , I do not think it will help us .
I really urge you to use the Stability Instrument more as an early-warning political instrument to move on a political process , and to support and finance that .
I think that that would be , from my perspective , something worthwhile .
I would like to add another point : gender equality has been mentioned , and you raised that , and I think we really should invest heavily in that .
Population growth is one of the main concerns in those countries , and , as we all know , we will not solve that issue until we have family planning , and that means women 's rights .
I know that you will not push for major women 's rights , but I think gender equality and especially family planning is crucial if we are now considering what to do in order to help Yemeni society .
Madam President , the eyes of the whole world were on Yemen recently , after al-Qaeda activists there claimed responsibility for what was , fortunately , an unsuccessful attempt to blow up an American airliner at Christmas .
However , we have known for a long time that the deteriorating state of security in the country is allowing terrorist groups to find refuge from where they can plan and organise further operations .
Terrorism had been spreading in the region for many years before 9 / 11 , a day we all remember .
We need only recall the al-Qaeda attack on the American warship , the USS Cole , on 12 October 2000 .
Yemen is an extremely significant country , in particular , because of its geographical location .
We must remember that 3.5 million barrels of crude oil , which is 4 % of world production , are transported every day through the 26.5-kilometre Bab-el-Mandeb Strait between Yemen and Djibouti .
At the same time , it is a country with a very complicated internal situation .
Apart from al-Qaeda , which is thriving there , there is also a serious Shi 'ite rebellion in Saada Province in the north of the country and an outbreak of violence from secessionist movements in the south .
If we add to this the negative effects of the world food crisis of two years ago , the recent financial crisis , the country 's dwindling reserves of crude oil , which account for three-quarters of its income , and finally an increasingly serious water shortage , we have a picture of a country on its knees , the ideal target for al-Qaeda , which , in view of its problems in Afghanistan , is looking for a new base .
Therefore , apart from military action which , in one form or another , would appear to be unavoidable in view of the passivity and helplessness of the local authorities , the international community , including the European Union - and here I appeal to Mrs Ashton - must , above all , be very active in the process of rebuilding state institutions .
Madam President , the media are already mobilising the populace for a third front in the war on terror .
At this point in time , however , the strategic options for the US and the Member States of the EU in Yemen and the Horn of Africa region are not really open .
The fact is that the ruling elites surrounding President Saleh brutally discriminate against and suppress the Shi 'ite population in the north of the country and are waging a war against the separatist movement in the south , in the area of the former People 's Democratic Republic of Yemen , that is causing a great deal of suffering to the population there .
There is no real provable connection to speak of between the Shi 'ite population and al-Qaeda and this idea thus merely serves the corrupt and de facto autocratic government as a smoke-screen behind which to obtain massive military aid .
Supporting this government to build up security forces should be avoided - doing so merely pours further oil on the fire .
Any aid provided must benefit all the regions , irrespective of their religious , ethnic or political orientation .
A reconciliation process including the UN and all local players , including in the neighbouring states - such as Iran - must be initiated and promoted .
We must not provide one-sided support of the government against the rebels .
Operation Atalanta should not be continued and expanded , and absolutely not onto the territory of the Yemeni mainland , because this would only serve the geostrategic interests of Western industrialised nations .
We should focus all our efforts on ensuring that the EU does not go along with the US 's completely erroneous strategy of escalation in Yemen , too .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , rather than being a new frontier of terrorism , as someone dubbed it , Yemen is a country of precarious stability .
The central government 's lack of control over the territory and the permeability of the borders are allowing illegal trafficking , unchecked migration , piracy and terrorist activities to grow .
The response to the new challenges of al-Qaeda in Yemen should not , however , just consist of military pressure , but also of helping the local authorities to gain better control over the territory .
I repeat : the local authorities , and not just the government .
Yemen 's stability should , however , be brought about with a view to national and regional ownership , without imposing external or pre-prepared solutions which are often at odds with the situation on the ground and are doomed to failure .
This would facilitate greater commitment by the Gulf Cooperation Council , whose financial participation in local projects would be crucial .
The European Union should work together with its partners - Yemen , the G8 and Gulf countries - with financial and development contributions backed by the Yemeni Government .
To conclude , policies which , although excellent , are long-term ones , should be accompanied by immediate strong support for security and control over the territory , without which we risk the failure of the Yemeni State and a huge growth in terrorism in the area .
( DE ) Madam President , it is well known that Yemen is currently a hotbed of Islamic extremists , a poverty-stricken country with ineffective security and a high density of weapons that is convulsed with conflicts and suffers from an acute water shortage .
It is a country in which the government appears not even to have the capital completely under control .
Yemen has thus found itself in the spotlight of the fight against terrorism and is therefore another country in which the presence of radical Islamists is an unfortunate consequence of past US policy failings .
That should be very consciously borne in mind in the debate , along with the CIA 's overflights , the secret prisons and the disastrous consequences of the US campaigns thus far in the Middle East .
In my opinion , it would be naive to equate terrorism with poverty , just as it would be irresponsible to allow ourselves to be dictated to by US policy and to trustingly believe that only increasing military aid to Yemen could solve the problems there .
The dictatorial president is quite happy to collect the West 's military millions , but in the past he has time and again fallen back on Islamists in order to permanently silence opponents of the regime .
Of course , we cannot stand idly by and watch as this country is transformed from a retreat area of the Jihadists , which it has been so far , into their operations and training base .
There is also a clear need to discuss how to improve development aid , even if only to take a proportion of the Jihadist recruits out of the equation .
Finally , the EU must not allow itself to be forced into the role of the US paymaster .
Instead , the Union must assume the role of an impartial broker in order to bring about a dialogue and pave the way for a long-term political solution .
Madam President , I have a short comment and two questions to put to Baroness Ashton .
It seems that the EU is now faced with a dilemma .
On the one hand , we need to support more robust action against terrorists who directly pose a danger to the security of European citizens .
Various Islamist extremist groups in Yemen have been more active than ever before , and al-Qaeda sees Yemen as one of its most important areas to plan attacks on Western targets and to train militia and potential suicide bombers .
The failed operation against the Northwest Airlines plane is the most recent example of the threat we face .
On the other hand , one should know that the Yemeni authorities have more than once been accused by various human rights organisations of torture , inhumane treatment and extrajudicial executions .
Arbitrary arrests of citizens and searches of homes are widespread , and the need to fight terrorism has been cited as the main excuse for such unlawful actions .
In this context , Baroness Ashton , referring to the Council conclusions on Yemen , what kind of support has the EU to offer to Yemen in terms of fighting terrorism ?
In addition , the EU considers that there is no military solution for the crisis in the area .
At the same time , Washington has signed the agreement with the Yemeni authorities on closer military cooperation .
So , I would appreciate your opinion and the position of the European Union on the decision by the Americans to engage more actively in Yemen to fight terrorists , especially by signing the agreement on military intelligence and training .
Madam President , I welcome today 's debate in advance of next week 's Foreign Affairs Council and the London conference called by Gordon Brown .
Our attention may have been generated by the attempted airline bomber .
Today I also appeal for international attention to address efforts to free the British engineer , Anthony S. , and five other European hostages , who worked at a local hospital in Yemen and who remain kidnapped since last June .
But our future work should recognise internal , not just external , needs in relation to Yemen .
To combat levels of malnutrition that exceed some sub-Saharan African countries , such as Niger , and violations of human rights , as Mrs Andrikienhas just said , in a country which inflicts the 11th highest number of executions in the world , including children . So that , as an international community , we do not wait for the terrorists to move in before we begin to address issues of capacity , governance and development in fragile states in our world .
I welcome the High Representative 's announcement today on aid and ask her to ensure that next week 's meetings address actual commitments of aid money to Yemen , from all participants , at a time when the UN 's consolidated appeal for the country has generated less than 1 % of the funds needed .
Like Mrs Brantner , that the meetings pursue a ceasefire , and perhaps a peace conference , on the latest round of fighting with the Houthis in the north and to ensure humanitarian access to the region .
To ensure the country 's oil revenue should be invested in economic and social development for the country 's people .
That Europe should cooperate in finding lasting solutions for Yemeni prisoners , the largest contingent left in Guantánamo Bay .
But I do hope the High Representative will explore the potential for a joint EU-Gulf Cooperation Council CSDP project on security sector training in Yemen , in which our efforts are critically important in so many countries .
Finally , the Bin Ladens may come from the village of Al-Rubat in Yemen , but it is the absence of international engagement which has allowed too many of the country 's young people to be radicalised in his name .
It is international engagement which now must take place .
( FR ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , an attempted attack is enough to remove any sense of triviality from the affirmation of the right to security of our fellow citizens .
The protection of our societies obliges us moreover to permanently look for a balance between security and freedom .
The right to protection , in particular from a terrorist attack , is laid down by Article 188R of the Treaty of Lisbon , and more precisely in its Article 4 , which empowers the European Union and its Member States to act in an effective manner .
The same paragraph makes clear that the European Council must conduct a regular evaluation of the threats faced by the European Union .
I would like to ask Mrs Ashton to clarify to me whether , and to what extent , the European Union and its Member States have acted in line with this clause .
From her point of view , can cooperation within the European Union allow her to maintain that failings by the US intelligence service , which came to light in the case of the recent attempted attack on flight 253 from Amsterdam to Detroit , could not have happened in the European Union ?
One question is absolutely central to this debate : was the name of the suspected terrorist known to European intelligence services , to all the European intelligence services ?
If not , what conclusions does she expect to draw ?
Does she consider , at present , that the level of coordination and exchange of information between the intelligence services is good enough to rule out this type of failing in the European Union ?
Does the High Representative consider as sufficient the capacity of Member States ' intelligence services to cooperate in the spirit of solidarity set out in Article 188R ?
Indeed , citizens have the right to demand faultless monitoring of the terrorist threat .
They would find it hard to understand how , on the one hand , the European Union continues to send more and more SWIFT-type personal data to the United States and how , on the other , the same European Union has shortcomings in the area of prevention and intelligence .
Madam President , unfortunately , Yemen long ago developed the characteristics of a terrorist incubator and not enough attention has been paid to this over the years .
Conflict , lawlessness and corruption are deeply embedded .
It is worth recalling , by the way , that the reason that British troops intervened in Yemen in the early 19th century was to put an end to piracy in the Gulf of Aden and they were very successful for over a century .
In more recent years , of course , Yemen has both developed as a terrorist incubator , where terrorist acts have taken place , and exported terrorism to other countries .
Terrorist groups are adept at exploiting the possibilities provided by failed states .
We need to help counter this .
At the moment , the UK is disproportionately providing assistance .
I hope that the London conference will encourage other countries to do more , including the European Union , and , I agree , other regional states .
Of course , we cannot hope to snuff out terrorism wherever it breeds , and that means we must improve the security of our own countries and have more effective controls on our own borders .
I doubt that the EU is motivated properly on this , so each of our own countries needs to put its house in order .
( EL ) Madam President , the people of Yemen are the victims of imperialist conflict and intervention .
The imperialist powers are , I believe , fomenting ethnic , racial and religious infighting in this country .
For years , they have frequently resorted to military force .
They are undermining the peaceful resolution of differences so that they can control energy reserves and the energy transmission channels in the area .
Developments in this country have always been the result of the imperialist choices of NATO policy and the policy of supporting the deeply reactionary and anti-grassroots regime in this country .
With the huge increase in financial and military aid from the United States on the pretext of fighting al-Qaeda , together with the classification of Yemen as a country which conceals terrorists , the bombing of areas of the country by Saudi forces , with the assistance of the USA , and the presence of foreign troops , it is possible that open military imperialist intervention will escalate .
That is clear from the new breakout of hysteria following the attempted terrorist attack on the Delta aircraft .
I believe that the peoples will respond by stepping up the fight against the repressive measures and imperialist interventions against them .
Madam President , as the fictional Lady Bracknell might have said , to make one major mistake in the Muslim world is unfortunate , but to make two sounds like carelessness .
To make three or more is an indication of stupidity , insanity or deliberate mischief-making .
Yemen is now being called the new Afghanistan .
US troops are already being deployed there as advisers .
How long before they and their allies , including Britain , are deploying ground troops there against al-Qaeda ?
What should the West in fact be doing to prevent the threat ?
First of all , it should stop wars in Muslim countries that are killing Western troops , killing civilians and radicalising young Muslims at home and abroad .
It should bring the troops home to work on homeland security to protect our populations and infrastructures .
It should adopt a genuinely neutral policy towards the Middle East and abandon the partisan policy of the US , and it should stop immigration from Muslim countries and encourage radical Muslims in the West to see that they would be much happier living among their own coreligionists .
( DE ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , over recent months , the conditions for the people , as well as the overall political and economic situation , have dramatically deteriorated in Yemen .
We Europeans must therefore do everything we can to finally stabilise the country .
High Representative , might I ask you to please prevent Yemen from becoming a second Afghanistan .
We must do everything in our power to fight international terrorism .
We will only be able to achieve that , however , if we also support a peace process in Yemen .
We need to achieve peace in the region and we need to support the peace efforts of the government there .
The Yemeni Government could also be reminded , once again , that it needs to ensure that there is no discrimination in Yemen - only then can there be peace .
Peace requires democratic structures that uphold the rights of minorities .
That is our European path , and it may differ from other paths .
I ask you , in your new role , to spare no efforts to walk this European path with us .
Without political stability , Yemen has no chance .
With political stability , the local economy can recover , then an economy can be built up and people can be given future prospects .
I ask you to work hard for this .
I also ask you to make your influence count to ensure that the auxiliary troops there can provide humanitarian assistance .
There are over 130 000 refugees from Somalia in Yemen .
The situation on the ground is dreadful .
I put all my hopes on you , Baroness Ashton , in the expectation that you will use your influence here .
Please also stand up for the six hostages , for the European citizens - one Briton and five Germans - who are being held as hostages in Yemen .
Maybe you can also help to get them freed . Many thanks .
( LT ) I agree with the Commission and my fellow Members who have said that the situation in Yemen is tense .
The country is exhausted and impoverished by endless partisan wars and separatist fighting and people are suffering from extreme poverty .
Such economic and political instability has already caused concern in neighbouring countries of the Arabian peninsula and threatens not just regional but global security .
News about the recent intensification of the activities of terrorist groups is worrying .
Let us also remember the failed attempt to blow up a plane flying to the USA , as well as threats against embassies in Yemen .
The USA has already announced that it will devote special attention to the situation in this country .
Therefore , while implementing a common foreign policy , I think that it is the duty of the European Parliament , the European Commission and other institutions , particularly following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , to take joint and coordinated action together with the international community .
( SL ) I will speak in Slovene , so please listen to the interpretation .
Yemen is a country troubled by religious and tribal conflicts and by mistakes made by past colonial and US policies .
As some of our fellow Members have said , we are dealing here firstly , with the Near and Middle East , an unstable region and one riddled with unresolved problems , and secondly , of course , with the mother of all conflicts , the Israeli-Palestinian conflict .
Yemen is representative of all these problems and we should not delude ourselves into thinking that we are dealing with a local problem .
Yemen is struggling with a civil war , al-Qaeda strongholds , a weak state , poor intelligence services , inefficient security and armed military forces .
What may we expect from the London conference ?
Madam High Representative , in my view , the hardest thing of all will be to formulate a holistic approach , but that is precisely what we need to do .
That alone will solve Yemen 's problems .
We need an economic and developmental approach and we need to offer Yemen the kind of assistance that will help it build its state and administrative capacities .
However , I am of the opinion that the second report , which I would like you , Mrs Ashton , to present , is about us not deluding ourselves into thinking - let no one delude themselves into thinking - that this is merely another issue or another problem that can be resolved by military means .
I fear that there are many indications , especially in the world media , to the effect that we are preparing for a new frontline , for a new armed conflict .
That would be the worst thing that could happen in Yemen and something that would probably poison relations in the entire region even more .
We have drawn enough lessons from the military adventures we have witnessed , from the Near and Middle East to Afghanistan and a few other places .
Madam President , we debated earlier the deteriorating human rights situation and brutal fascist regime in Iran .
We heard in that debate how the mullahs have exported terrorism to Palestine and Lebanon , and how now they are exporting their vile brand of terror to Yemen .
In late October , Yemeni officials reported that they had intercepted a vessel laden with weapons from Iran .
They arrested five Iranian instructors .
The weapons and the instructors were destined for the Houthi rebels .
Iran is a past master at fighting wars by proxy ; it did so in both Palestine and Lebanon .
Now it wishes to foment a proxy regional conflict with Sunni-dominated Saudi Arabia .
I would say to Baroness Ashton that if she deals decisively with Iran , she will cut out much of the malignant cancer that threatens the Middle East .
( IT ) Madam President , High Representative , ladies and gentlemen , the serious political , economic and social crisis in Yemen is linked to the operational presence of al-Qaeda on its territory and the jihadist vision that motivates it .
Yemen is one of the poorest countries in the world and the management of internal conflicts bristles with difficulties because of the religious origins of the conflict between the Shi 'ite and Sunni minorities .
As the motion for a resolution stresses , aid , cooperation and support for the implementation of social assistance programmes are vital .
We should , however , stress the risks that the West also runs if the security problems are not tackled clearly and with determination .
The reasons that drive terrorists to acquire military training and train in acts of martyrdom are the product of jihadist ideology , which is becoming increasingly widespread and entrenched on the African continent too , partly because of the indifference and superficiality with which the international community has dealt , or rather has not dealt , with al-Qaeda and its cells in Somalia and Sudan , as well as in Yemen .
We should remember the cause and effect relationship between the terrorist presence in Yemen and the number of acts carried out to destabilise Somalia , which is a pawn controlled by al-Qaeda forces in Yemen .
These in turn are dependent not so much on the Wahhabis of Saudi Arabia as on the Iranian ayatollahs , from whom they receive weapons and money .
Support for Yemen cannot be divorced from the issue of security .
( FR ) Madam President , Mrs Ashton , you were right to stress that the important thing in Yemen in terms of security priority is to end the internal conflicts that exist in that country .
We must not confuse the causes and the consequences , and without playing down the terrorist risk , the main reason for the instability in Yemen is not terrorism .
Terrorism develops because there is instability due to internal conflicts .
From this point of view , the priority of the European Union should be to encourage and to support the efforts currently being made to start a national dialogue in Yemen with President Saleh .
At regional level , there are - as we have just been reminded - links with the Somalian crisis and the crisis in the Horn of Africa .
There are very sizeable migratory flows , but also arms trafficking and movement of jihadist fighters between Yemen and Somalia .
In this respect , I would like to know where the European Union stands as regards the strengthening of maritime surveillance capacities , which also concern Yemen .
( PL ) Madam President , Yemen is the poorest country of the Arab world .
I was in Yemen not long ago and saw this with my own eyes .
There is no doubt that poverty is the source , or at least a factor , which intensifies some of the many problems the country faces .
Unfortunately , in the global world , Yemen 's problems are also becoming our problems .
The internal conflicts referred to in the draft resolution and during this debate should be resolved by political means , and the sides in the conflicts should respect human rights and international humanitarian law .
The European Union should make efforts to prevent escalation of the present crisis .
The development aid which we give , if it is effective and if it is sensibly spent , can be of help in bringing about political , economic and social stabilisation .
However , a catastrophe is not far away .
The water deficit has been mentioned , as have the dwindling reserves of crude oil , but there is also the problem of the abuse by 90 % of Yemenis of qat , a hallucinogenic narcotic , which is displacing other crops .
For example , Yemen used to export coffee , but now it cannot do this , because this narcotic is being grown instead .
The government in Yemen and the international community must not just take stop-gap measures , because they are faced with structural problems , and even if we can stop al-Qaeda in Yemen , the problems will return if we do not eliminate the causes .
( EL ) Madam President , as we have already heard and as we all realise , the situation in Yemen is drastic from a social and economic point of view and from the point of view of social cohesion .
The country has no water , oil reserves are running out and the inhabitants are growing drug crops .
It is exactly what Afghanistan was 26 years ago when , in this Chamber - I mean in the old Chamber of the European Parliament - we made provision during the debate of the report on narcotics for the future of Afghanistan .
If there is no development-type intervention right now , and if the UN is not allowed to have a constant presence at all levels , Yemen will certainly find itself in the same situation as Afghanistan is today , with unresolved problems .
There are not many ways to combat terrorism and the way in which the West is going about it is certainly not one of them .
The only way to help this country not to become an al-Qaeda outpost is for it to come to agreement with all the Arab countries , not just Saudi Arabia and , of course , we need to make efforts to help this nation move away from a tribal philosophy and civil conflict and to seek democratic rights .
( RO ) The failed bomb attempt on 25 December on board the Amsterdam-Detroit flight actually only served to reveal an important fact .
It focused the international community 's attention on the seriousness of the situation in Yemen because , as is well known , there are not one , but three conflicts going on in this country .
Apart from the battle involving the separatist movement in the south , the conflict in Saada province in the north has been reignited by the offensive launched approximately six months ago by government forces against the al-Huthi Shi 'ite rebels , and air strikes have been carried out against al-Qaeda bases .
The humanitarian situation , as was also mentioned by the Secretary-General of the United Nations on 5 January , is deeply concerning and is at risk of deteriorating even further if none of these conflicts end .
Looking ahead to the international conference being held next week in London , I believe that the European Union must encourage a coordinated response in order to ensure this country 's stability , which could also contribute to international security .
The path to a united , stable and democratic Yemen lies , in my view , through drafting a consistent plan for boosting both military and economic support and for combating terrorism , which needs to be backed up by specific measures supporting this country 's economic development . Thank you .
( SV ) Yemen is not just a safe haven for al-Qaeda .
That has been made clear in the debate here .
The country could very well develop into a battlefield between two of the major powers of the region : Saudi Arabia and Iran .
The Yemeni Government has repeatedly accused Iran of supporting the Shi 'ite rebellion movement .
This is repudiated by Iran , but such accusations have , in fact , also been made in the Saudi media .
The evidence cited for this includes the statement by the Yemeni Government that it stopped an Iranian delivery of arms to the rebel movement in October 2009 and the fact that in recent months , the Iranian state media has been covering the struggle of the Shia rebel movement more intensively and benevolently than previously .
Eighty-two Saudi soldiers have died in the conflict with the rebels in Yemen since Saudi Arabia began its offensive on 4 November 2009 .
As has been pointed out , Yemen is the poorest country in the Arab world - but it has also found itself squeezed between the major powers of the region , Iran and Saudi Arabia .
I wonder whether Mrs Ashton can confirm this and also carry out an analysis of the situation ?
( PL ) Madam President , I would like to agree with the evaluation of the situation presented by Mrs Ashton .
You are right , Mrs Ashton , that if we want to change the situation in Yemen , we need both humanitarian and , perhaps , military action .
If this range of measures is to be a broad one , it also requires coordination , because it is not only the European Union which is responsible for improving the situation in Yemen .
There are many such institutions .
In relation to this , I would like to ask the following question : do you not think the work of the UN and the European Union on humanitarian issues should be better coordinated ?
In the area of military matters and reconnaissance , we also need better cooperation with NATO and intelligence services - I am thinking specifically about the intelligence services of particular countries .
For these measures must be coordinated , because they would then be significantly more effective .
( DE ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , my question relates to the forms of cooperation , in your view , that we , the European Union , should develop in Yemen , for example , in the area of small and medium-sized enterprises , or perhaps in the area of the provision of energy and water supplies , as communication and building up connections could play a special role in future .
Which programmes would have priority here , for you , High Representative ?
( PL ) Madam President , the President of the European Parliament nearly had to express condolences to the families of almost 300 victims , who were in an airliner flying from Amsterdam to Detroit .
He would have done this yesterday .
This did not happen by accident .
This dramatic incident was necessary for the world to discover the problem of Yemen - a new source of terrorism .
We stand helpless , faced by a situation like we once faced in Afghanistan .
We stand helpless , faced by what is happening today in Yemen , and Europe and this building are full of the misguided voices of the human rights defenders who felt sorry for the prisoners of Guantánamo .
Those prisoners were released , and are now organising attacks again .
Once again , people are going to die , and we are going to say we are powerless .
I want to endorse in full what was said by Mr Zemke - without military cooperation , without cooperation on intelligence and without the cooperation of institutions whose role it is to pursue terrorism , we are going to put the health and lives of our citizens at risk .
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy / Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , once again , an important and wide-ranging debate on an area of the world where we have , for some years , had a focus .
I was reflecting on the fact that , over the period 2007-2010 , EUR 100 million have been spent by the Commission in support and a similar amount will be spent in the future but nonetheless , an area where we have reflected again on the importance of sustainable and coordinated effort , as many Members have pointed out .
I think that Mrs Salafranca 's comments at the beginning have been picked up and reflected again in a number of contributions about how we can make sure that our coordination is effective in terms of security , in terms of the political and economic coming together to address the concerns that this nation faces .
Mrs Giannakou raised the question of dwindling water and dwindling oil ; I think Yemen is the first country that is expected to run out of water by about 2015 , something which we have to see as a real and significant challenge .
In order to address this , we have to look at an integrated approach ; a number of Members raised the question of what is the strategy which we should pursue .
Let me try and outline a few of the key elements of that : first of all , the issues of security and counter terrorism .
As we approach the London meeting , we need to collaborate effectively on this , a point raised by a number of Members : we need to get the package of assistance together and focus on the work that we are already undertaking , for example , in the Atalanta mission off the coast and the importance of that .
The issue of improving maritime surveillance is being looked at right now ; it was the subject of a discussion I had recently with the Spanish Defence Minister to see what more can be done in order to coordinate better and more effectively to deal with maritime security , bearing in mind the length of coast and the amount of space that have to be covered .
I think , too , that we have described this comprehensive approach of how to link together the different elements and engage the neighbours of Yemen .
Mrs Brantner , you raised particularly the Gulf Cooperation Council .
I agree : a very significant part of how we try and address this area is to work collaboratively with the neighbours around the region and again the London meeting will , I hope , bring together the key Member States from around the area who can help us .
The London meeting is that opportunity , of course , to pull together our thinking and to do so with the United States and with others .
We are engaging with the United States .
It is not true to say that their approach is confined to counterterrorism : they also support and are fully on board with what we describe as our ' root causes ' approach , again the mixture of things which we need to do to ensure that we support this country .
To answer the specific point on security , the EU Home Affairs informal meeting is taking place in Spain this weekend .
I understand the American counterpart will be there in order to have discussions on the points which Members have raised .
I agree with the comment that this is not a Christmas tree or wish list .
We have to be very selective about what we believe we can do to make a difference ; helping Yemen to have the type of dialogue it needs to have internally in order to support the people and to try and resolve some of the conflicts which occur in that country is going to be just as significant in my view as anything else we do .
Asked about finding the right kind of support , the stability instruments too , can be used appropriately , I think , to provide the level of support , but this is no substitute , and could never substitute , for trying to support the government to have the internal dialogue that only they can have .
Partners have to engage in Yemen to be able to address the problems which are of greatest significance for that .
So for me , this has been a very useful debate , I am very grateful , because again it helps me in my mind to set the agenda of the issues that I will take to the Foreign Affairs Council as we debate this and then on to London engaging , as I have indicated , with the government on all the elements where we can provide continuing support to develop the country economically , to deal with counter terrorism , to deal with the issues of support from the neighbourhood , too .
I think a final point is to recognise the plight of the hostages which has been raised a number of times : six hostages , one British , five German including some very young children with the German family who have been taken hostage .
I know that Minister Westerwelle , the German Foreign Minister , was recently in Yemen .
He and I spoke about it this week , and our thoughts will always go to the hostages who are suffering at the present time .
We will take all of these issues into the meeting in London and I am very grateful again to honourable Members for raising these important matters .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place during the first part-session in February .
We have long seen the convergence of powerful geo-strategic interests in the vast area encompassing the Middle and Near East , Central Asia and Northern Africa , including the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden , where Yemen has a strategic position ( next to Somalia ) .
These interests are increasingly being defended by military means , and with ever greater aggressiveness .
The current situation in Yemen and the terrible suffering to which its people are being subjected should be analysed in the light of this situation .
The growing military involvement of the US and the EU in the region must be understood and denounced accordingly .
A brutal and disgusting manifestation of this , which we strongly condemn , was the US cruise missile bombardment of what was alleged to be an al-Qaeda terrorist base , but which is said to have resulted in dozens of civilian casualties .
The real solution to the complex problems and dangers that menace the people of the region has to come about through demilitarisation , respect for national laws and the sovereignty of the people , and genuine cooperation that aims at the resolution of the profound social problems that they are facing .
Madam President , regarding the problem of security and economic and political stabilisation in Yemen , a problem which has manifested itself fairly often recently , I would like , as a member of the European Parliament Delegation for relations with the Arab Peninsula , to express my concern .
Yemen , which is the poorest country in the Arab world , has become an object of the special interest of terrorist groups , which , taking advantage of its weakness , have turned it into a base for terrorist attacks far beyond its borders .
According to observers , Yemen is at risk of breaking up as a result of the Shi 'ite rebellion in the north , the separatist movement in the south and the terrorist activity of al-Qaeda .
Therefore , I appeal for a strengthening of bilateral relations with Yemen and for drawing up plans for the most effective methods of improving security and the political situation , especially in connection with the special meeting on this subject being organised by Gordon Brown for 28 January in London .
Situation in Iraq ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy / Vice-President of the Commission on the situation in Iraq .
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy / Vice-President of the Commission . - Madam President , when we look at Iraq today , we see real progress , though the country still faces a multitude of challenges .
But I want to focus today on the present and the future of Iraq , as a country with great potential and notable achievements over the past months .
Violence today is at its lowest since 2003 .
Although we have seen terrible attacks targeting government institutions , the total number of civilian deaths in 2009 was less than half of the level of 2008 .
Inter-sectarian violence , a major problem in 2006 and 2007 , has been significantly reduced .
Iraq has a new constitution and has conducted several elections with high participation at great risk .
Thanks to the courage of the Iraqi people , democratic institutions have taken root .
Provincial elections last year went fairly smoothly all over Iraq .
Crucially , the next general elections , due on 7 March 2010 , can be another big step towards consolidating the Iraqi democracy .
For our part , this means our work to support Iraq must continue , and move into new areas as the situation improves .
The European Union has provided more than EUR 1 billion in assistance to Iraq since 2003 .
It has gone towards basic services , human development , refugees , good governance , political process and capacity building - all in accordance with Iraqi priorities .
Our Integrated Rule of Law Mission , EUJUST LEX , has been extended several times at Iraqi request and is now also training inside Iraq .
The EU has been playing a leading role in electoral assistance , and we will continue to assist Iraq in this and other areas until Iraqi institutions can assume full responsibility themselves .
As there is good progress , we are focusing more and more on Iraqi ownership and long-term sustainability .
We are also developing our relations with Iraq .
We have just signed a Memorandum of Understanding on Energy Cooperation , and we will soon sign a partnership and cooperation agreement , the first contractual relationship between the EU and Iraq .
It will cover issues from political dialogue to trade and regulatory cooperation and development assistance .
We want a broader and deeper political dialogue with Iraq , which should also cover human rights .
Parliament has taken a keen interest in Iraq , and we expect to see even more cooperation between the European Parliament and the Iraqi Council of Representatives in the future .
Clearly , Iraq must deal with the many challenges .
The upcoming general elections will be crucial , and should be free and fair .
With our international partners , we will be following them very closely .
The EU will be deploying an Election Assessment Team to Iraq to assess the election and make targeted recommendations .
Honourable Members , Iraq is on a positive trajectory .
I am confident it will use its new institutions to find the compromises necessary for national reconciliation .
For our part , we will continue to stand by Iraq and continue our support together with the UN and the rest of the international community .
I look forward to our debate .
Madam President , I , too , would like to thank the High Representative for her words , which struck the necessary note of optimism .
There are , indeed , positive signs .
Amongst other things , you made reference to the lower number of deaths resulting from attacks , and the forthcoming elections .
Yet , Baroness Ashton , even successful elections do not make a democracy , nor do they make a state under the rule of law .
To quote a great German , Schiller , in your native English , Baroness , ' The voice of the majority is no proof of justice ' .
A mature democracy also recognises the rights of minorities .
I do have serious concerns in that area .
I find it disappointing that the word ' minorities ' did not come up in what you had to say to the House .
Why am I worried ?
Human Rights Watch continues to report that non-Muslim minorities are being persecuted .
Since 2004 , there have been attacks on 65 churches .
Local militias continue to drive Christians from their homes .
The day before yesterday , a 52-year old greengrocer , a father of two daughters , was shot dead in the middle of the street in Mosul .
This , of course , leads to the ongoing flight of Christian minorities from Iraq .
In 1991 , they still numbered 850 000 ; after the Gulf War they numbered 550 000 , while after the US invasion this number was down to 385 000 , 100 000 of whom are internally displaced people .
The European Union cannot continue to stand idly by in this situation .
Article 2 of the Treaty on European Union refers to human rights , including the rights of minorities , as literally one of the core values of the European Union .
We require respect for minorities of our 27 Member States and it is your job , Baroness Ashton , to command that respect at the international level , too .
Thus far , the Commission 's approach - and you said so yourself - has been heavily focussed on general support for infrastructure and building up democracy , via the UN or otherwise .
You say that we act in accordance with Iraq 's priorities .
I would like you to tell us how you will be ensuring that the European Union 's Iraq policy and its Iraq budget give greater consideration to vulnerable minorities .
That is perhaps not Iraq 's top priority , but it is ours .
I would appreciate a response from you .
Madam President , Commissioner Ashton , ladies and gentlemen , I think it is very important for the European Parliament to take the opportunity offered by this debate with a view to the March elections in Iraq .
The Iraqi political process has shown itself to be important - even if , as you were saying , interesting - but still very fragile .
It is thus even more important to do everything possible to consolidate and strengthen the country 's new institutions and the political equilibrium which sustains them .
We believe this to be a vital objective if we wish the first substantial withdrawal of US troops to occur in August without it having serious consequences on the country 's internal situation .
The coexistence of Shi 'ites , Sunnis and Kurds which is today embodied in the federal structures should be guaranteed by new laws , as well as by a political consensus involving all these parties .
On this point , concerns are being aroused - and we would also like your view on this - by the electoral commission 's recent decision to bar many candidates and parties with close links to Sunnis or Christians , thus running the risk of weakening the already fragile democratic process in Iraq .
Through the measures undertaken , the European Union must follow this electoral process , as you have said , but also be more ambitious in the development of relations with Iraq .
The Union 's EUJUST LEX programme directly involves us in the process of improving Iraqi legislation and democratic institutions , and we , the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , consider it a positive sign that the Council has decided to extend the mission until 30 August 2010 .
The EU should continue to maintain strong support for Iraq through its cooperation programmes , with the aim of participating in the process to stabilise and develop the country , and after the elections , it should strengthen relations between the parliaments .
It should be remembered that many Member States are working with Iraq , including Italy , with the important cultural cooperation programme .
Iraq 's political equilibrium is essential not only for the country but also in terms of the role that Iraq can play in the region strategically , with the aim of overcoming existing conflicts and securing peace .
In this sense , the improvement of relations with Turkey by the regional government of Kurdistan constitutes a positive step in that direction .
However , as we know , Iraq remains a country with very serious problems in relation to security , respect for democracy and human rights , as well as economic insecurity .
It is the most vulnerable groups , such as refugees - forming 10 % of the population - ethnic minorities , women , religious minorities and children who are suffering the negative impact of this situation .
We must therefore play a still more incisive role in this area - I am just finishing - partly through support for local and European NGOs working in Iraq and , in this regard , women can also be involved as strategic figures to overcome some of the population 's difficulties .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , the fact is that Iraq is not secure .
That is a fact .
If we look at Iran , Iran is trying to get much more influence than necessary in Iraq in the south - throughout the whole south , via the Shia minority .
I did not hear the High Representative mention the position of Iran .
Iran is threatening Iraq .
How does she see the role of the European Union in keeping Iran where it should be - in Iran and not in Iraq ?
Regarding the north , we see that there is a big problem between Turkey and Iraq concerning Kurdistan .
Of course , there can be legitimacy in fighting guerrillas in the north of Iraq which threaten Turkey , but that is the point .
The autonomous region in the north of Iraq - Kurdistan - should have its own development .
Regarding the energy memorandum of understanding , this is very important , but Iraq is not a unitary state .
So is the memorandum also being discussed with the Kurdish autonomous government ?
Because there is a discussion in progress on Kirkuk , on who owns the oil fields , etc .
Is this being taken into consideration ?
I would also like to draw your attention to the fact that the Iraqi security forces are still not well-trained , and are still not functioning well .
So we should not only support the rule of law but , if asked , we should also be prepared to help them by assisting their security forces . There needs to be an integrated approach concerning energy , the economy and stability .
There needs to be an integrated approach concerning the states neighbouring Iraq .
Please would you give a clue about that integrated approach ?
Thank you on behalf of the ALDE Group .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Madam President , can I thank the High Representative , Baroness Ashton , for her statement .
I do think it is relevant to mention that the debate we are having tonight is taking place against the backdrop of the Chilcot inquiry in the UK into the illegal war on Iraq and what lessons should be learned from that , and a lot of information is coming to light which confirms what many of us believed at the time of the invasion : that the reason for the war was regime change and control of resources and not the threat of weapons of mass destruction .
And , in terms of long-term planning for a post-war Iraq , words like ' dire ' , ' deeply flawed ' and ' woefully thin ' are being used by senior diplomats and military officers in their evidence to the inquiry , so it is little wonder that we are now seeing severe consequences of the action .
Baroness Ashton said that some progress has been made , and of course it has , but there are severe problems still .
There is no legislation to protect minorities in Iraq .
There is a continuing major refugee problem .
Trade unionists , journalists , women politicians and human rights activists have disappeared or have been killed .
Suicide attacks continue .
With elections due on 7 March , the Iraqi Election Commission last week , as my colleague mentioned , barred almost 500 candidates , mainly Sunni politicians , from standing .
They are already under-represented in the Iraqi Parliament and this is certain to lead to more tension and instability .
Last November , the EU Presidency urged the government of Iraq to suspend the death penalty and abolish it altogether , but 900 people are still on death row in Iraq and death sentences are handed out often following unfair trials , some lasting only a few minutes .
The EU has a responsibility to help build democracy and ensure respect for human rights , and the framework for engagement with Iraq sets out three priorities to help build basic services like health and education , to enhance the rule of law and to support the Human Rights Commission .
The partnership and cooperation agreement will be the basis for future work , but we must demand immediate action on issues like the abolition of the death penalty , on protecting vulnerable and targeted groups and on strengthening democracy and human rights .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , Baroness Ashton , the elections will not be free and fair in Iraq .
Ten days ago , the Justice and Accountability Commission decided to ban Saleh al-Mutlaq , leader of the parliamentary National Dialogue Front and a member of the Iraqi Parliament for the past four years .
He has been banned from participating in the forthcoming elections .
I think it was no coincidence that this outrageous ban , together with the banning of over 500 further secular Iraqi politicians , was announced on the very day Manouchehr Mottaki , Iran 's odious Foreign Minister , was visiting Baghdad .
Saleh al-Mutlaq has been an outspoken critic of Iranian meddling in Iraq , and now the mullahs have insisted on his removal from the election .
I am relieved that US Vice-President , Joe Biden , has already protested about this ban , and I hope , Baroness Ashton , that you will do likewise .
Unless Dr al-Mutlaq and the others are reinstated , we must not , and cannot , recognise the legitimacy of this election .
Baroness Ashton , I am sorry but I do not share your optimism .
It is good to be optimistic , but we cannot be optimistic about Iraq as things stand at the moment .
As proof of this , the Commission has decided not to send observers because it cannot guarantee their safety .
I believe this decision speaks for itself .
It clearly shows that as far as Iraq is concerned - and I know that you do not want to talk about the past , but we have no option but to talk about the past - we are faced with a country that has been devastated , with more than 1 million people dead and 4 million homeless as a result of an illegal , unfair war based on lies .
Neither were there any weapons of mass destruction nor any connection between Saddam Hussein and al-Qaeda .
That is the plain truth of it .
The only thing that was true was the interest of the North American oil industry in gaining control of crude oil in Iraq .
That is the plain truth .
Moreover , that truth cannot reasonably continue with the presence of the occupying forces , which is distorting everything .
I would not be surprised , at the moment , if the decision that has been taken to ban the opposition parties were to result in a genuine civil confrontation .
Some European embassies do not currently rule out the eventuality of a military coup , an actual military coup in Iraq .
The picture is therefore very gloomy .
I call on you to work quickly to withdraw the occupying forces as soon as possible .
This is the factor that is distorting the true situation in Iraq .
The United Nations should therefore assume control and allow a transition that will ensure a return to normality for something that should never have been forsaken , in other words , international law .
Madam President , High Representative , on Christmas night , 2009 - while we were on our Christmas recess , in other words - a number of churches in Iraq , Mesopotamia , were closed .
Threats of bombings led to this sad situation , just as they had last year .
In any case , the churches often remain empty , with or without such threats , as more and more Christians are leaving the country .
The violence against them just goes on increasing , despite their shrinking numbers .
Before Christmas , there were three deadly attacks in Mosul .
Moreover , the Christians in the previously relatively safe city of Kirkuk , too , have , for several months , faced a simply unrelenting series of kidnappings and killings , resulting in the flight of hundreds of Christian families .
While there were around 1.5 million Christians in Iraq in 2003 , more than half of them have now sought safety from religious cleansing in flight , religious cleansing that is being performed by Islamic extremists .
Is the European Council , are the 27 Member States of the European Union , just watching on meekly as this Afghanisation of Iraq takes place , an Iraqi Christian has asked .
I would appreciate hearing your position on this , High Representative .
Whatever it may be , a Mesopotamia without its ancient Christian community will not face a more tolerant future , nor will that be good for Europe 's security in the long term .
( RO ) The preparations for the legislative and presidential elections on 7 March have generated a frenzy of activity involving the formation of new coalitions and alliances .
Some of the Iraqi Prime Minister 's opponents want to re-establish old alliances , such as the Iraqi United Coalition .
On the other hand , the prime minister is attempting to attract secular groups or independent candidates to join the Rule of Law Coalition .
However , we must not forget that , after these legislative and presidential elections , the government will have to organise the referendum on Kirkuk .
There is a strong possibility that the security situation in Iraq will deteriorate in the event that these elections are disputed by some Iraqi groups or in the case of internal conflicts .
The main problems facing the authorities in Baghdad are the postponement of the referendum on the SOFA agreement signed with the United States and of the finalisation of the oil and gas law , the drop in oil price , the large number of executions - there are currently 900 people who have received the death sentence - and the use of torture to obtain confessions .
The general deterioration in the human rights situation is causing the EU deep disquiet .
Last but not least , there is the rise in the level of corruption .
One example I would like to give you of this is the arrest of the former Iraqi trade minister .
In terms of its relations with Iraq , Romania is aiming to switch from making a contribution to military security to the area of civilian security .
My country has shown that it keeps its commitments to its partners by retaining its military presence in Iraq until the mission is accomplished .
( PT ) The democratic achievements of the Iraqi people still need to be consolidated and furthered , as does the security situation .
In recent months , there has been an encouraging reconfiguration of alliances , which has done much to overcome the ethnic-religious splits that have marked Iraqi politics in recent years .
The success of the new Kurdish ' Change ' party is an example of the normalisation of political life in Iraq .
However , the Election Commission 's recent statement that around 500 Sunni politicians would be barred from standing is not conducive to national reconciliation , may jeopardise the electoral process and could reignite conflicts .
The news about the application of the death penalty is also disheartening .
Baroness Ashton , European leaders should strive to convince the Iraqi authorities to abolish it .
The strengthening of the EULEX is also important in this regard .
One and a half million Iraqis still live in neighbouring countries .
Many will never be able to return .
The European countries that participated in the invasion in 2003 have a particular responsibility , and should welcome more of these refugees .
In this respect , as in the cases of support for internally displaced persons , human rights issues in general and women 's rights in particular , and the fight against corruption , it is vital that the Iraqi Government rectifies the NGO law , so that society can organise itself freely .
It is imperative that the European Union encourages interaction between Iraqi and European NGOs .
A society that is civil , free and dynamic is a prerequisite for the consolidation of democracy in Iraq .
( PL ) Madam President , Mrs Ashton , despite the huge commitment of international forces and hundreds of victims among the international coalition , including 23 Polish soldiers , the situation in Iraq is still bad .
It is a country in which we have to deal with terrorist attacks and persecution of religious minorities , including the Christian minority , and , of course , in comparison with what the situation was like several years ago , some progress has been made .
However , we still receive news of terrorist attacks which are destabilising not only Iraq but the whole of the Middle East .
The objective of the terrorists and the sponsors of international terrorism is the destabilisation of Iraq .
Much evidence points to the fact that Iran is responsible for sponsoring terrorism .
What is your opinion , Mrs Ashton , as the European Union 's High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , concerning the role of Iran in interfering in the affairs of Iraq ?
I would like to encourage you to adopt a more assertive stance and to cooperate with the United States in order to achieve solutions which will influence and put pressure on Iran to stop interfering in Iraq 's internal affairs .
In my opinion , only then will the possibility exist of bringing about a relative degree of stability in the region .
( FR ) Madam President , High Representative , we do not share your optimism either on the situation in Iraq or on the benefits of the Coalition , as it borders on blindness .
Iraq was invaded and occupied on the basis of deliberately deceptive information concerning the presence of weapons of mass destruction .
As a result , 17 of the 27 EU Member States were dragged into the attack and occupation of Iraq .
The country lies in ruin , its heritage plundered , its population deeply divided .
Religious fanaticism there is recruiting numerous reserves of fighters .
Iranian tyranny intervenes there freely .
Elections take place in a deplorable and unfair manner .
What do you and what do we intend to do to call to account those countries which lied and which could start again tomorrow with Yemen or any other nation ?
What measures do you intend to take to condemn the occupiers for resorting to non-conventional chemical and radiological weapons and depleted uranium shells , the consequences of which on future generations are well known ?
How can we ensure that these arms will not be used in Afghanistan because we turned a blind eye to the situation in Iraq ?
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , we sincerely welcome the forthcoming elections in Iraq because they represent a further step towards democracy .
They will not be free and fair , but we must settle for one small step after another .
Rebuilding Iraq in economic , trade , cultural and financial terms , and guaranteeing its security , are essential conditions for the development of democracy , but we must also promote the strengthening of the country 's institutions .
The peaceful coexistence of the various ethnic and religious groups present in Iraq can be brought about through a renewal of the institutions , with the implementation of a federal formula - federalism - which allows broad autonomy for the various regions within the framework of a unitary State .
The experience of Iraqi Kurdistan could be a useful reference point .
I would therefore like to know the opinion of Baroness Ashton , the High Representative , on this institutional aspect of the country .
( SV ) Naturally , there is a lot of talk of violence and terrible horrors when Iraq is discussed , but it is indisputable that a democratisation process is taking place in the country .
I would like to remind you that 3 912 women stood quite openly in the local elections in Iraq last year .
That is roughly ten women standing for each seat .
That must be seen as a positive thing , particularly in an Arab country .
It also provided us with some hope ahead of this year 's parliamentary elections on 7 March , particularly since the Sunnis participated in the local elections .
As has already been stated , however , two weeks ago , a government commission refused 14 Sunni parties and several hundreds of people permission to participate in the elections .
Among those affected are defence minister Abdul-Qadir al-Obaidi and Saleh al-Mutlaq , the head of the Sunni-led Iraqi Front for National Dialogue .
The Iraqi parliamentary elections are , of course , crucial to the future of the country and for the future democratisation of Iraq , particularly as regards Iraq 's ethnic and religious cohesion .
I would also like to underline that we must speak plainly as regards the treatment of ethnic and religious minorities in Iraq .
As I mentioned , the Iraqi parliamentary elections will be decisive for how we regard Iraq in the immediate future .
What does the EU 's High Representative , Baroness Ashton , believe that the EU can do to make the forthcoming parliamentary elections in Iraq inclusive and more democratic ?
( LT ) In recent years , the European Union has greatly strengthened its relations and influence in the countries of the Near East .
The European Union has always paid much attention to Iraq and , together with the international community , has participated both in the reconstruction of Iraq and in peacekeeping and security missions .
Different groups are still struggling for power in the country , which hinders the implementation of reforms begun in the country in various areas .
The fact that 14 parties are banned from participating in the elections that are taking place is also cause for concern .
Iraq has chosen the road to democracy and therefore , both the European Union and other states must demand and , if necessary , help ensure that the international commitments entered into are observed and human rights and freedoms are respected .
I believe that Iraq really is ready for close cooperation with the European Union .
The Memorandum of Understanding between the EU and Iraq in the area of energy cooperation which was signed on Monday demonstrates its commitment to develop a long-term relationship that is mutually beneficial .
From an energy point of view , Iraq is very important to the European Union , but safeguarding security of energy supply is inevitably linked to economic and political stability in the country , which has been lacking in recent times .
Clearly , this is a long-term process , but I believe that the European Union , the High Representative and the international community must offer means and solutions to make the principles of human rights and the rule of law become the fundamental pillars of future politics in Iraq .
( PL ) Madam President , Mrs Ashton , I would like to say that if I wanted to summarise Mrs Ashton 's speech in one sentence , I would say it was official optimism .
However , I think Europe and our voters expect something more specific , and they expect the truth .
Politicians show who they are not only by what they say , but also by what they do not say , and I did not hear in your speech , Mrs Ashton , anything about some matters which have shocked a significant part of European public opinion , including public opinion in my country .
I am thinking , for example , of the regular persecution of minorities in Iraq , including , and I stress this , of Christians .
This is a reality of which we can be certain .
I think my colleague , Mr Poręba , was right in what he said a moment ago about Iranian interference in Iraq .
Is the same not true of the Iraqi authorities and their scandalous intervention in Camp Ashraf , which houses Iranian refugees ?
Are the Iraqi authorities not doing just this ?
It seems to me this should be stressed very strongly , especially because the Iraqi authorities are receiving financial aid from the European Union , which they then often use in a highly improper way , for example , in the intervention in Camp Ashraf .
( PL ) Madam President , I think Iraq can serve as an example of how sometimes , to break the back of a dictatorship which destroys its opponents in their thousands using chemical weapons , it is necessary to use force .
These decisions are difficult .
Therefore , I would like us , today , while speaking about Iraq , to remember the thousands of soldiers from the United States , Italy , Poland and other countries who have fallen in Iraq , and to remember their families .
They went there believing they were going to serve in a good cause , and , as we are hearing here , Iraq is , today , on the way to building a democracy .
I know that , today , we are all calling for you to be more active , Mrs Ashton , but we want the European Union to be active .
Please go to Iraq and present an evaluation of the situation , so that the aid which the European Union is sending will be used with the same conditions attached as have been mentioned here and , in particular , with regard to the protection of minorities .
( PL ) Madam President , it so happens that only Poles are speaking at the moment , but we do have experience of the involvement of Poland and Polish soldiers in restoring security in Iraq .
I share your opinion , Mrs Ashton , that , fortunately , the situation in Iraq is a little better than it was , but it is still in a rather fragile state .
Alongside the diverse measures which the Union is taking , I would like to propose two specific measures , because it seems to me they are missing .
The first matter concerns something which has not been mentioned today : I think it is exceedingly important for the development and stabilisation of Iraq to adopt a programme for the education of young Iraqis in Europe , because in Iraq , there is still a shortage of doctors , engineers and irrigation specialists .
I think we could help Iraq greatly in this area .
The second matter concerns protection of the cultural treasures which are to be found in Iraq .
I think the EU should , in particular , help with the rebuilding of Babylon .
This is a treasure which everyone in the world should take care to protect .
( DE ) Madam President , Baroness Ashton , my question relates to the memorandum of understanding that has been signed in the energy sector .
Do you think it is possible to achieve further development together with either Mr Oettinger or Mr De Gucht ?
In my opinion , economic reconstruction would be the very thing to bring more stability to Iraq .
If we were to improve relations in the energy sector , particularly through greater provision of European equipment to make better use of the energy reserves that are present there , with us buying energy there to compensate , we would have a win-win situation for both sides .
An initiative in the next few weeks would make great sense in this regard .
High Representative of the Union for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy / Vice-President of the Commission . - Thank you all again for an important and interesting debate .
I will just try and capture some of the clear issues that honourable Members were most concerned about .
I would begin by recognising the importance that Members attach to the issue of minorities .
As Members will know , one of the fundamental parts of our work in the partnership and cooperation agreements is indeed to make sure that human rights is at the heart of our agreements .
We hope to be able to initial this agreement with Iraq soon , and I do accept and undertake to make sure that , within what we do , the issues of minorities are understood .
That is clearly of great significance .
I share , too , the objective raised by a number of honourable Members on the question of capital punishment .
Our objective is indeed to get this abolished , for all the reasons that honourable Members have quite rightly indicated .
I agree , too , that we have to consolidate and strengthen the political processes , which is going to be of great significance in everything we do , and to make sure particularly that we have , with the forthcoming elections , an understanding of what it is we want to achieve .
I understand the points raised by a number of honourable Members , including Mr Costa and Mr Stevenson , about the issues concerning the Committee decision on the barring of candidates .
The review of candidates was always part of the pre-electoral process .
There is an appeals procedure , which I trust will be allowed to run its proper course .
I should also say that we do plan to send our EU mission next week , which is six weeks ahead of election day , and that will enable us to follow first-hand and closely the pre-election process , which is of great interest .
We trust and hope that the Iraqi authorities will ensure an inclusive electoral process , for all the reasons that honourable Members have made absolutely clear in what they have said .
A number of Members also raised the issue of the memorandum of understanding on energy and its importance and significance .
We are very clear in doing this that Iraq is a unitary state and that all our cooperation is with the government of all of Iraq .
We fully support Iraq remaining a unified and sovereign state .
Within this area , it will be important to enhance cooperation - and I heard what was said , in particular , by Mr Rübig , who described the need to think further about enhancing that cooperation .
I will feed that back to the Commissioners-designate .
I am also aware , when I say that there is an issue around the security question , that the issue of Kirkuk is a very important one , as well as other disputed boundaries .
I described that as one of the major challenges which Iraq faces at the present time .
I feel very strongly that Iraq has to solve these issues for itself .
It is for Iraq to deal with .
However , I am very keen to support the United Nations Assistance Mission in Iraq , which has made significant efforts to try and begin a dialogue and a process .
To be cautious , though , I do not expect dialogue to be of any significant level pre the elections , at this particular stage .
Just a little bit more about energy cooperation too .
We see this as being part of developing a comprehensive and integrated energy policy for Iraq .
This is about the supply and security of supply between Iraq and the European Union and should , of course , include the development of renewable energy , particularly solar and wind energy , and to also enhance energy efficiency measures within Iraq .
I hope , too , that we will see technological , scientific and industrial cooperation as well over the coming months and years .
That point was well made .
Moving to the issue of the recent cancellation of the delegation , Mr Meyer raised the issue of future security concerns .
We do want to see an improvement in the environment , as I have indicated , to allow the deployment of the election observation mission with the participation of MEPs .
This will clearly be of enormous significance for honourable Members in the coming electoral process and , as I have indicated , we will be sending people out very shortly .
Honourable Members raised the question of the withdrawal of forces .
President Obama has , of course , announced the withdrawal of all combat troops by August 2010 which , in practice , means that the withdrawal will begin soon after the national elections .
That , again , is of significance and importance .
I have indicated that we are sending the election assessment team shortly , which I hope will help us deal with the issues that honourable Members have raised in that context .
In terms of Camp Ashraf , we have consistently and repeatedly reminded Iraq that this complex issue must be managed in full accordance with international law , and indeed without any violence .
Going back to where we began , I am optimistic about Iraq .
There are significant challenges , and honourable Members are right to remind us of those significant challenges .
However , we can see , with the coming elections and with the opportunity for greater cooperation - an opportunity for the European Union , with its value system and the things we are particularly concerned about : human rights , the rights of minorities , the issues of capital punishment , developing strong cooperation on energy security and supply and working more closely with the government , while being clear about the expectations we have - a future for Iraq that will be peaceful and democratic .
We must ensure that we work consistently towards that end .
I know of only a few countries relatively close to Europe which have managed to put their ' democratisation ' process off for several decades .
Iraq , where units from EU countries have also unfortunately left a negative mark , is definitely one of them .
At present , one of the most secular states in the Islamic world has been left in ruins , with three of its communities constantly at loggerheads .
What has survived from the past are just memories of the country 's relatively good education and health care systems , and a comparatively advanced infrastructure .
This is the only country in the region where the Kurdish minority was autonomous , even though no ideal democratic regime ruled in the country .
By and large , the question is which country of the region can we describe as having a truly democratic regime ?
The fact that , following the invasion by the US Army , the Iraqi state has been totally disrupted marks , together with the partial liquidation of the infrastructure of its social , health care , and educational systems , a giant step backwards .
The cloak of so-called democratic elections can by no means cover that up .
The ongoing efforts aimed at distracting attention from current problems by stage-managed trials of prominent figures of Saddam Hussein 's regime are naive .
Only a person absolutely unacquainted with the situation could believe that it can be improved in this way .
The only positive aspect of the recent period is that both the US administration and the Iraqi Government have realised that there will be no improvement without good relations with Iran .
I am pleased at the optimistic tone of Mrs Ashton 's speech , but I would rather maintain a certain caution in my assessment of the situation in Iraq .
Despite many appearances , the country is still internally unstable , and democracy most certainly cannot be said to have ' taken root ' .
We cannot speak of stabilisation in a country within whose borders 1.8-1.9 million residents have been displaced , while a further million have left the country altogether , and the conditions under which the refugees are living are extremely poor .
It is essential to review the methods currently being used to supply foreign aid to refugees in Syria and Jordan and displaced people inside Iraq .
This aid needs to be supplied for a sufficiently long period of time .
How long ?
This we still do not know .
However , just as a doctor does not stop treatment at the first signs of improvement , we , too , must not allow ourselves to be misled by over-optimistic prognoses .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.25 and resumed at 21.00 )

Second revision of the ACP-EU Partnership agreement ( Cotonou agreement ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Eva Joly , on behalf of the Committee on Development , on the second revision of the ACP-EU Partnership Agreement ( Cotonou Agreement ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the revision of the Cotonou Agreement gives us an opportunity to learn lessons from the crises that we face : the economic and financial crisis , the social or food crisis , climate change , energy challenges and the persistence of extreme poverty .
The dominant economic model that is the unbridled free market , and our lifestyles , have not just shown their limitations , but have actually caused these unprecedented multidimensional crises .
We must therefore carry out a radical overhaul of all our policies .
The report submitted to you today and adopted unanimously by the members of the Committee on Development seems to me to represent a first step towards this necessary revision .
The main imperative to respect is consistency .
European Union trade policy , fisheries and agriculture must be designed consistently and in such a way as to ensure sustainable development , to fight poverty and guarantee a decent standard of living and income for everyone .
I am sorry to tell you that this is not the case today .
By making trade an end in itself , and not a means to serve its development policy , the European Union is sacrificing the populations of developing countries for the benefit of its multinationals .
Therefore , negotiations on the Economic Partnership Agreements are quite rightly causing controversy amongst the governments of the ACP , unions and civil society , which see them as a threat to their economies .
Agriculture is one of the most problematic issues and remains tragically neglected in cooperation between the European Union and the ACP countries .
Although rural areas and this sector represent more than 60 % of the population and their jobs , their share of the European funds for ACP countries is virtually non-existent .
This must change .
How can we eradicate poverty without making food sovereignty a priority ?
Agriculture must be at the heart of the European Union 's development policies .
Helping developing countries together with local farmers to ensure they have food sovereignty is quite simply essential , all the more so because , today , food sovereignty , like the democratic legitimacy of these countries ' governments , is threatened by a new and particularly worrying phenomenon , the acquisition of arable land by foreign investors following the rise in food prices in 2007 .
China , Saudi Arabia and even Qatar now own thousands of hectares in developing countries .
The European Union and the ACP countries must tackle this matter , which is likely to create violent conflicts and hunger riots , in particular , by making access to natural resources such as land and water a fundamental and inalienable right of local populations .
Another matter that is close to my heart is that of tax havens .
The repercussions of these are bad enough for developed countries , but are even worse for the economies and the political institutions of developing countries .
The illicit financial flows that they allow are thought to account for as much as ten times the amount of official development assistance .
Stopping this haemorrhage is a question of consistency and credibility .
A first step could be the signing of a binding agreement , requiring multinationals to automatically declare their profits and the taxes paid in every country in which they operate , thus limiting the abuses and the losses sustained by developing countries .
Finally , I would like to use this debate to stress once more the democratic deficit of this revision , which our parliaments were not consulted on .
The role of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly must , however , be strengthened .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I hope that the negotiators will seize the opportunity they are being given to make the necessary amendments to this partnership and to make it a success of which the principal beneficiaries will be the populations of the ACP countries .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Committee on International Trade , over which I have the honour of presiding , has decided to take a stand on the ongoing revision of the Cotonou Agreement for two reasons .
Firstly , trade is an essential part of the relations between the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries and the European Union .
Secondly , the Cotonou Agreement has brought with it the new Economic Partnership Agreements , which are essentially trade agreements .
For these reasons , we have decided to participate by providing a report , for which I am the rapporteur .
In this report , we are concerned with two things : firstly , respecting the details of the Economic Partnership Agreements and the parliamentary monitoring institutions which they have established , such as the Cariforum , and , secondly , making use of synergies while respecting the autonomy of both institutions .
Respecting the synergies , in other words , within the Joint Parliamentary Assembly , which acts between the European Union and the ACP countries and the new inter-parliamentary institutions for the Economic Partnership Agreements .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I appreciate very much the interest that you take in the second revision of the Cotonou Agreement .
It is also with great interest that I read the report of the Development Committee , which provides a shrewd analysis on the matters at stake .
Throughout the whole process , it is a priority for us to keep Parliament informed , as we have done over the last months .
The negotiations have gained momentum and are now entering into the final phase , and the next joint ambassadorial meeting will prove the value of these discussions .
We will be heading for an extraordinary joint ministerial meeting to conclude the negotiations in March , as foreseen by the Cotonou Agreement .
Let me now share with you some observations on the report .
Above all , the report has already proven helpful in upholding certain positions of the EU .
Just to name some of them : your position on strengthening national ACP parliaments , on the International Criminal Court and on other human rights issues confirmed our negotiation position .
Likewise , the importance that you attach to climate change and food security is shared by us and will be reflected in the final outcome .
I would like to focus on four items , starting with the importance of the parliamentary dimension as embodied in the Joint Parliamentary Assembly , to which the report attaches great importance .
The Commission is committed to strengthening the parliamentary dimension in the Cotonou Agreement .
Therefore , our intention is not to weaken the JPA .
On the contrary , the Commission proposal must be seen in the broader context of growing parliamentary oversight functions , in particular , with a view to existing and future Economic Partnership Agreements ( EPAs ) and EDF programmes .
We should ensure maximum synergy between EPA and Cotonou institutions , including between regional JPA meetings and the EPA parliamentary bodies .
In this emerging setting , a reduction in plenary JPA meetings would make sense .
The Commission accepts , however , that this matter needs to be agreed with those who are most concerned , and is therefore open to reconsidering its position .
At the same time , we would be interested to learn more from Parliament how it sees the JPA 's role and functioning in a changing political and institutional environment .
The establishment of EPAs does not only call for the need to ensure synergy between them and the Cotonou institutions , but also requires an update of the Cotonou trade provisions , since the Cotonou trade regime has become obsolete .
We have agreed with ACP partners that we will continue the negotiations towards regional European Partnership Agreements .
In this context , as Development Commissioner , I would stress that it is neither politically desirable nor legally feasible to incorporate EU unilateral trade regimes such as GSP or GSP + in Cotonou , as suggested in the draft report , since these depend on autonomous EU schemes .
By contrast , the Commission welcomes the call for Cotonou to give more attention to the trade and development issues in general , and to aid for trade in particular .
In your report , you express the concern that the conclusion of EPAs and increased regionalisation might undermine the coherence of the ACP Group .
The Commission believes that regional differentiation within the framework of Cotonou is more an opportunity than a threat .
Regional integration is crucial for the development of ACP countries and we need to integrate this reality into Cotonou to better support their own efforts towards this objective .
This by no means signifies disrupting the ACP Group , and our ACP partners largely share this approach .
Let me now briefly comment on sectoral policies which you are stressing in your report .
We fully share the importance of climate change and renewable energies which are already included in the present revision exercise .
Likewise , we will address food security in the regional dimension .
You also stress the importance of good governance in tax matters and in the fiscal area .
Good governance is a fundamental principle of the Cotonou Agreement .
Building on Article 9 of the Cotonou Agreement , the Commission is currently preparing a new policy on good governance in tax matters in the context of development cooperation .
We are also seeking to address these aspects in the ongoing revision exercise .
Therefore , I can confirm that we share the same objective with you , which is to create fair , effective and growth-enhancing tax systems and effective tax administrations , as well as to strengthen the participation of developing countries in international tax processes .
Finally , I take note that you deplore that the Commission has not consulted a wider variety of actors before launching the revision process - paragraphs 2 and 8 - and I fully agree that , for the future of the ACP-EU relations post-2020 , a comprehensive consultation process is needed , possibly in the form of a green paper .
We will have to assess the results of the present revision exercise as a basis for this as a form of lessons learnt .
I would first of all like to congratulate Mrs Joly for compiling this report .
The subject areas touched on in it are extremely important in terms of ensuring that the Cotonou Agreement remains the basis for a solid partnership with the ACP countries , as well as a relevant instrument against the backdrop of the new challenges which these countries are facing .
The negotiations are taking place in a climate which , as we all know , is difficult and complex .
On the one hand , the ACP countries are deeply affected not only by the economic and financial crisis , but also by the lack of food security and the consequences of climate change .
On the other hand , there is an institutional challenge facing all the parties in the negotiations , which involves reflecting in an appropriate manner on the trends towards a regionalisation of relations between ACP countries and the European Union .
We must ensure from now on that the revised text contains all the elements required for a cooperation promoting effective development , capable of contributing to the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals in the ACP countries .
I also wish to emphasise that I introduced five amendments on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) .
I believe that these will offer a more finely nuanced reading of some of the proposals contained in the report .
For example , it is important in paragraph 29 for us to insist on the concept of ownership in connection with arable land .
In addition , on the subject of creating a mechanism where transnational companies are obliged to declare the profits they have made , I believe that this must be set up at international level .
In paragraph 25 , it is important to make a clear reference to dealing with the issue of food security in a consistent manner as part of the EU 's development policy .
Finally , in paragraph 31 , the position expressed on readmission agreements with third countries does not reflect the PPE Group 's vision on this matter .

Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to congratulate Mrs Joly on her work , on the report and also on taking into account the contributions of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament , and , although we have again tabled some amendments , we see our contribution in the resolution that she has presented .
For our group , the partnership between the European Union and the ACP countries is part of an historic commitment , which must retain all its specific characteristics , which must not be watered down , even by the need to comply with certain rules , such as those of the WTO .
We are most concerned that this partnership should preserve , in particular , the consistency of all European Union policies - trade policy , budgetary policy - with objectives in the area of development , but also in relation to the promotion of peace , security and democracy and human rights in ACP countries .
It is not a question of imposing a model , but of working with these countries to ensure their development , which must be sustainable development .
From this point of view , it is very important for this revision to enable us to take into account new elements of the last five years : the fight against climate change , technology transfers , renewable energy development aid , the fight against food crises , and therefore greater emphasis in our cooperation on agriculture , on food sovereignty , the fight against financial deregulation , good fiscal governance and the fight against tax havens .
We see our contribution in all of that .
I would like to stress two points .
Trade : with the implementation of the Economic Partnership Agreements , certain provisions of the Cotonou Agreement will become obsolete , but we are concerned that this agreement should still mention that the trade clauses and the trade regimes from which the ACP countries benefit must not be less favourable than those from which they benefited previously .
It seems to us that we should integrate the GSP , the interim EPAs and all these provisions in the revision of the Cotonou Agreement .
Finally , on emigration - our colleagues in the group will emphasise this - we are concerned that it should actually be said that the migration agreements preserve the rights of migrants and that we cannot accept transit regimes to countries that do not guarantee respect for human rights .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would also like to congratulate Mrs Joly on the accuracy and the rigour of her report , and on the very appropriate analysis that it contains .
The second revision of the Cotonou Agreement must enhance the Lomé acquis while consolidating unity , cohesion and solidarity between the ACP States .
This agreement must , of course , guarantee that these countries will be able to take control of their development policy .
The programming , re-examination and monitoring of the agreement should consequently also be a prerogative for the parliaments of our partner countries .
I know that this is obviously a huge challenge , but I think that we must make a special effort to encourage these parliaments .
It is an expectation that we must also express very openly to the authorities of our partner countries .
Certain governments , as you know , are reluctant to encourage parliamentary debate in their countries .
I also call in particular for the democratic scrutiny and the role of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly to be strengthened , notably via the insertion in the Cotonou Agreement of clauses that would allow the JPA to receive national and regional strategy documents in order to debate them .
In future , the national and regional parliaments must also , I believe , be consulted much more systematically on the process of drafting regional and national strategy documents .
I would like to say a few words on the organisation of the work of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly : I believe that we must keep two sessions .
Reducing these to one session would send out an extremely negative message to our partners .
Regional meetings should perhaps be organised more closely together ; on 25 January , I will make some concrete proposals in this regard to the Bureau of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
For the sake of consistency and effectiveness , I insist that the parliamentary bodies in charge of monitoring the EPAs are made up of members of the JPA in order to better guarantee their development dimension .
Furthermore , I welcome your comments , Commissioner , since you were quite clear on this declaration as the next Trade Commissioner .
I do not , for one minute , doubt your sincerity when you say that you want to endow these Economic Partnership Agreements with this development dimension .
Finally , the revision of the Cotonou Agreement should provide for an increase in aid and funding for ACP countries in order to help them take the measures necessary to combat climate change .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , we go on and on and on .
We keep talking about alleviating poverty .
This is the 10th EDF .
We have pumped about EUR 350 billion into so-called alleviating poverty when we know that poverty has increased .
Why is it that we have policies and programmes in our ACP countries that we never had in our own European history ?
The provinces of Brussels or Brabant did not get richer and eliminate poverty by creating what we are trying to do in the ACP countries .
We created wealth in Europe by creating wealth .
How do we create wealth in the ACP countries ?
Mrs Joly has very interestingly identified that there is a flight of capital .
She says that eight times what we put into those countries goes out .
Why is that capital not employed in those countries ?
Why are we not creating the conditions for that capital to stay at home to create jobs and make wealth ?
Until we answer these questions , we are wasting our taxpayers ' money without actually eliminating one person from being poor .
Mr President , my group supports Mrs Joly 's report .
We call for the following problems , amongst others , to be taken into consideration : the incorporation of the consequences of climate change and of the necessary adaptation measures for the ACP countries ; the concern of the ACP countries that the EU 's regional negotiations with groups of ACP countries will undermine solidarity within the ACP community ; and the possibility of supporting necessary investments in the field of public services and public infrastructure with IB credits on the basis of the Cotonou Agreement .
At the same time , we oppose the inclusion of quotas for the return of migrants from the EU to the ACP countries as part of these negotiations .
The first revision of the Cotonou Agreement took up the political dimension .
Now , it is about the parliamentary dimension , for which reason we see the idea of cutting the sittings of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly to once a year as incomprehensible .
( HU ) I was shocked when , during a food conference , I saw a sign in the hand of the African delegation saying : Do not feed Africa .
We would do better to realise that what Africa needs is not aid but food self-determination .
Interestingly , the African population and farmers have the same interest as Eastern Europe 's post-communist farmers and population , or even , carried to the extreme , the French farmers and population , namely the need for local farmers to decide what they wish to produce , how to produce it and sell it on the local marketplace .
And the local population 's interest is to be able to eat locally produced healthy and good quality food .
The ideas of a liberalised global free market , on the one hand , and food self-determination , on the other , belong to two different systems of logic .
Here , we should take the side of food self-determination more decisively .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the second revision of the Cotonou Agreement comes at a very interesting time , because it allows analysis of the provisions of the agreement in the light of a rapidly changing reality .
Much has happened since the previous review in 2005 : crises in the areas of economics , food , energy and finance and the changes resulting from climate negotiations and their effects on developing countries .
However , something which must interest MEPs is the role of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly and possible attempts at restricting its frequency and role .
I am greatly pleased by the Commissioner 's declaration that the European Commission has no such intentions .
This is important , because neither the European Parliament , nor the Joint Parliamentary Assembly , nor the parliaments of the ACP countries , took part in the decision process which has produced the changes to the agreement .
Another important matter is the regionalisation of European Union-ACP relations and , in particular , the nature of this regionalisation .
I am not against regionalisation , but I am convinced that regional meetings of the Joint Assembly must not replace plenary sessions .
Incidentally , it would probably be more natural if decisions about the structures and principles of work of the Joint Assembly were made by the Assembly itself , and not the parties to the agreement .
I endorse the desire expressed in the report to strengthen national parliaments .
Mr Michel spoke about this .
In future , we would like all representatives of the ACP countries who take part in the work of the Joint Assembly to be Members of their own parliaments , and not representatives of their governments .
It is equally important that the national parliaments of the ACP countries be given the opportunity to play a significant role in cooperation on development , in preparation and implementation of programmes and in monitoring and evaluation of action taken .
This explains the necessity of access to strategic documents .
In addition , I agree , of course , that functions should not be duplicated and that complementarity and synergy between Economic Partnership Agreements and the Joint Parliamentary Assembly is very important .
( FR ) Mr President , Article 13 of the Cotonou Agreement has not been revised since 2000 .
It concerns a sensitive subject : the dialogue between the European Union and the ACP countries on immigration , fair treatment of immigrants , the principles of non-refoulement , the underlying causes of immigration and , finally , the fight against illegal immigration and readmission , and it is these two aspects that the European Union has mostly concentrated on .
The cruel absence of a common immigration policy that is worthy of the values that Europe claims to uphold risks strengthening , in the planned revision of Article 13 , the aspect of repression and the hunting down of illegal immigrants .
The tragic example of the bilateral agreement between Italy and Libya , which has led to intolerable humanitarian situations , does not seem to have discouraged the zeal of those who want to toughen up Article 13 in order to strengthen the section on the fight against illegal immigration .
Furthermore , in some regions - I am thinking of Calabria - illegal immigrants are now being hunted down openly and unceremoniously .
Instead of acting on the basis of the fears aroused by the current crisis , we must point out the synergy that must be established between immigration and development .
If the ACP countries need aid in order to take off economically , we ourselves will need immigration to face the crisis affecting us .
We should therefore concentrate on legal immigration and mobility .
These are the only safeguards against the hateful climate surreptitiously taking root in our own countries .

( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as liberal democrats , we want to take advantage of the revision of the Cotonou Agreement to affirm an idea of modernity that is backed by the ACP countries too , and when I speak of modernity I mean , above all , the assertion of policies that can stress and allow greater freedom .
This freedom should be , first and foremost , freedom from bureaucracy , which is becoming more and more excessive in the ACP countries and is constantly an obstacle to economic growth .
This freedom should be the possibility , above all , for students to go to study abroad , and I believe that we should take the opportunity afforded by this revision to launch an ambitious programme of study grants .
This freedom should be through the dissemination of new IT technologies so that the Internet , in particular , can become an asset that is as widely accessible as possible .
Finally , it should allow the free movement of workers in such a way as to resolve the serious cases of interference to which Mrs De Keyser referred when she talked about bilateral treaties .
Cotonou , which is the direct descendant of Lomé and Yaoundé , has a long history ; at one time , it led the way , and if it is able to tackle new challenges , it will again succeed in playing a major role .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Joly on the quality of her report .
Indeed , the revision of the Cotonou Agreement must be an opportunity to finally take stock and to propose , on the basis of the lessons learned , solutions to improve its implementation , its operation and its impact .
In this regard , the clear identification of priorities is extremely important .
I would like to stress three points .
First of all , we need to make the contents of the political dialogue clearer .
We must not lose sight of the consolidation of peace , the prevention and the settling of conflicts , but making existing instruments operational and adding references to the fight against the traffic in small arms and against drugs are challenges which , once conquered , will have a positive impact politically , economically and socially .
Secondly , the conclusion of flexible and balanced Economic Partnership Agreements that have due regard for regional development is extremely important .
The key sectors , such as agriculture , renewable energy and the employment of young people , should be better taken into account .
Regular dialogue with local populations will enable a realistic adjustment to be made .
Finally , the institutional framework is vital .
To ensure better cohesion between the different pillars of the agreement is absolutely essential .
Strengthening the power of the JPA and of the national parliaments will automatically lead to better democratic scrutiny and , above all , to far greater transparency .
To conclude , any instrument , whether new or overhauled , must preserve the fundamental principles and spirit of the agreement and , above all , we must not lose sight of the central objective , which is the eradication of poverty , while contributing to sustainable development and the progressive integration of the ACP countries into the global economy .
Mr President , brevity is the source of wit .
Congratulations , Madame Joly ; congratulations , Commissioner .
Parliament puts at its heart in these negotiations reinforcing the principle of non-negotiable human rights clauses and sanctions for failure to respect such clauses , inter alia , with regard to discrimination based on sex , racial or ethnic origin , religion or belief , disability , age , sexual orientation , and towards people living with AIDS and HIV .
I am told , Commissioner , that some Member States do not want this amendment , but for Parliament it is vital .
Human rights , as you well know , are often far too eroded , and this erosion is primarily for party political advantage .
The defence of fundamental rights is at the heart of the European Union , and so it should therefore be at the heart and the centre of our relations with all ACP countries .
Commissioner , this is probably the last time you will appear before us in your present portfolio , so can I please say a warm thank you on behalf of Parliament .
You have been a staunch defender of human rights and the values of the EU , and I wish you well in your new portfolio . Thank you .
( PT ) This revised version of the Cotonou Agreement introduces key issues for sustainable development and the gradual integration of ACP countries into the global economy .
Issues such as climate change , energy security , training and education are essential for development in these countries .
At the same time , global warming may present an opportunity .
The costs of renewable energy that these countries have at their disposal are essential for their economic and social development , and allow them to move towards a state of independence in terms of energy , so that they can face up to the global crisis .
Investment in education and training is equally important in combating poverty , unemployment , emigration and the brain drain , and will help to build the economy in these countries .
To conclude , I would like to make special mention of the small island countries that are particularly vulnerable and fragile .
In view of this , the implementation of the Cotonou Agreement should take account of the Mauritius Strategy and the Barbados Action Plan , which identify a number of measures to assist developing island countries in bringing about sustainable development .
( PT ) Mr President , Parliament has been convened at this precise moment in order to decide on the second revision of the Cotonou Agreement .
Please allow me , however , to point out the difficulties that Haiti is facing at present .
This situation calls for international solidarity , action and attention .
Of course , my thoughts go out to those who have lost their lives and those who are living through a really desperate situation .
In terms of the topic in question here , we know that Cotonou aims to create a framework for cooperation that will constitute a joint ACP-EU response to globalisation , contribute to peace and security , and foster a democratic political atmosphere .
The 2005 revision took a few steps in the right direction .
However , much remains to be done .
The global economic and financial crisis , climate issues and the increased cost of food and energy are the reasons behind a new revised version .
I will no longer vote for the European Union to maintain - and , wherever possible , to increase - the levels of aid given to ACP countries .
I agree with the argument that the national parliaments of those countries need to be involved in the process of revising the agreement both now and in the future , and I reiterate the need for them to be invited to do so .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one objective that the second revision of the partnership agreement should have is definitely to promote a culture of responsibility .
It will be very difficult to achieve this without the help of civil society organisations , non-State entities , and also without the parliaments .
In fact , I do not believe that it is possible to have policies that fully meet the real needs of the communities involved .
A second key aspect is humanitarian aid .
The USD 300 billion of aid that has been granted over the past 40 years has had no effect , if we consider that the growth of the African continent over that period has been less than 0.2 % per year .
This is an apocalyptic scenario which the international community must start to understand .
It must , at last , tackle the issue of developing countries as a problem that is truly ours , as a problem that concerns us , the day-to-day lives of our communities , to be tackled day by day together with the local institutions which are on an endless quest for a glimmer of legitimacy .
Finally , allow me to stress that investing in human capital means trying to understand that the greatest resource for recovery is the very people who are living through difficult situations .
It is they who bear the responsibility for pulling the continent out of the abyss , and it is for us to pay attention to the problems of those countries with a clear purpose : that common good which is an interest not only of the ACP countries but also our own , and the future of our citizens .
We should look to people instead of to money , to substance instead of to advertisements .
This will allow us to utilise our strategies to the best effect .
( CS ) Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have repeatedly criticised the fact that the national parliaments and the non-governmental organisations in developing countries are not involved in decision making regarding development aid , and that they do not have access to strategic documents .
This must be rectified during the new revision of the Cotonou Agreement .
The new agreement should also incorporate commitments by individual governments and parliaments to build functioning tax systems in their countries .
This is important for both contracting parties .
The ACP countries finally need their own standard fiscal administration , i.e. , planned tax revenues for their own development objectives .
This , in turn , will help the Union in its struggle against the abuse of tax havens , against tax evasion , and against the illegal flight of capital .
As deputy chair responsible for human rights , I demand that international treaties also contain human rights clauses , and not only for African , Caribbean and Pacific countries .
I am sorry to note that the report by Mrs Joly , a good report in other respects , does not contain such a requirement .
I urge the Commission and the Spanish Presidency to rectify this .
( RO ) The report we have debated today refers to many problems linked to food security in ACP countries .
I believe that we cannot talk about this subject without also taking into account some of the realities of European agriculture .
The European Union can and even should play the role of regulator on the global markets .
If Europe reduced its agricultural output , the rise in food imports would contribute significantly to the global rise in food prices .
This is why the European Union 's food production must be maintained at constant levels for the benefit of Europeans , as well as for the benefit of the citizens from the ACP and other states .
Therefore , I believe that these aspects linked to the poorer countries ' food security are also closely linked to the future of the European common agricultural policy .
( FR ) Mr President , I would also like to express my support for the very good report by my colleague , Mrs Joly .
The ACP-EU Partnership is more necessary than ever , and the tragedy taking place in Haiti demonstrates the extent to which the ACP-EU Partnership is indispensable and definitely must be strengthened .
It is unusual to speak about all of this to a Commissioner who today is in charge of development but tomorrow will be in charge of trade and , precisely for this reason , I would like to give you three suggestions .
Firstly , as others before me have said , when it comes to parliamentary control and the Assembly , we should continue to hold two annual meetings and not reduce these to one .
Secondly , why not subject the Economic Partnership Agreements to parliamentary control in the case of the ACPs , rather than to a strictly commercial logic , so that , here too , parliaments can be involved and made responsible for controlling the repercussions for the populations of the Economic Partnership Agreements and the defence of their interests in this framework ?
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the revision of the Cotonou agreements should promote a shift in the European Union 's policy of cooperation and development aid .
This policy should be aimed at genuine cooperation and solidarity , and should help to promote autonomous and sovereign development in ACP countries .
There are myriad mechanisms that currently ensure that many of these countries remain subject to domination and subjugation .
Suffocating foreign debt , paid several times over , yet always rising , plays a key role in establishing these kind of relations .
Pressure from the European Union to implement Economic Partnership Agreements - essentially free trade agreements - has come to reflect the current priorities of the European Development Fund , which needs to be revisited , and is indicative of the path that is now being followed .
This is a path that seeks to force these countries to submit to new relationships based on dependence and to the interests of multinationals , which leads to the overuse of their resources so as to serve interests that are not shared by their citizens .
Development aid must not be conditional on the implementation of Economic Partnership Agreements .
The concerns and objections of the ACP countries must be respected , along with the priorities that they set down .
( DE ) Mr President , I will come straight out and say this : I think there is little sense in paragraph 31 of the present proposal for a second revision of the agreement .
I , too , am opposed to the kind of relay race that the various readmission agreements for migrants create , whereby the people in question are passed from one country to the next .
In this regard , there is definitely a need for such cascade agreements to be better regulated at the international level .
It seems to me even more important , however , that this kind of situation is avoided in the first place .
I therefore believe that the idea of facilitating the circular visa for people from the ACP countries is the wrong way to go .
Let us , therefore , support self-help .
Let us promote self-sufficiency .
Let us turn charity cases into producers with a sense of self-worth .
That would certainly put a stop to social emigration and the flight from social poverty .
( EL ) Mr President , this afternoon , the debate was held on the massive and unimaginable disaster in Haiti and on how Europe can help to bring relief to the victims .
This debate should remind us - and this is why I have taken the floor during this evening 's sitting - that we need to approach agreements with countries which face serious economic problems and which are especially vulnerable to natural disasters , as the tragedy in Haiti has proven , in a completely different spirit from other economic agreements entered into by the European Union .
We are talking about countries at the mercy of poverty , indigence and disease .
We are talking about countries in which the term humanitarian crisis is tending to become the rule .
It is therefore our responsibility , it is our duty , it is our creed , it is the foundation stone of the European Union for us to put human life above all else and any technical or economic dimensions after that .
That is why , everything we have debated today , the red tape , the technical issues , need to be resolved as quickly as possible .
( DE ) Mr President , when I think of the Caribbean , two images come to mind : the current major disaster in Haiti , and , when you have been working in this House for many years , also the MEPs luxuriating at the meetings of the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly ( JPA ) .
After this long debate , in which important things have been said , it could perhaps be possible to send out a very concrete sign and , in consideration of the situation in Haiti , do without the next one or two opulent sittings of the ACP-EU JPA in these very countries and use the net profit to actually benefit the victims .
It would only be a drop in the ocean , but it would be symbolic , and it would show that we really do mean , in practice , the many fine words that are spoken in this House .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the ACP Assembly is particularly important at this political juncture where globalisation has more or less divided the world into countries producing products and countries producing ideas , giving rise to a migration of workers as well as , naturally , goods .
At the heart of this process is the Mediterranean , the true fulcrum between Europe and the ACP countries .
The Cotonou rules must therefore adapt to this new situation and I propose - at the request of the President of the Republic of Italy , Giorgio Napolitano , who officially supports this proposal - that a decentralised office or a fixed annual meeting of the ACP Assembly be established in the most multi-ethnic , most Mediterranean European city , which is also close to the ACP countries : Naples .
I therefore repeat - again at the request of the President of the Republic of Italy - I recommend discussing this proposal in the new agreements .
Moreover , it has the advantage of bringing Europe closer to its citizens and the people of southern Italy , which is Europe 's true logistical platform with regard to the countries of the Mediterranean .

( PL ) Mr President , I permit myself to ask for the floor after hearing Mr Niculescu 's speech , and would like to support firmly the thought he expressed - that in our economic relations with other countries , including the ACP countries , we should not lose sight of the food security of European society .
In relations with ACP countries , we can recall the reform of the sugar market , which was carried out under the noble slogan of support for those countries , but which , in reality , made the situation in the European Union , for our farmers and consumers , much worse , and was not of much help to the ACP countries .
Let us always remember food security , and our society , which needs that security .
Member of the Commission . - First of all , with respect to the GSP and GSP + , we have nothing in principle against these being included in the Cotonou Agreement , but we should realise that GSP and GSP + are unilateral and Cotonou is contractual .
I think it is therefore very difficult to put them in the Cotonou Agreement , but maybe we can find formulas that make the link more intricate .
( FR ) Democratic scrutiny : several speakers have requested that the practice of holding two annual plenary meetings be maintained .
The Commission is prepared to reconsider its point of view in this respect , but perhaps we could nevertheless agree to let the regional meetings coincide , as far as possible , with one or two of the plenary meetings , since it seems to me that all the meetings of the European Parliament , together with those of the other institutions , create an awful lot of meetings .
I therefore agree in principle with the idea of having two plenary meetings , but let us try to bring them closer to the regional meetings .
Several speakers also spoke of the nature of the Economic Partnership Agreements .
This is the term we agreed on , but in fact we should really talk in terms of development partnership agreements , and I think that this would also make the discussion with the ACP countries easier .
I think that this would be liable to make the debate a little more open .
In any case , if the European Parliament should agree at some point to a new Commission , of which I am a member , I will do everything possible , within my remit , to make these agreements a success and to be present at the sessions of the Joint Parliamentary Assembly .
There were some questions on fiscal matters .
I think that I have already dealt with this point in my introduction , and I really believe that it is important that this becomes a crucial subject in our discussions with the ACP countries , but also among ourselves , since , let us be serious - and I know that the Spanish Presidency also has a keen interest in this subject - if we really want to do something , we also have to have the courage to intervene with our societies in these developing countries .
The problem does not only arise there , the problem arises in particular , and I would even say above all , in the relationship between Europe and its own societies and industries in developing countries .
This is a process that is under way and I understand that the Spanish Presidency will also take initiatives in this respect .
Migration .
With respect to Article 13 , both sides want to update migration .
On Article 13 , the Commission has put forward a balanced and coherent proposal that builds on the three pillars of cooperation in the areas of migration and development , legal migration and illegal migration and readmission .
The aspects put forward by the report are duly taken into account .
All areas deserve equal attention .
Negotiations are ongoing , and we are optimistic about finding an agreement provided the balance between the three pillars is kept .
Mr Cashman made a remark with respect to discrimination .
Mr Cashman is not here at the moment , but I think he is completely right .
Sexual orientation was part of the elements proposed by the Commission and we attach a lot of importance to it , but you should also be aware , as the Commission is , that in some ACP countries , homosexuality is forbidden by law .
We recently made representations to the Burundian President and also to the Ugandan President because they have introduced discriminatory laws , but this is a very touchy subject and I think , at a certain moment in time , you will have to come to grips with it .
Either you insist that the text is very clear , and probably we will not get an agreement on it : that is the first possibility ; or another possibility is perhaps that we have some language which is less specific .
UN language is less specific but would also cover sexual orientation .
That is something that should be further discussed in the course of the negotiations .
I think I have reacted to most of the points , even if it meant that I have spoken for too long .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , since the entry into force of the Cotonou agreements , poverty has not subsided .
We have therefore failed in our development mission .
Something has to change with this second revision .
I am pleased to say that there is a fairly broad consensus on the measures that I am proposing , and I think that one of the measures that we can use to eradicate poverty is to really combat tax havens , and to use this instrument to do what we can .
Within the European Union and in the ACP region , we can force multinationals to declare , on a country-by-country basis , how much they earn and how much tax they pay .
That is also an international demand .
However , many years will go by before this demand is met at international level .
So let us use the opportunities that we have within this agreement to establish this rule in Europe .
This is why I am asking you to reject the proposed amendment to paragraph 16 , but to preserve the initial wording , which calls on us to put our own house in order .
In the same vein , what we can do is also force our own investment bank to take action with regard to tax havens .
We should prohibit European Development Fund investments in companies that do not make profits in the countries in which they operate , but prefer to make profits in tax havens .
This was the case in Zambia , where very substantial investments - to the tune of USD 46 million , I believe - were made in the Mopani mine , for example .
This has done nothing to improve the lives of Zambians ; rather , it has improved the lives of the shareholders who have benefited from this aid .
It is therefore totally counterproductive .
This is within our power .
We can change the mandate of our bank .
Let us therefore do what we can and put nothing off until tomorrow .
Let us take action in this regard .
Then , there are principles to which we should remain totally committed : human rights and migrant rights , and I urge you to retain my proposed wording of Article 31 and not quell the protests against bilateral agreements which , in reality , constitute an outsourcing of migratory flows .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow ( Wednesday , 20 January 2010 ) .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The second revision of the Cotonou Agreement presents an opportunity to evaluate the fields left open to incorrect or inefficient changes and is also the time when corrections can be made to the agreement according to developments in the globalisation process .
There are numerous challenges to face , triggered by economic and social events , such as the economic and financial crisis and armed conflicts , as well as those posed by the negative trend in terms of the population 's health , as highlighted by the increase in the number of people infected by transmissible diseases ( TB , AIDS , malaria ) and the rise in the number of victims of violence or natural disasters .
There are also the challenges posed by climate change , which are more difficult to control , and all these challenges create the urgent need to make the developing countries ' population more resistant to systemic social deficiencies .
This also assumes that the offer of development cooperation is better focused on key elements in the public health and education systems .
Consequently , I think that it is vital to deal with these aspects with greater clarity by consolidating title I - Development strategies - in Part 3 of the agreement .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will be voting in favour of this report , as I think that the deepening of cooperation between the European Union and the ACP states within the framework of the partnership agreements is important .
That said , I would like to point out that this report contains the wording ' protection of sexual and reproductive health ' .
Yet what is behind this phrase ?
Does it , first of all , mean ensuring people 's physical and mental well-being in relation to all areas of human sexuality and reproduction , for example , by combating sexual violence and genital mutilation ?
Does it , secondly , mean access to information about what has come to be called family planning ?
Or , thirdly , does it also include abortion ?
In the past , the Commission and the Council have made it clear in relation to questions from MEPs that this ' sexual and reproductive health ' does not include abortion .
That is exactly how I see it .
I therefore think it important to establish that the term ' the sexual and reproductive health of women ' is not in the context of abortion and I am therefore proposing a clarification to that effect in the text of the agreement .
Today , the second revision of the Cotonou Agreement introduced in 2000 is in progress , and within the framework of this revision , the aim is to introduce a range of changes to the agreement , changes which will help us to achieve the objectives set out in the agreement : the abolition of poverty , economic development and the gradual integration of the African , Caribbean and Pacific Group of States into the world economy .
It should be noted that , since the latest revision to the Cotonou Agreement in 2005 , there have been many new developments in the global situation ( e.g. the financial crisis , climate change , rising food and energy prices , etc . ) , all of which directly affect the countries in Africa , the Caribbean and the Pacific .
I totally agree with the rapporteur 's opinion that all those developments in the global situation that have taken place could , if they are not dealt with appropriately in the process of revising the agreement , make it difficult to achieve the objective of the Cotonou Agreement and the Millennium Development Objectives by the year 2015 .
As is well known , the EU and ACP countries have today agreed on areas and articles that will be revised in the Cotonou Agreement , in which the above has also been partly taken into account .
Unfortunately , this means , worryingly , that the European Parliament , the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly and the parliaments of the Member States and the ACP countries have not been involved in the process of making the appropriate decisions , which crucially affects the transparency and credibility of the revision to the agreement .
I am of the opinion that , in order to increase democratic legitimacy and self-accountability , the role of the European Parliament , the ACP-EU Joint Parliamentary Assembly and the parliaments of the EU Member States and the ACP countries should be increased in the process of revising the agreement .
Procedural rights in criminal proceedings ( debate )
The next item is the debate on
the oral question to the Council on procedural rights in criminal proceedings , by Sarah Ludford , Elena Oana Antonescu , Carmen Romero López , Heidi Hautala and Rui Tavares , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs - B7-0343 / 2009 ) ,
the oral question to the Commission on procedural rights in criminal proceedings , by Sarah Ludford , Elena Oana Antonescu , Carmen Romero López , Heidi Hautala and Rui Tavares , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs - B7-0344 / 2009 ) .
author . - Mr President , I frankly and fully acknowledge that these two oral questions tabled on 1 December last year have been overtaken by events , but this debate is still worthwhile to acknowledge that the issue of procedural rights is fully back on the table after a regrettable absence of several years and to stress the urgency and priority of this programme .
It has been a consistent complaint of the European Parliament for the last decade that procedural safeguards and defendants ' rights have not received the same attention , let alone action , as moves to enhance the speed and efficiency of investigations and of prosecutions .
We have supported the latter because , then , more criminals get caught .
Those who reject in principle the European Arrest Warrant are the apologists for mafia criminals and absconding robbers , rapists and terrorists .
But it is question of balance and getting ' European Arrest Warrant plus ' , and thus justice all round , through procedural guarantees to accompany simplified cross-border prosecutions .
Opponents of the European Arrest Warrant of course do not want any EU action on rights either ; they just want ' European Arrest Warrant minus ' .
But the application of the European Arrest Warrant without proper procedural guarantees has , in some cases , led to the denial of justice , because mutual recognition has not been accompanied by a solid basis for mutual trust .
One of those cases is my own constituent Andrew Symeou .
Andrew has been in prison in Greece for six months awaiting trial on a manslaughter charge which seems to be based on mistaken identity and , I am afraid to say , police brutality to witnesses , and I believe the European Arrest Warrant has been misused .
When it was agreed upon in 2002 , it was with the understanding from all sides that this measure , which would have the effect of EU citizens standing trial and being held in prison in another Member State , would be swiftly followed by measures guaranteeing their fair trial rights and guaranteeing there would be no miscarriages of justice .
That promise was betrayed by Member States in failing to accept the Commission 's 2004 proposal for a reasonably wide framework decision on procedural rights , and now a piecemeal approach is the best we can get .
I am grateful that it was relaunched by the Swedish Presidency , but it is only a roadmap on a step-by-step basis .
We need to see the glass is half full and be optimistic , although I regret that the Council is , worryingly , only promising to consider , not to legislate on , Euro-bail , which would have helped Andrew Symeou , who has been explicitly refused bail because he is a foreigner .
Judges are currently asked to enforce the judgments and orders of courts in other Member States without examining the facts , and they will be subject to increasing criticism and public unease if there is no EU-wide compliance with minimal procedural safeguards and defence rights for criminal investigations and prosecutions .
It is not just individual citizens who fear poor guarantees of rights ; this also deters judges , but also police and prosecutors , from working together , too .
I happen to believe that the human rights assurance in European Arrest Warrants should be an explicit condition of extradition , even if the Commission hates that .
Thanks to Liberal Democrats , the UK legislation implementing the measure says that the court must be satisfied there is no breach of the European Convention on Human Rights .
Puzzlingly , British courts seem shy of invoking this clause to block surrender .
Now if all Member States genuinely observed their obligations under the ECHR , there might be no need for EU measures .
The problem is not the absence of standards but the absence of practical respect , and many Member States find themselves before the Strasbourg Court for this reason .
Considering that the Treaty on European Union and now the TFEU obliges EU States to respect the ECHR , this is shameful and unacceptable .
So we do need an EU mechanism for enforcement which , from now on , will be provided by Commission infringement competence and European Court of Justice supervision .
So EU measures need both to be consistent with the ECHR and not conflict with or undermine it and , at the same time , to add value in the sense of strengthening practical implementation .
I hope the Commission and Council agree that the standard of directives guaranteeing fundamental rights should be high .
The Member State initiative on interpretation and translation , proposing the text which the Council agreed on last October , is less ambitious than the Commission text and needs improving .
So we are concerned that the first measure does not demonstrate the highest standards .
I hope we will be more ambitious and set a precedent for the next stages in building up procedural rights which , after interpretation and translation , are followed by other measures like legal advice , right to information , right to communicate with consular authorities and so on .
Therefore , I want reassurance from the Council and Commission that measures in the roadmap will be rolled out fast enough to keep up the momentum towards a genuine achievement of fair trial rights , long overdue .

I am pleased that this question has been tabled by Baroness Ludford , who spoke just now , Mrs Antonescu , Mrs Romero , Mrs Hautala and Mr Tavares , because we are indeed faced with a matter of overriding magnitude in the shape of procedural guarantees in criminal proceedings .
On this subject , I would like to say that we agree on raising the profile of the matter you have brought to our attention and we also agree that it should be harmonised at European level .
In your question , you indicated at the outset that the Swedish Presidency made significant progress .
The Swedish Presidency did indeed make important progress in this field .
In October , the Council agreed on general guidelines for the text on the right to interpreting and translation in criminal proceedings and one month later , in November , the Council adopted a plan to make progress on further measures regarding procedural guarantees , in response to Baroness Ludford 's call for action .
Some of these you mentioned yourself , Baroness Ludford , such as the right to information on a person 's rights - the repetition is intentional - and obligations in any criminal proceedings , on aid , on legal advice , on communication with family members and consular authorities , or on the special guarantees that must be put in place and the protection of vulnerable accused people .
That was with regard to the Council during the Swedish Presidency .
At this point you may well say : That is all very well , but is there any agreement with the European Parliament to continue treating this work as a priority ?
And we can say to you : Yes , it is a priority to continue this approach .
How ?
Through what initiatives ?
The first thing that the Spanish Presidency will do is to try , by working with the European Parliament , to ensure the adoption of the Directive on interpreting and translation rights in criminal proceedings proposed by 13 Member States .
It was not possible to continue with the proposal tabled by the Commission and 13 Member States have replaced this initiative .
We want this initiative to be approved , naturally in cooperation with the European Parliament .
Apart from this , we hope that the Commission will put the appropriate initiatives in place for the remaining aspects of procedural guarantees .
We are very willing for this to happen as soon as possible so that we can start the process of adopting them , again in conjunction with the Council and Parliament .
I would like to end by telling you that the Spanish Presidency is planning to organise a seminar in Madrid this coming March , together with the Commission and the European Law Academy , on the subject of Common Standards in Procedural Guarantees .
This shows , Baroness Ludford , that we agree wholeheartedly with you and those who supported this question on the urgency of regulating these matters , of harmonising them throughout Europe and , naturally , of keeping Parliament informed at all times on how the work is progressing .
Thank you for this question .
You know how much I value these procedural guarantees .
It is true that , for many years , the Commission has been fighting to ensure that minimum common rules relating to the right of defence are genuinely applied in all criminal proceedings in Europe .
This is necessary for judicial cooperation and it is a condition for the vital mutual confidence among the Member States .
The Commission has worked tirelessly to ensure that European legislation is adopted in this area .
Moreover , it is true that , thanks to the Swedish Presidency , the roadmap was adopted by the Council on 30 November 2009 .
This is a fundamental step in the creation of European legislation on minimum procedural rights .
The Member States have , through this act , agreed on the scope of this legislation and on the need to adopt it as a matter of priority in full cooperation with the European Parliament .
Like you , I have just listened to Mr López Garrido , who gave a very good explanation of how the Spanish Presidency also tended towards this will to adopt these initial measures , which will provide us with a range of minimum guarantees .
It is true that the roadmap 's step-by-step approach ultimately seemed to us to be a good solution .
This approach will allow us to achieve our intended objective .
The step-by-step approach means not only that a more thorough analysis can be made of each right in the context of the legislative proposal , but also that , in negotiations , each right can be examined individually .
That allows us to avoid cross-sector bargaining , which sometimes characterises legislative texts that are too broad-based and can allow some Member States to hijack the negotiations in order to gain an advantage on a very specific point .
So , Mrs Ludford , I am sure that the new Commission will work as quickly as possible to table all the legislative proposals provided for in the roadmap and to have them adopted at the earliest opportunity .
With regard to the right to interpretation and translation , which is the first provision of the roadmap , the Commission has noted the initiative presented by a number of Member States .
This initiative , I must say , is based on the Commission 's proposal of July 2009 and on the negotiations held within the Council during the second half of 2009 .
However , it is true that the Member States ' initiative is not in full conformity with the European Convention on Human Rights , or with the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights .
The Commission 's old proposal , which made the interpretation of meetings between the accused and defence counsel compulsory , is not completely followed up by the Member States ' initiative , which limits this right to communications that take place in front of police authorities and during the trial .
Moreover , the Commission 's old proposal provided for a right to translation , a more comprehensive right in the text of the Commission .
Of course , there will be work in this area between the European Parliament and the Council , and I think we will be able to obtain an ambitious text regarding procedural rights .
This is essential if we want to create a truly European judicial area .
We will also ensure that the text complies with the standards laid down in the European Convention on Human Rights and in the case-law of the European Court of Human Rights , as well as in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Therefore , I am sure that we will be able to count on Parliament to act on this matter and , once again , I note that the Spanish Presidency will also lend us its support .
Although progress has been made in the area of mutual recognition of decisions in criminal matters , very little progress has been made with regard to guaranteeing and ensuring the rights of suspected and accused persons .
The importance of common standards is an essential condition for instilling mutual trust in the Member States ' legal systems .
The lack of balance between the rights of suspected and accused persons , on the one hand , and the instruments which the prosecution has available , on the other , may jeopardise the principle of mutual recognition of decisions .
This is why the initiative launched by the Swedish Presidency in July 2009 to present a roadmap for consolidating the procedural rights of suspected or accused persons has marked a very important step forward .
As far as the right to translation and interpretation is concerned , the Treaty of Lisbon 's entry into force on 1 December has established a new institutional framework .
The proposal for a framework decision pending in the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs needed to be converted into a proposal for a directive for the work on this dossier to be able to continue .
We were concerned about the timetable and scope of application of the future initiatives on procedural rights .
This is why we decided to submit these questions to the Commission and Council .
Shortly after they were submitted in December , 13 Member States , including Romania , presented an initiative for a European Parliament and Council directive .
I am confident that in the course of the whole process , we will manage to make improvements to this text , both with regard to its scope of application and to ensuring the integrity of the procedures and the quality of translation and interpretation .
With regard to the other measures stipulated in the roadmap , we believe that they are intended to ensure access to rights , as well as to legal advice and assistance , to establish special guarantees for suspected or accused persons who are vulnerable , and to provide information about the rights they have and the costs involved .
We would like to see clear commitments from the Council and Commission so that proposals for a regulation are submitted as quickly as possible .
The differences which currently exist between Member States require common standards to be adopted urgently .
I wish to welcome the Spanish Presidency and , at the same time , emphasise that this is the first initiative on procedural rights .
We had been debating this topic but it was left in the air when the Swedish Presidency ended .
This draft initiative is already with Parliament and the first debate has already taken place .
We therefore believe that the question is relevant and continues to be relevant due to the importance of the topic .
Improvements can certainly be made in this area and we hope that progress will be made as the initiative moves through the various stages .
As Mr Barrot pointed out , the Commission proposal was certainly more ambitious and we must therefore improve on the present text in Parliament .
It is by no means a new text , however , because it has already been debated by Parliament and the Commission , with the resistance of Member States .
The Swedish Presidency tried to get things going again with its roadmap , but despite this , the situation is still difficult for Member States .
The situation clearly changed after the Treaty of Lisbon , because Parliament now makes the decisions .
We therefore believe that the Commission and the Council must re-examine procedural rights in the new scenario we find ourselves in today .
We would like these procedural rights to be considered as a package .
It is not possible to recognise the right to translation without recognising the right to legal assistance or the right to information .
For that reason , the Commission 's plans to carry on tabling these rights year after year must , in our view , be fast-tracked so that the subject can be considered as quickly as possible .
It is true that anti-terrorist legislation overturns the guarantees , but if we wish to build an area of justice and freedom , we must trust in our values so that we can also convey them to the European project .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , this House proposed the creation of the European Arrest Warrant on 6 September 2001 .
Our proposal would still be on a shelf gathering dust if it had not been for the events in New York five days later .
Mr Bin Laden helped make it a reality , and it was to me that fell the honour of piloting the measure through the House .
This House insisted at the time that it should be accompanied by minimum procedural guarantees in criminal legal proceedings .
The Commission made its proposals in 2002 and undertook to see speedy action .
So why is it that until recently , this has been stuck in the Council 's in-tray ?
Why has the Commission not been waging war to see all of its proposals approved , and not have them approved separately ?
The European Arrest Warrant has replaced extradition .
It has substantially cut the time needed for surrender .
It has encouraged direct contact between Member States ' judicial authorities .
It has ruled out decisions based on political expediency to the extent that Member States surrender their own nationals .
It has vastly enhanced the rule of law on our continent , but the European Arrest Warrant relies on mutual trust , and there are too many cases where such trust is called into question by our citizens .
Two of my constituents are currently in detention in Hungary awaiting trial .
Though their extradition was requested over a year ago , and though they have been there for two months , they have not yet been indicted and their trial may yet be months away .
One has lost his job and his family 's main source of income .
Both are deprived of the company of loved ones . And yet both may be innocent of the crimes of which they are charged .
Cases like this give European judicial cooperation a bad name .
They pour shame on the inaction of governments in Council .
The authors of this oral question are right : they require Europe 's urgent attention .
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )
Thank you , Mr Watson .
I was going to call you the ' Godfather ' of the European Arrest Warrant , but I thought it could be misunderstood .

Mr Watson , you mention Bin Laden and 9 / 11 as being the justification paving the way for the adoption of the European Arrest Warrant .
Is it your contention therefore that the European Arrest Warrant should be used only against terrorists and murderers and in cases of serious violent crimes ?

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , with permission , I did not give Mr Bin Laden as the justification ; I said he helped us to speed it up .
It was never intended solely to cover terrorist crimes ; it was intended to cover all serious crimes .
Those who oppose its use are those who , effectively , oppose the rule of law on our continent and the protection that the European Arrest Warrant gives to our citizens .
Mr President , Mr Watson is absolutely right when he says that the European Parliament insisted right from the start that the European Arrest Warrant should be accompanied by clear minimum criminal procedural norms .
We can now clearly see the sort of problems that many Member States are facing because the European Arrest Warrant was built on sand .
It is indeed built on sand , because the assumption is that Member States should be able to rely on the legal systems of others : that the rule of law and norms relating to fair trials are a reality in the various Member States .
Just like some here before , I , too , could tell you stories about how that is not actually the case and how urgent it is that the Commission acts , just as my fellow Member proposed a moment ago .
We need to establish a comprehensive system in which minimal rights in criminal procedures are taken forward .
I believe that the Treaty of Lisbon will also allow us this opportunity , because now , the European Parliament is a fully competent legislator along with the Council , and it was very agreeable to hear Mr Barrot say that he had confidence in this partnership between the Commission and Parliament .
The Commission and Parliament must now form an axis of power that truly overcomes resistance on the part of the Member States that have been unwilling to make progress in this matter .
I promised to tell you a story about what happens if the rule of law is not adhered to but the European Arrest Warrant system is .
In Finland at present , there is a Chechen couple , Hadižat and Malik Gataev , who have been detained .
They arrived from Lithuania where , for years , they kept an orphanage for the child victims of the war in Chechnya and , as it turns out , in Chechnya , the security police interrupted their activities on the pretext that there may have been some minor connection with violence in the family ; it was perhaps mainly family-related and so not anything actually approaching serious assault , for example .
Now this couple is in Finland .
They are applying for asylum and Lithuania is demanding their extradition .
The case is being heard next Monday at the Helsinki District Court .
What on earth is one to do in this situation , given that the basic notion here is that Finland should be able to rely on the fact that in Lithuania , this couple will have a fair trial ?
We have very hard evidence that that has not actually been the case , and I would say that there are any number of examples of everyday cases such as this , where the European Arrest Warrant has actually been meaningless .
We must be able to make progress in this matter , as , otherwise , it will be completely impossible for us to build the trust between Member States that will inevitably be required if we are to engage in judicial cooperation .
Mr President , I , too , will give an example , as Mrs Hautala has done .
A certain young man from Poland was sentenced in Great Britain to life imprisonment for rape , in a trial based on circumstantial evidence , which took place under the influence of a strong smear campaign in the press and which , in the opinion of some observers , did not meet Polish standards , at any rate , for a fair trial .
The man is now serving his life sentence in a prison in Poland , although Polish law does not provide for a life sentence for rape , only for murder - rape carries a maximum sentence of 12 years .
We have , therefore , a situation in which there is someone in a Polish prison who has been given a sentence which is not in accord with the principles of Polish law .
I give this example to illustrate the problem and as an argument for the urgent need to establish certain general standards , both in the area of criminal procedure and , in my opinion , in the area of the rules for carrying out sentences .
For we are facing , with increasing frequency , situations where the perpetrators of crimes are tried in one country and serve their sentence in another .
Therefore , I support the idea of standards and the idea of a directive .
Mr President , the European Union need two legs to walk : one is the Member States , and the other is their citizens , who are represented by their elected representatives in this house .
Now , it often happens that after the Member States have resolved their problems , they shut up their judicial systems ; after allowing their political systems to communicate , they forget to take care of everything else and forget to lay their foundations by creating a basis of trust among the citizens of the European Union .
This is one of those cases .
The European mandate clearly speeds things up and makes life easier for the judicial systems within the European Union .
However , other rights , like the right to translation and interpretation ( on which we have the pleasure and honour to work with our fellow Member , Mrs Ludford ) , are essential if European citizens are to have confidence in their dealings with the judicial systems of other Member States .
I am pleased to join my colleagues in requesting that the Commission and the Council make haste to produce texts which , via the codecision process , take this process forward in other procedural rights in criminal cases .

on behalf of the EFD Group . - I speak tonight because , as has been mentioned , two constituents - Michael Turner and Jason McGoldrick - are imprisoned in Unit 2 of the Central Budapest jail in Hungary .
They have been imprisoned since 3 November and they are yet to be tried .
There is , in fact , no trial date .
The terms of imprisonment are burdensome .
They are separated and have no contact with each other .
They share a small cell with three other prisoners .
They are confined to their cells 23 hours a day .
They are permitted three telephone calls and one shower a week .
They are allowed one family visit per month .
In short , they are isolated .
The language barrier makes the isolation worse .
They are accused of a white-collar crime .
They are not murderers or terrorists .
And they are imprisoned only because of the European Arrest Warrant .
The European Arrest Warrant swept away , at a stroke , the safeguards against arrest established in Britain over a thousand years .
Well may you shake your head , Mr Watson : it would be better if you apologised .
Mistaken identity and identity theft mean that what has happened to Jason and Michael can now also happen to any British citizen at any time .
The Labour Party , the Liberal Democrats and the Conservative Party all voted in favour of a European arrest warrant .
To restate Zola , ' J 'accuse ' - I accuse - the parties of the British political establishment : their support for the European Arrest Warrant has put everyone in Britain at risk of random arrest .
( HU ) As a Hungarian and a criminal lawyer , I should be ashamed because today , here in the EU Parliament , on the subject of the lack of procedural guarantees in criminal proceedings , two of my fellow Members , who otherwise represent two different political views , have mentioned Hungary as a flagrant example .
Though I am ashamed , I have to agree with them because I myself have had similar experiences .
I ask them , and all you , the few Members still present here during the discussion of this important topic , to consider the following : if they have come to know of such serious infringements of the law in cases of foreigners who are politically quite irrelevant to the Hungarian State and Hungarian Government , what may be the fate of those who are opponents of the Hungarian Government , let us say because they are politically opposed to the government ?
There are currently 15 persons in jail under preliminary arrest for having tried to take a stand against the corrupt dealings of the Hungarian Government .
In retaliation , criminal proceedings were brought against them on trumped up charges of terrorism .
To this day , not a single piece of evidence has been presented ; the authorities feel no obligation to point to any kind of evidence .
They are in custody under the same conditions that you have heard , shut off from their families , from public view and from the press .
Please , let us join together and do something in order to normalise the situation in Hungary and make it impossible to take advantage of the lack of procedural guarantees in criminal proceedings , especially for political reasons .
Hungary must institute such guarantees .
( PT ) Mr President , Mr López Garrido will not mind if my first words are addressed to Vice-President Barrot .
I do not know whether we will have the opportunity to be with him in Plenary before the new Commission enters into force , and so , just in case , I would like to thank him for his efforts , intelligence and fantastic collaboration with the European Parliament in this field of justice and home affairs .
I would like to add my voice to those who consider this field to be very important .
We do not simply want to build a safe Europe .
We also want to build a just Europe , so any initiative that has a bearing on procedural rights is vital .
We have to take measures to support victims and promote respect for the rights of citizens who are brought to justice .
I believe that this message has two very clear appeals , one of which is for the Council , prompted by Mr Watson , who put it much better than me in his speech .
It is ridiculous that after eight years , we are still at this stage of the process , and only looking at certain types of rights .
We must be more efficient and more rapid .
This is a job for the Council and Parliament , and Commissioner Barrot should also bring his influence to bear on his colleague , the next Commissioner , and the next Commission .
The Commission must take the initiative in all other areas that have to do with procedural rights , not only those that relate to language and translation .
( SK ) The issue of fundamental procedural rights in criminal proceedings is one of the key topics that should resonate in the field of justice and internal relations .
In principle , the draft framework decision defines a set of fundamental procedural rights in criminal proceedings , namely the right to legal advice , the right to interpretation and translation , the right to specific attention in sensitive areas , and the right to communicate and cooperate with consular authorities .
This list of fundamental rights should be considered strictly demonstrative because the role of the European Union is to ensure that Member States respect the broadest possible range of fundamental rights , also with a view to Member States ' membership in the Council of Europe and with a reference to its Convention .
Our effort should be to promote such means of regulation of procedural relations in criminal matters that would provide the aforementioned rights to all participants in criminal proceedings , whether they are victims and injured parties or offenders , in order to reach a fair and democratic judgment that fully meets the purpose of any penalties imposed , which is not only repression but also social rehabilitation and education .
The Committee calls for the Council to continue work in introducing common European procedural rights in criminal matters .
An existing common procedure in the form of the European Arrest Warrant has removed the centuries-old safeguards against unjust arrest and imprisonment that the English used to enjoy .
This is not an academic argument .
The EAW is destroying innocent people 's lives .
My constituent , Andrew Symeou , is just one of a growing number of people extradited without an English court having the power to consider the prima facie evidence against them and to prevent unjust extradition .
Extradition has now been reduced to a mere bureaucratic formality .
Mr Symeou has been held for six months in the notorious Korydallos prison without bail or prospect of trial .
The political cynicism of the British Liberal Democrats is truly breathtaking .
They now cry crocodile tears in London over Mr Symeou 's fate despite having been materially responsible for the common procedures that caused it and while here , they work for more of the same legislation .
The common procedures are about lowering European legal standards and not raising them .
Let me make a suggestion .
If you want higher standards in European criminal proceedings , then adopt habeas corpus , trial by jury and the main provisions of the Magna Carta and the Bill of Rights 1689 as the common European standards .
( EL ) Mr President , it is crucial that we progress as far as possible with the creation of a common European reference framework for procedural rights during the dispensation of justice .
The key concept is the concept of trust .
We want European citizens taking recourse to justice to be confident that their fundamental rights will be protected .
We also want trust between the Member States in terms of their cooperation and the ultimate dispensation of justice to each person called to account .
Finally , we need trust from all of us in terms of the dispensation of justice .
As long as we fail to promote these common frameworks at European level , whether we like it or not , there will sometimes be some crimes which exploit the loopholes and ultimately , we shall not achieve the dispensation of justice we are striving for precisely because no such frameworks exist .
Having listened to the speeches , I would like to say how pleased I am to see that many MEPs , from very different groups , agree over the need to harmonise procedural guarantees at European level and to draw up a genuine European law on procedural guarantees .
All the speakers and all the Parliamentary groups agree on the need to draw up a genuine European law on procedural guarantees .
This illustrates the importance and need for the European integration process and the importance of a citizens ' Europe , of a European judicial area and of implementing the Lisbon Treaty .
This subject is the focus of the Spanish Presidency 's programme for the next six months and has received indubitable support in all the speeches I have heard , based on a variety of arguments and seen from different perspectives : the need to move towards harmonised procedural guarantees .
I would also like to take up the point raised by Mrs Flašíková Beňová , which I believe is very important , on the need to take this step specifically at the time when the European Union is about to sign the European Convention on the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms , as laid down in the Treaty of Lisbon .
I wish to end , Mr President , by stating that the Council and the Spanish Presidency will work to ensure that all these procedural guarantees are put into practice , through the directives that the European Commission will table in due course and also the directive that is already in progress , based on an initiative by 13 Member States , as far as I remember .
I would like to make one final point about the European Arrest Warrant .
The European Arrest Warrant has been brought up only to criticise it .
I wish to say that the European Arrest Warrant is a fundamental example of European Union and of cooperation against organised crime in the European Union .
I am entitled to shout this from the rooftops , coming as I do from a country like Spain , which still suffers from terrorism and for which the European Arrest Warrant is an essential weapon in the struggle against terrorism .

Mr President , the Minister is right , and Mr Coelho put it very well earlier when he said , ' a Europe of security , a Europe of justice ' .
Yes , Mr Watson , the European arrest warrant has been very effective and very useful , even if it is true that , at the same time , we need to get the European judicial area up and running , and it is in this area that we must work for this Europe of justice , so that there really is confidence in the way in which justice is provided throughout Europe .
In this regard , I would like once again to thank the authors of the question and indeed to tell them again that , on the basis of the text that reflects the general approach of the Council of 23 October 2009 , the Commission , with the help of the European Parliament and the Spanish Presidency , will ensure that this is a higher quality text than the current one .
I would add that we will obviously be careful to formulate all the necessary legislative proposals in due course , so that no initiatives are necessary on the part of the Member States .
The Commission is already working on the proposal on a letter of rights .
The Commission will endeavour to have all the measures planned in the roadmap adopted as soon as possible .
The estimate of one year to enforce each measure is only indicative .
If the negotiations allow , the Commission is happy to move things up a gear ; this is quite clear .
I firmly believe that opinions have changed and that , with the multiannual Stockholm Programme , we really have an obligation to produce results in this area .
Moreover , I have to say that , since I have had these responsibilities , I have done everything possible to make progress with this issue of procedural guarantees , and , although we have chosen a step-by-step formula , I believe that we are now well on our way .
I would like to thank the European Parliament and the Spanish Presidency , convinced as I am that a Europe of justice will make significant progress in 2010 .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I am sure there are many outside this Chamber who would like to endorse the remarks of Carlos Coelho in thanking you for your dedication and application as a Commissioner over this period .
Thank you so much .
The debate is closed .
Preventing trafficking in human beings ( debate )
The next item is the debate on
the oral question to the Council on preventing trafficking in human beings , by Anna Hedh and Edit Bauer , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality - B7-0341 / 2009 ) , and
the oral question to the Commission on preventing trafficking in human beings , by Anna Hedh and Edit Bauer , on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality - B7-0342 / 2009 ) ,
As we are all aware , trafficking in human beings is one of the most serious and heinous crimes in the world .
That is why I am very disappointed to be debating this important issue here so late in the evening before an empty chamber with no audience and no journalists .
In 1850 , slavery was officially banned throughout Europe .
Nonetheless , nearly 200 years later , hundreds of thousands of people are suffering the modern form of slavery that is trafficking in human beings in Europe .
The European Parliament and the other EU institutions have a huge responsibility to combat and stop modern day slavery , which takes many different forms : forced labour , sex slavery , trading in organs , adoption and begging , for example .
That is why I am pleased that we are debating this important issue this evening .
I would like to take the opportunity to thank you for your good cooperation to date and I hope that together , we will ultimately be able to arrive at a common resolution .
I also hope that the new Commission will present a directive on trafficking in human beings as soon as possible - a directive that is more forceful and goes even further than the proposal made by the old Commission , which was , in itself , a good one .
In order to tackle the problem of human trafficking we need to have an overall perspective that takes into consideration all the affected policies ; that is , not just penal law but also migration .
We also need to have proper sanctions in place that really reflect the seriousness of this crime and that really hurt those who are making money out of trafficking in human beings .
We must ensure that the victims receive better help and protection , that particular consideration is given to victims who are minors , and we need better coordination within the EU institutions .
In order to really get to grips with the problem of human trafficking , however , all the Member States must put substantial effort into preventive work , and that largely means reducing the demand that exists in our countries for the services provided by the victims of human trafficking .
If we can reduce demand , then the supply of services will also go down .
Finally , I appeal to the Council , the Commission , the European Parliament , the Member States and the other EU institutions : let us stand together to put a stop to the trafficking of human beings in Europe , which is a modern form of slavery .
There is no greater sign of the seriousness of the problem of trafficking in human beings than the fact that even in Europe , several hundred thousand people fall victim to it each year .
This is probably so unbelievable that the interpreters said several hundred instead of several hundred thousand .
Popular opinion is also more or less of this view .
It feels that this is a marginal issue , and underestimates both its consequences and the weight of the phenomenon itself .
I think that Europe has an obligation to increase the struggle against human trafficking .
I would like to address two matters .
The first is the protection of victims , and the second the elimination of demand .
As regards victim protection , there is a piece of European Community legislation , which the Commission has promised to reassess by 2009 .
Unfortunately , in spite of the fact that this Directive , number 2004 / 81 , indeed requires updating , so far , this reassessment has not seen the light of day , while the majority of victims are treated as accessories to the crime and are further victimised .
We all know , as well , that without the victims ' help , it is impossible to round up the criminal gangs , as the management of Europol has also confirmed .
I would like to draw attention to the legislative process regarding another matter , namely , the elimination of demand .
Human trafficking has its own market .
The laws of supply and demand apply there as they do to other markets .
We usually deal with the supply side , and more or less forget , or do not want to address , the demand side , although as long as we have not succeeded in eliminating demand , we will probably strive in vain to combat human trafficking .
In addition , I would like to emphasise the need for policy coordination .
We have found that within the Commission , certain DGs , certain Directorates-General , do not really coordinate their policies , and the flow of information between them is also unsatisfactory .
I think that there is work for us to do in this regard as well .
Mrs Hedh , Mrs Bauer , I could not agree more with the initiative , the question and the debate you have sparked here tonight .
I believe that human trafficking is the greatest scourge of humanity .
It is therefore one of the great challenges we must tackle , and one that we must tackle together .
This is one more example of the importance of combining our efforts at European level , and outside Europe , in order to stamp out this scourge .
In your question , you began by talking about whether the approach to be taken by the European Union should be human rights centred , holistic , and focus on repatriation and reintegration , social affairs and social inclusion .
The answer is yes .
We absolutely agree that this is the right approach .
We also agree with proportionality in the severity of sentencing - this is another of the points you raised in your question - and with the need for additional measures for victim protection .
You pointed out and stressed - and I totally agree with you - that victim protection is essential if we are to fight trade and trafficking in human beings and also that consent by a defenceless victim or child to exploitation is absolutely irrelevant ; it has to be irrelevant when it comes to punishing this exploitative behaviour .
I believe that your idea on the subject of demand is also important .
It is a very important idea that must also be seen through .
The same applies to the subject of jurisdiction .
In part 2 of your question , we believe that the coordination of information is absolutely necessary .
We therefore agree with the proposal in this question , which seems to us highly appropriate .
You also asked us about preventive measures .
I can say , on this subject , that the European Union is working on such preventive measures .
Back in 2005 , the Council adopted a plan in this regard , which would need to be implemented effectively .
Also , as you know , human trafficking is also included in many agreements between the European Union and third countries , for example , the Africa-European Union Strategic Partnership .
It is also one of the priorities of the stabilisation and association agreements between the European Union and the Western Balkans .
I should also point out that assistance with the training and awareness raising of people who might come into contact with victims plays an important part in the fight against human trafficking .
Examples of such people are border police and police and security officers in third countries .
I wish to end by saying that the Spanish Presidency will work in this direction and will concern itself specifically with the subject of children affected by this trafficking , which is one of the main priorities of the Spanish Presidency .
Among other initiatives , we have called on the Commission to submit an action plan on unaccompanied minors entering the European Union at the start of 2010 .
Lastly , Mr President , during its term of office , during this six-month period , the Spanish Presidency is calling for an immediate debate on a directive to combat human trafficking and I am sure that the new Commission will table this immediately .
When the Commission produces its draft , the Spanish Presidency will begin its discussions in the Council and with Parliament .
You can take this as an expression of our determination to fight this modern form of slavery , as the previous speakers aptly described it .
Mr President , the Minister has just explained how , in fact , this trafficking in human beings is a form of slavery .
I would very much like to thank Mrs Hedh and Mrs Bauer for having raised this question .
We must come up with a holistic , multidisciplinary approach which is not limited to repression , but which integrates international cooperation with third countries .
This integrated approach was that adopted by the Commission following the proposal for a framework decision published in March 2009 .
This framework decision is based on the 2005 Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings , but it goes further .
Naturally , as the Minister has just said , we are going to use the new legal basis offered by the Treaty of Lisbon to present , as quickly as possible , a proposal for a directive , which will take into consideration the discussions that took place before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
With this new proposal for a directive , we hope to be able to maintain a high level of ambition .
We feel that the European Parliament must play a central role and that its commitment is very important in terms of further strengthening the European legal framework of measures to combat trafficking in human beings .
I shall therefore give you some information in response to the content of the question .
Firstly , penalties : trafficking in human beings constitutes a very serious offence , and it must be punished accordingly .
Sentences must be severe and the harmonisation of maximum penalties must continue .
These vary greatly among Member States , from three to twenty years for basic offences and from ten years to life imprisonment for aggravating circumstances .
While I admit that the way in which sentences are pronounced may differ from one Member State to another , such an enormous discrepancy between penalties is unjustifiable in a European context , and so in the new proposal , we will provide for very severe penalties .
I now come to the help and protection provided to victims .
The help , support and protection given to victims of people trafficking , notably as regards accommodation , medical and psychological assistance , advice , information , interpretation services and legal representation , are all essential .
Obviously , as it is something the Spanish Presidency wishes , we will also consider specific and more protective measures for child victims of trafficking .
The system for legal aid and representation should be free , especially for children .
Finally , in the course of 2010 , the Commission will publish its first report on the implementation of the directive relating to residence permits issued to nationals of third countries who are victims of trafficking in human beings and who cooperate with the competent authorities .
Following this report , we will see whether it is appropriate to amend the directive .
As for measures aimed at discouraging demand , in its future proposal for a directive , the Commission also intends to include a clause obliging Member States to take initiatives in this area , as well as to encourage them to criminalise the use of sexual services or labour when the user knows that the person is or has been a victim of trafficking in human beings .
As far as jurisdiction is concerned , we must increase the capacity of each Member State to prosecute not just its own nationals , but also people who habitually reside on its territory , and who are found guilty of trafficking in human beings abroad .
This is essential when it comes to combating the phenomenon of the so-called new mafias , namely criminal organisations made up of individuals of different nationalities , who establish the centre of their criminal interests , and therefore their habitual residence , in a country of the European Union .
Next I come to data collection .
The Commission has invested heavily in the development of common indicators for data collection .
We must provide the European Union with reliable and comparable statistics .
Several important projects have been carried out , and the results of these initiatives must be followed up in an appropriate manner , allowing the development of a common model of indicator with Eurostat , with the agencies of the European Union , Europol , Eurojust , Frontex and the Agency for Fundamental Rights .
Finally , I will end with prevention .
We have a financial programme , ' Prevention of and Fight against Crime ' which , in 2010 , will include a targeted appeal concerning the fight against trafficking in human beings .
Then , the Stockholm Programme provides for specific action which , in the general guidelines document adopted by the Justice and Home Affairs Council , concerns measures to strengthen cooperation with third countries .
A more comprehensive policy for combating trafficking in human beings is therefore taking shape .
As I have said , the Commission will present a draft directive very soon , and I am delighted that the Spanish Presidency has , for its part , announced a debate that will enable you to further enrich the Commission 's proposal which , it seems to me , is timely given that this phenomenon is unfortunately far from being in decline and is still growing in our Member States .
It is therefore time to react , and to react forcefully .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to thank Mrs Hedh and Mrs Bauer for their initiative .
Human trafficking , as everyone has said , is an extremely serious offence linked to sexual exploitation and illegal employment .
These crimes are committed by unscrupulous people who recruit their victims through violence or deception , perhaps by promising an honest , well-paid job or through threats , directed not only at the victims , but also at their children or relatives .
Unfortunately , as is often the case , it is women and children who pay the highest price .
It is estimated that there are nearly three million victims of trafficking worldwide , and nearly 90 % of these are women and children .
In 2008 , with the first European strategy on the rights of children , the European Parliament stated that trafficking in children has many criminal aims : trafficking in organs , illegal adoption , prostitution , illegal work , forced marriages , exploitation of street begging and sexual tourism , to give just a few examples .
In that document , trafficking was described as a real scourge within the European Union , and it was said that combating trafficking and exploitation must therefore become a priority for the future agenda of the European Union , first and foremost , through the adoption of all the urgent legislative measures needed to guarantee the full protection of and provision of assistance to victims .
The recent Stockholm Programme also talked about the trafficking and exploitation of minors .
In conclusion , therefore , and in the light of this evening 's debate , our hope is that the Commission and the Council will maintain their commitments and that the Commission will produce this new proposal for a directive , which we will assess very carefully .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , the achievement of Mrs Hedh and Mrs Bauer today , although speaking at a very late hour , as Mrs Hedh said , is to come here tonight and hear the outgoing Commissioner , Mr Barrot , and the new Spanish Presidency use words like ' determined ' and ' ambitious ' for the Commissioner .
It is worth waiting until this late hour to hear it , because there are many people in this Chamber today , including the authors , who understand the complexity of this brutal modern day phenomenon , but also understand that the EU is expected by its citizens to tackle this modern day scourge .
Mr Barrot talked about the need for new legislation .
We hope we will see the Commission proposal very soon .
This morning , at the hearing of Commissioner-designate Mrs Malmström , we also saw a positive response to our proposal for an EU anti-trafficking coordinator .
If you start to put together the various pieces of this puzzle , at least we are moving forward , but the sheer scale of the problem described by Anna Hedh means that we really have to turn words into action .
With trafficking being such a complex phenomenon , touching on so many different areas such as forced labour , organised crime , sexual exploitation and child abuse , our response must be multi-pronged and holistic .
Mr Barrot listed many of the things that we would like to see as a reality and , if they come together in a package across the EU , we will have a determined policy which EU citizens will see as a plan of action .
At the moment , EU citizens understand the scourge of trafficking but they do not see the holistic approach and they do not understand what the EU is doing as a whole .
I am happy that Commissioner-designate Malmström underlined her commitment today to come forward with a new legislative proposal very soon , and I am also happy to see the Spanish Presidency underlining not just the fight against trafficking but related issues such as violence against women .
It is important that these all come together to show real determination and heart in this proposal .
Although the hour is late , we now need the words to be turned into action and the authors have done a good job for us today .
Mr President , first of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her commitment and excellent cooperation , as this really is an important subject .
As we have said already , human trafficking is perhaps the very worst form of crime .
Europol 's figures , cited in the question , show that there has been no improvement in this field .
The opposite is true , in fact .
In the area of forced labour , specifically , the figures are going up , whilst the figures on the trafficking of women remain unchanged .
It is thus absolutely clear that there is an urgent need , above all , for consistent action .
In order for such action to succeed , it is necessary , first and foremost , to adopt an integrated approach in the most varied of areas .
One absolutely essential element is to increase awareness - including amongst the population within Europe - that human trafficking takes place right in the middle of Europe , in every country .
We need , above all , to get to work on education in this regard , as we did , for example , for the football World Cup in Germany , in order to bring the issue of forced prostitution to light , and to show that this really happens everywhere , and also to inspire debate amongst the populace so that there is an awareness there which will lead to the victims being helped .
My second point concerns the protection of victims .
Precisely when people are rescued from such a dramatic situation , the Member States , too , must ensure that there is medical and psychological care for them so that they are supported in going back to their countries of origin where appropriate or so that the way is opened to asylum or other similar possibilities here to find a new home and to begin a new life .
Today , there was a report in a Dutch newspaper about an asparagus farmer who was taken into custody because she was suspected of human trafficking and of using slave labour by Romanians , in other words , European citizens .
Human trafficking is not just something that takes place with citizens of countries outside the Union , but also with those of countries within it .
A well-integrated policy on combating human trafficking cannot simply be limited to taking traffickers like this one into custody and robustly tackling those who commit such crimes , but must also properly focus on the victims .
Their rights and their future must be top priority .
Victims of human trafficking should never get the impression that they are alone or that they have been left in the lurch .
We must support them in all kinds of ways : legally , medically , socially and in communities and financially , and we should possibly also compensate them .
The ability of these victims to take possession of their rights and make use of the opportunities that our law allows for is crucial in any new directive .
I heard good things from Mr López Garrido and Mr Barrot in this regard .
The Commissioner also said that people who use the services of people who have been trafficked should face stiffer penalties .
For me , stiffer penalties for such activities are certainly not wrong , but I do wonder how we help the victims if we further criminalise their function , their work - as it is still work , even if it is slave work .
How does it help the victims if they have to be afraid that the work that they are doing at that point in time is being criminalised still further ?
I would appreciate an answer to this question .
In the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance 's book , victims of human trafficking have a right to a residence permit , a permanent residence permit under certain circumstances , in order to ensure that they do not have to be afraid of being sent back to the country where it all started and in order to ensure that they are able to bring charges against the trafficker , as they are safe in the knowledge that their stay in the country is secure .
This is because there must not be even a small chance that anyone is sent back and then comes across the trafficker again .
Your new framework directive , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , must be about empowering the victims .
It must give them rights and a new future .
That is what I would like to see .
Mr President , it is a matter of extreme embarrassment that modern Europe , which enjoys freedom and respect for human rights , has become a place of oppression and abuse for so many people .
This is all the more shocking because it often concerns women and children , who are at particular risk and are especially helpless .
As Minister for Justice and Prosecutor General in Poland , I supervised numerous investigations which revealed that such things are happening in Europe , that they extend beyond the borders of particular countries and are sometimes very cruel in nature .
The main objective of human trafficking is sexual exploitation or enforced slave labour .
In order to prevent and eliminate these phenomena effectively , it is essential that in particular EU Member States , professional enforcement agencies exist which ideally would be centralised , and would guarantee decisive and effective action as well as good international cooperation .
European Union institutions should play a major role , especially as regards that last point .
In addition , there are two other matters .
Conscious of the fact that human trafficking is often the work of organised criminal gangs , individual countries should guarantee sufficiently severe sanctions for such serious crimes in order to deter and isolate the perpetrators , including sanctions in the form of seizure of assets , which would strike at the economic reason for their activity .
Mr President , human trafficking is , in reality , a scourge of the present day , and it feeds on poverty and ignorance .
Its worst form is the trafficking of children , which is often linked to sexual abuse .
We in the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left believe that there is an urgent need for action on the Commission 's part .
One of the most important prerequisites for successfully combating human trafficking is strengthening the rights of the victims .
Only if this succeeds - and not only through punitive measures - can human trafficking be combated at all .
That requires very clear rules whereby human trafficking will not result in any sanctions against its victims .
One of the things these victims need is effective protection and support before , during and also after criminal proceedings in which they testify as witnesses .
This must be a high priority for the period of reconsideration , specifically , as well as where witness testimonies are retracted .
Long-term witness protection programmes are urgently needed .
Another thing that I think is important is that all victims of human trafficking , not just children , must be given free counselling .
When dealing with children it is also necessary - coming back to this point - for it to be made possible to make use of child-specialist lawyers .
There is a need for urgent measures to strengthen prevention , such as training for lawyers , the police , judges and counsellors .
I am pleased that the Spanish Presidency intends to address this issue .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today , during the hearing of the Commissioner-designate , I heard a very specific commitment regarding combating human trafficking .
I have been pleased to hear a unanimous opinion expressed here .
The same unanimity was not heard when , many years ago , some people occupying these seats - including myself - denounced the dangers that mass illegal immigration would give rise to , among them , a substantial boost for the criminal organisations that utilise this labour and the risks of human trafficking and even organ trafficking .
Today , everyone has discovered this phenomenon , and we can only be pleased with the unanimous nature of the commitment .
However , it is important for us to realise that the cause is still the same .
The cause , the origin , the breeding ground for this trafficking has but one name , or a main name , a main cause : the scale of illegal immigration and the role played in it by local , European and also non-European criminal organisations , because now we also have trafficking in humans easily managed by organisations outside Europe .
Now , let us take this as our starting point .
We should take a considered view that this extremely serious and shameful phenomenon is a sub-species or sub-consequence of mass illegal immigration that has not been properly controlled .
Europe should have the courage to call a spade a spade .
( EL ) Mr President , I , too , should like to take my turn in congratulating the authors of this very important question .
We are living in modern times in which one would expect trafficking in human beings to have been eliminated from our society .
Unfortunately , however , the numbers refute this .
For example : it is estimated that over 1 800 000 children and young people fall victim to trafficking throughout the world every year .
According to UN figures , we have 270 000 victims in the European Union .
In Greece alone , the estimated number of victims of trafficking for prostitution has been increased to 40 000 a year , including women and children , but excluding other forms of trafficking .
The two basic parameters that I should like to highlight , without underestimating the importance of other parameters are : firstly , the European institutional framework for combating this crime , which is cross-border and is exacerbated by illegal immigration , is - as has rightly been said - inadequate .
That is why we need to up the ante towards a holistic approach and the directive we are awaiting is very important within this framework , as has rightly been said .
Secondly , a particular gap has been identified in the protection of victims , especially in terms of support structures .
It is therefore necessary - and I am delighted to have heard this from the Spanish Presidency - for resources and infrastructures to be made available in order to improve any existing infrastructures and create new infrastructures and , of course , to give the staff which can provide such support suitable training .
This modern form of the slave trade cannot and must not have any place in a European Union based on the principle of respect for human rights and human dignity .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to express my great satisfaction that today we are tackling a subject like this with an important question , for which I warmly thank the authors , and I would also like to express my gratitude for the high level of cooperation that we have seen between all the political parties and the two committees .
I am also very happy to have heard very serious commitments voiced by the Commission and also by the Spanish Presidency , and I truly hope that the new directive will soon be drafted along the lines that essentially seem to enjoy a large consensus .
I think we know that the numbers in this field are very complex to analyse , but in brief , we are talking about almost 300 000 people , 79 % of them women , many of them minors , being trafficked every year in our civilised Europe .
Unfortunately , numbers have been rising in recent years .
For this reason , too , we need to make very strong progress in the light of the new areas of responsibility that the European Union has and also in the light of what we have already approved in the Stockholm Programme to bring in some innovations .
It was a great step forward when we approved , at EU level , the provision - which , for example , had already been in force in Italy since 1998 - allowing humanitarian residence permits to be issued to victims .
However , we must also make progress on safeguarding victims in relation to protection , social and employment reintegration , the possibility of preventing there being customers - which we must think very seriously about - and more serious and effective measures on sanctions which must , as you said , Commissioner , be harmonised at EU level .
In particular , we ask that the consent of victims to their exploitation be considered irrelevant , in view of the high level of blackmail involved in these circumstances .
I will conclude very shortly , just adding this : we need not only special protection for minors but , above all , also forms of support for persons arriving in Europe who have already previously suffered forms of trafficking along the journeys , ever longer and ever more tragic , that they complete before reaching our coasts and our territories .
( BG ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to congratulate the rapporteurs , the Commission and the Spanish Presidency for their boldness in enabling us to finally find a serious solution to this problem .
When we talk about human trafficking , it is extremely important for us to think about establishing a permanent policy at European Union level .
Such a policy will contribute to a more coordinated approach and enable Member States ' actions to have a greater impact in terms of law enforcement , and protection and assistance provided to the victims of this form of trafficking .
The appointment of a European Union coordinator for combating human trafficking , working under the direct supervision of the commissioner responsible for justice , fundamental rights and citizenship , will guarantee that a single , coherent political approach is used by all Member States in tackling this serious crime .
The coordinator 's role will be to identify the problems and sources of human trafficking , implement preventive measures , devise and enforce strategies at European level , including active cooperation and consultation with civil society agencies , as well as to organise information campaigns and introduce measures to increase protection for and provide help to victims , and also support them in the reintegration process .
In order to tackle this global , transnational problem successfully , a coordinated strategy is required at European level which guides and supports Member States in their joint efforts to combat human trafficking effectively . Thank you very much for your attention .
One who is another 's property and a helpless victim of some dominating influence - you might be forgiven for thinking this is a definition of human trafficking .
In fact , it is a definition of slavery .
Trafficking is today 's slavery .
Trafficking of people , be it women , men or children , is a criminal offence and on the increase in all Member States .
Extreme poverty , family breakdown and domestic violence contribute to some of the root causes of human trafficking .
In the UK , we estimate approximately 5 000 victims , of which 330 are children .
The ECR Group welcomes this debate .
National governments , law-enforcement agencies and border-control agencies need to work together .
Mechanisms for victim support need strengthening .
Initiatives must be robust , Member State-driven and EU-supported .
( SV ) If there were no demand for exploiting people as cheap labour , if there were no demand for organs , if there were no demand for the purchasing of sexual services - then in such a world , we would not have trafficking in human beings either .
Demand is a key word as regards the combating of trafficking in human beings .
Another important factor is that people in many parts of the world are living in poverty and in inhumane conditions , with the result that they can easily fall prey to those wanting to buy and sell human beings .
We therefore need not just efforts to reduce demand , but also , of course , preventive measures in the form of improving living conditions for many people in those parts of the world where the victims are recruited .
I and the Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left would like to thank Mrs Hedh and Mrs Bauer and their colleagues on the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs and the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
However , I would like to see some differentiated proposals for how we can support the victims of trafficking in human beings .
Those who are victims of forced labour need different measures and support to those who are victims of the sex slave trade .
( ES ) According to a United Nations report , in 2009 , some 270 000 people were victims of human trafficking within the European Union .
With these figures in mind , we need to ensure that European Union action is based , first and foremost , on victim protection , with special focus on the situation of women and children , who are the most vulnerable .
We cannot continue to stand by and remain indifferent to the play that is being enacted , to the sideshow of sexual exploitation that is unfolding before our eyes .
For this reason , I completely support the Parliament 's demands that victim assistance should be unconditional and that more forceful methods and more severe penalties should be adopted , as Mr Barrot has just told us .
Having said that , I would like to call on the Spanish Presidency , the European Commission and the Council to use all the European legislation at their disposal , both existing and future legislation , to protect the victims of human trafficking .
I consider that the proposed European victim protection system , which I personally demanded from the Spanish Presidency during the Stockholm Programme debates , and which has finally come to fruition , will be an effective instrument for fighting such crimes .
I hope for a firm undertaking , as we have already seen , from the Spanish Presidency , to ensure that this system offers victims special protective measures that will be effective throughout the European Union .
I hope that we who are responsible for taking action against the most severe problems in our society will come up with a real and substantial response to this extremely severe problem of human trafficking and that our words will not be empty promises .
We really owe it to all the victims .
( SK ) First of all , I would like to express my appreciation for my fellow MEPs , Mrs Hedh and Mrs Bauer , because despite the limited space available to them , they approached this topic very comprehensively .
I support the question and I would like to add a few factual observations and notes .
Ordinary people usually have no idea of the enormous scale of trafficking in human beings .
As a matter of fact , it is the third most lucrative illicit trade in the world .
The fact that it mostly concerns women and children makes this immense business all the more inhumane .
Our response to it must be massive and concentrated .
Our fight has to be equally effective at all points of the trafficking triangle - it has to impact the supply and demand sides , as well as the traffickers themselves .
Supply exists especially where there are inhumane living conditions , poverty and its feminisation , unemployment , violence against women , and overall oppression and instability engendering desperate human beings .
Therefore , we should do everything in our power to help the people who fall victim to criminal trafficking within and outside the Union live a more dignified life .
The demand side deserves strict sanctions .
Those who profit from exploitation of desperate or manipulated people within the grey economy must not go unpunished .
Those who provide such services and those who use them consciously should also be faced with sanctions .
Finally , trafficking operators deserve exemplary punishment - organised crime in this area must be a priority target for organisations such as EUROJUST , EUROPOL and FRONTEX .

( SV ) Slavery has not yet been abolished , as many in this House have already emphasised .
Modern day slavery takes the form of the sex trade , and it is going on here and now .
The bodies of women , girls and boys are sold like pieces of meat , just like any other goods , and it is happening all the time .
People are robbed of their most basic human rights and become the slaves of our times in our various Member States .
This ought to be seen as Europe 's greatest failure and shortcoming , and it must be dealt with by restricting and stopping both supply and demand .
In my home country of Sweden , a law entered into force ten years ago under which it is illegal to purchase sex .
This law is important , because through it , society signals that no human being is for sale .
The slave trade to America was made illegal in 1807 , but it is still going on right in our midst in Europe .
It is time that it was consigned to the dark recesses of history .
It is our time and our responsibility to do all we can and I would like to thank the authors , Mrs Hedh and Mrs Bauer , for their excellent work that benefits us all .
( PL ) Mr President , a few minutes ago , the representative of the Green party very correctly emphasised that this matter - human trafficking , or the sale of living people - is not an external problem which is imported by the European Union .
It is also an internal problem .
Citizens of my country are also being sold to at least several Member States of the European Union .
It is a very significant and serious problem .
It is my conviction that , on this matter , strong , united action is needed , and not only from EU institutions , but also from individual Member States .
I will recall , here , an incident which took place a couple of years ago , when the Italian police and administration , reacting to certain information coming from Poland , put an end to cases of human trafficking where Polish workers were being illegally employed in Italy .
This , too , is human trafficking , and we must not be silent about it .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , every year more than one million people are abused for slave labour , and 90 % of them are abused for the purpose of sexual services .
Only 3 000 victims have received assistance , and a mere 1 500 cases have been brought to court , even though this qualifies as a criminal offence throughout the European Union .
Studies have shown that the profits from trafficking in human beings exceed those from drug smuggling and dealing .
This kind of organised crime has grown with the Union 's enlargement to the east .
And yet , we still have no common strategy , and there is no coordination of measures taken by the various institutions and the Member States , which should not resist harmonisation of their legislation , even though this is not anchored in the treaties .
That is why I am asking the Spanish Presidency to complete negotiations with the Member States on the common definitions of punishments and sanctions .
I would like to stress that the new directive we are waiting for should also combat more effectively the demand for illegal sexual services ; in actual fact , it is alarming that the abuse of children in particular has been rising .
In the case of children , the figure is nearing 20 % .
Also missing is effective prevention and education focused on children and parents alike .
Do you know that only 4 % of the parents of abused children admitted that their children had been lured to meetings via the Internet ?
As many as 1 500 websites where children are sexually abused were discovered in 2008 .
What we undoubtedly owe to the citizens of the European Union is a new , coordinated approach , and harmonisation of legislation to also combat the demand for and naturally the trafficking in humans itself .
Therefore , I urge the Commission to submit to the European Parliament a comprehensive legislative proposal for a more effective struggle against trading in humans , within the shortest possible time .
( DA ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank the authors for this important initiative , for the EU faces a huge challenge in preventing and combating trafficking in human beings .
Trafficking in human beings is a rapidly growing lucrative business , and it is attractive because the punishments are mild compared with other money-making forms of organised crime such as drugs and the arms trade .
Consequently , we have to come down hard on those behind it .
The victims of human trafficking are the most vulnerable and defenceless people , and they need our protection .
We must not send them back into the arms of the human traffickers .
They must be offered residence permits .
In addition , we must also focus on the demand for the services that are provided by people trafficked and implement various measures such as criminalising the purchase of prostitution and increasing the sanctions against those who use trafficked labour .
I am therefore pleased that the Commission is contemplating the criminalisation of the abuse of trafficked human beings .
( LT ) Events of recent days in Lithuania , when an organised gang was arrested for profiting from human trafficking , demonstrated once again that this crime is a widespread phenomenon that is intensifying even more during the economic and financial crisis .
At present , almost 90 % of the victims of people trafficking are women and children , the majority of whom fall victims because of poverty and attempts to seek means to survive .
Human trafficking is a monstrous crime and an extreme humiliation of human dignity ; there is nothing worse than being sold into slavery .
Therefore , it is very important to strengthen cooperation between the Member States and with third countries , to ensure a dialogue with non-governmental organisations and to call on the Commission to establish the position of a European coordinator for these matters .
It is also necessary to ensure the security of victims of trafficking in human beings and their complete integration .
The accomplices , organisers or sponsors of this terrible crime must not be allowed to avoid responsibility .
( SK ) I would like to congratulate the authors of this question , Mrs Hedh and Mrs Bauer .
I would like to say that trafficking in human beings is one of the most profitable forms of international organised crime and , according to various reports and sources , its worldwide scale is estimated to be between 700 000 and 2 million persons , some say more , of whom 300 to 500 000 individuals are victims of trafficking in the European Union alone .
The current legal framework appears to be inadequate ; therefore , I fully support the adoption in the near future of effective measures to strengthen both prevention and repression of trafficking in human beings .
Stricter sanctions should be imposed on the direct offenders , including legal persons , as well as the users of services provided by the victims .
On the other hand , I firmly believe that a high level of protection , together with fair and adequate compensation , needs to be provided to the victims , regardless of the Member State in which they are located or where the crime was committed .
The protection , support and assistance provided must not lead to secondary victimisation and I would also like to say that the provisions relating to minors , who easily become victims due to their vulnerability and gullibility , deserve special attention .
In conclusion , I would like to say that trafficking in human beings also often occurs for the purpose of organ harvesting .
( DE ) Mr President , it is quite significant that we should be debating the subject of human trafficking here today , as this is a subject that remains taboo and since , unfortunately , in our highly developed society , it is women who , in particular , are very often victims of such human trafficking .
I am thinking of prostitution , first and foremost , but also of children .
Very often , we do not want to see it .
For a successful programme against human trafficking , we need to prioritise education , awareness-raising , and we will need money later on .
We should take this into account in our considerations right from the start , as it cannot just be the aim to arrest the perpetrators and enforce a just punishment ; we must also seek to have victim protection that means victims do not become victims a second time , but that we also have the funds to re-integrate them into society .
We must aim to take away the traumas experienced by children and integrate the women , as a top priority , into our working world , a legal working world .

Mr President , European action on this issue is long overdue , so I was very pleased to hear Mr López Garrido 's remarks on children , the Commissioner 's remarks and , this morning , that Commissioner-designate Malmström plans to bring forth a new directive in this area as a priority .
I want to urge both the Council and Commission to look at the support systems for victims , particularly the specific needs of trafficked children , who have very different needs to those of trafficked adults .
In the UK , last year alone , 325 children were identified as being suspected victims of trafficking .
Many of those were UK citizens trafficked within the UK , not externally sourced , if I might use that expression .
There are children in my own region who are trafficked but we find that , even after registration with social services , many trafficked children just disappear because they remain under the control of their traffickers .
They find it just too easy to re-traffic these children .
This occurs all over the EU and we must put a stop to it .
Trafficked people are voiceless and vulnerable and they rely on the European Union to speak out for them , to stop this abhorrent crime , and to care for them .
( DE ) Mr President , begging , prostitution , theft and burglary - human traffickers and people-smuggling gangs need people , primarily women and children , for these and other , similar objectionable activities .
We are talking about hard-to-monitor criminal activity here , with a very high number of unreported cases .
At this point , I would like to point out that my home country of Austria is particularly affected , as a popular transit country , but also as a popular final destination .
We therefore need to be aware that the vast majority of people-smuggling gangs are active in moving people from eastern and south-eastern Europe to central Europe and that the victims are not only recruited in third countries but also come from the Member States themselves .
The fact is that there has been a rise in such cases and that our external border controls scarcely function .
In the light of this development and the verifiable reality that these journeys are often undertaken in buses - criminal tourism - the question must be asked as to whether it would not make sense , in these circumstances , in addition to the drawing up of reports by Europol , Frontex and others , to re-introduce border controls in the relevant border regions and suspend Schengen for a limited period where necessary .
( SK ) I congratulate the authors on the submitted question and you , Commissioner , on your response .
I would like to underline one of the many topics relating to this issue .
The draft resolution states that children are particularly vulnerable and thus at greater risk of becoming victims of trafficking in human beings .
At the same time , it says that 79 % of the identified victims of trafficking are women and girls .
However , it fails to mention that parents should play a primary role in protecting children from trafficking .
Parents often do not even know what risks their children are exposed to or are not at all interested in how they spend their spare time .
In the context of prevention , I have repeatedly proposed a European-wide campaign called : ' Do you know where your child is now ? '
This campaign should alert parents to the risks that their children face .
I firmly believe that we can protect children from trafficking only if we cooperate with parents .
Unfortunately , parents are not mentioned anywhere in the draft resolution .
( PL ) Mr President , in the context of today 's debate , it is necessary to draw attention to three matters which require particular attention .
Too few criminals are brought to justice .
Despite the rise in the number of criminal proceedings involving human trafficking , it is still many times lower than the number of crimes committed .
The victims do not receive appropriate assistance , shelter or compensation .
Bearing in mind the estimated scale of human trafficking in Europe , it should be noted that only several countries have taken measures which can be said to be a real reaction .
Thirdly , the situation is not being monitored sufficiently .
It is obvious that this problem does not affect only the European Union .
It is , therefore , of key significance that the Union work yet more closely with the appropriate international organisations to create a new standard in the fight against this terribly dangerous phenomenon .
I believe that this wide-ranging debate has served to highlight that we are faced with an enormous problem , a problem that poses us an enormous challenge .
I am pleased that this debate has taken place on the very day that I have spoken before the European Parliament for the first time , which is undoubtedly an honour .
I am pleased that it has happened in these two important debates that have been held tonight in this important and mighty Parliament .
I believe that it is not enough to simply refer to or reflect on this huge problem .
It must be tackled with all our strength because it is a very serious problem and the enemies we are facing are very strong .
We therefore need great political will to tackle the problem .
Here tonight , this great political will has been displayed , and how !
I can assure you that the Spanish Presidency is going to show it means to tackle this matter , together with all the other European institutions .
I believe we can also say that this is a problem that must be tackled from a European perspective .
You have stated very clearly how such things come to pass in Europe ; Mrs Hirsch pointed it out clearly and Mr Papanikolaou and Mrs Parvanova spoke about the cross-border nature of this matter .
It is happening in Europe and we must tackle it from Europe .
It has been repeated many times and I repeat it now : it is important for the Commission to propose a directive as soon as possible in order to tackle the problem from this angle .
I believe that Mrs Roithová put it very succinctly in her speech .
I believe that the three major aspects that we must cover and emphasise in the regulation that will be issued by Europe , in the work that will be done by Europe , must be as follows .
The first is victim protection .
Victim protection is a central aspect and certainly the one most discussed here tonight .
The authors of the question , Mrs Sargentini , Mrs Ernst , Mrs Thomsen and other speakers indicated the importance of victim protection , which normally refers , above all , to women and children - the most vulnerable people .
Mrs Jiménez-Becerril Barrio , Mrs Kadenbach and Mrs Bearder also eloquently expressed the need to introduce a victim protection system , which is an essential instrument and a priority of the Spanish Presidency .

Victim protection , then , is in first place ; secondly , we must have tireless persecution and harsh punishment for traffickers - Mr Ziobro expressed this very forcefully in his speech ; and thirdly , we must consider the subject of demand for these services .
This is something hard to tackle but it is part of the problem and , as such , I therefore believe it must be included as one of the three major aspects on which I believe a global approach must be based .
As I stated before , ladies and gentlemen , the Spanish Presidency is and will be absolutely committed to a subject of such overriding importance as this .
Mr President , I believe that this debate has done much to clarify the preparation of the future directive , and I can , of course , confirm Minister that the Commission intends to present it this spring .
I would like to echo the comments made by Mr Moraes , by saying that we must use the most modern means to fight against this scourge , which itself is also often carried out using the most modern methods , and that we must fight against all forms of exploitation .
Minister , you said just now that there are three pillars : the victims , the seriousness of the penalties and then the problem of demand .
I would emphasise somewhat the issue of victims and victim protection since , in the framework decision , we had already negotiated unconditional support for all victims , immunity from criminal prosecution , and the right to legal assistance .
Furthermore , in the future directive , we intend to deal with accommodation , medical and psychological treatment , advice and information , in a language that is understood by the victim , and then all kinds of supplementary support .
In response to Mrs Záborská , I would add that , indeed , as far as child victims of people trafficking are concerned , the Commission will address issues relating to the prevention of this scourge , as well as the protection , return and reintegration of these children , in an action plan on the situation of unaccompanied minors .
Incidentally , Minister , this was a strong demand made by the Spanish Presidency .
We will therefore present this action plan , which will be adopted by the College in spring 2010 , so that it may be examined by the Council and by the European Parliament .
This action plan will propose several areas of action to tackle the main challenges posed by this phenomenon , which affects unaccompanied minors arriving in the European Union in different contexts , and will be guided by the best interests of the child .
However , Mrs Záborská is also right ; families must be increasingly involved in supervising , in particular , use of the Internet , which exposes children , once again , to new risks .
As you said , Minister , political will does exist in the European Parliament .
I believe the Commission has already done some good preparation work on this draft directive .
It will submit it shortly , and I would like to thank the European Parliament for offering not just its full support , but also a whole series of very interesting ideas that have emerged during this debate .
Once again , I would like to thank all the speakers .
Indeed , I believe that the European Parliament has a crucial role to play in the fight against this major scourge .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the February I part-session .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Those who are involved in human trafficking do not make any distinction between men , women or children , as long as they can make money from trafficking them .
Often , it is children who are in the greatest danger .
According to the ILO , roughly 218 million children are involved in child labour at present .
It is impossible to give a definite figure , however , as these children are involved in prostitution , slavery , forced labour and so on , areas for which accurate figures are not available .
The EU must urgently tackle trafficking in the labour market .
I find it encouraging that this issue is a priority of the Spanish Presidency and I hope that members of the Council will work together to put issues related to human trafficking and child labour at the heart of EU legislation and , in particular , that these questions will be dealt with within the context of trade agreements .
As a result of its important role in global trade matters and its commitment to protecting human rights , the EU has a responsibility to combat human trafficking and child labour .
in writing . - The trafficking of human beings is deplorable anywhere in the world , but particularly disgraceful in the European Union given our high levels of internal cooperation and resources .
In particular , the trafficking of young women for use in the sex trade is a relic of Europe 's fragmented past and must become an aspect of European history .
In this regard , the Union must commit over the five-year term of the incoming Commission to increase border security , and to implore national governments to do more to tackle the sex trade , particularly when it involves young women who have been trafficked from another country .
Currently , the laws exist in most countries but are simply not being enforced .
The speed with which this debate has been initiated so soon after the Treaty of Lisbon 's entry into force is not only opportune from a legislative perspective , but is also an absolute requirement dictated by a situation exacerbated by the economic crisis .
Poverty , job losses , the lack of prospects for young people , the absence of accurate information about the risks involved and an absence of even a minimal level of sex education are some of the factors contributing significantly to the vulnerable situation of the potential victims .
I believe that a hard-hitting information campaign is required , especially among minors from disadvantaged areas and groups , to improve the effectiveness of preventive actions .
We cannot talk about specifically combating the trafficking of women without considering strong measures for tackling criminal activities and the networks controlling this traffic , which is extremely busy in the Balkan and Mediterranean regions .
I want to emphasise that measures are needed to discourage the level of demand for prostitution , which is the most direct route , with the adoption of measures to punish clients .
I should mention that better funding is also required for the programmes intended to combat human trafficking .
I call for the adoption of harsh punitive legislation and for closer cooperation between Member States and the authorised European institutions : Europol , Frontex and Eurojust .
Although two pieces of European legislation currently in force deal with trafficking in human beings and its victims , the Member States of the European Union in practice often look upon these persons as illegal immigrants .
It is very important to make a distinction between the two .
Illegal immigrants are often obliged to leave their countries on account of some financial or social circumstance , and they arrive on European territory illegally , albeit as a result of their own decision .
Those affected by human trafficking have not taken a free , informed decision about all this .
They are to be treated entirely as victims .
EU Member States must offer victims adequate protection .
Not only should they be guaranteed legal or physical protection , but medical and psychological assistance , social rehabilitation , and those who collaborate with the authorities should be given residence permits for the duration of the investigation of the human trafficking case .
It is important , moreover , that the Commission should use information campaigns to help make sure that all those who may be at risk should be aware of their rights , opportunities and the dangers both within the EU and in third countries , and that it should do everything possible to ensure that Member States duly transpose and implement the relevant European legislation .
Given that the matter of human trafficking falls under the purview of several commissioners , including the commissioners for justice , freedom and security , for external relations , and for employment , social affairs and equal opportunities , it would be worth considering the appointment of a portfolio coordinator who could effectively liaise in order to ensure appropriate handling of this problem .
in writing . - Women and children are the principal victims of human trafficking .
When a new Council Framework Decision will be formulated regarding human trafficking , women and children have to be put at the centre of action .
Therefore , I agree with opinions stating that gender-specific violence data must be collected throughout the European Union as soon as possible .
Victim protection costs money , and this life-saving money should be spent wisely .
We should bear in mind that without reliable and comparable data , we will not be able to locate resources to the appropriate places in an appropriate manner .
We also have to be aware of the fact that different Member States and especially different cultures handle the problem differently .
There are Member States where victim protection is well organised and reachable for everyone , like in Spain , and there are Member States where it is almost a non-issue .
That means that we not only need to locate resources wisely , but we also have to come up with practical and statistical solutions ( namely with a minimum European standard at least ) in order to tackle the latency problem , and in order to draw attention to this question where it is needed .
in writing . - The problem of the trafficking of human beings has been with us for a long time , but instead of getting to grips with the issue , Member States stand indicted for our individual and collective failure to deal with this exploitation and degradation of women .
While free movement facilitates trafficking in terms of the removal of border controls , on the other hand , one would imagine that increased police cooperation should be in a position to tackle the problem .
What is clear is that the political will is not there .
The May 2005 ' Council of Europe Convention on the Action Against trafficking in Human Beings ' has only been ratified by nine countries , two thirds of women trafficked for prostitution come from Eastern Europe and yet , countries like the Czech Republic and Estonia have not signed the convention .
Apart from the political will not being there , the police will is not there either .
The number of convictions is derisory in terms of the problem ; the police do not see human trafficking as a crime .
The United Nations has estimated that there were around 270 000 victims of human trafficking in 2009 in the European Union .
The European Union must commit itself in the very near future and come up with legislative instruments which will cover both the prevention of and fight against human trafficking , as well as protection of the rights of trafficking victims .
Future European legislation will have to review the level of sanctions against traffickers so that they are commensurate with the severity of the offence .
International judicial cooperation , collaboration among all agencies for protecting minors and those campaigning for human rights , setting up specific funds for providing compensation , and effective protection for victims are all areas which need to be strengthened .
Furthermore , I feel that Eurojust , Europol and Frontex must have even further involvement in the fight against human trafficking and the protection of victims , as well as collect data and compile statistics on this phenomenon .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
Announcement by the President
I would like to inform the House that I have received a letter from the President of the European Council , Herman Van Rompuy , in which he informs me of the European Council 's decision to consult the European Parliament on the proposal by the Spanish Government concerning the composition of the European Parliament and to seek Parliament 's consent not to convene a Convention on this matter .
It concerns the 18 additional Members of the European Parliament .
I have handed the proposal to the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , which has just begun work on this matter and will shortly appoint a rapporteur .
Work on this will continue .
I would also like to tell you that , following the Bulgarian Government 's decision to withdraw its candidate for Commissioner-designate , it has put forward a new candidate .
The Conference of Presidents will decide tomorrow on the final timetable , but the most likely date for the hearing of the new Commissioner-designate is 3 February , with the vote on 9 February .
This , of course , also depends on a decision from Mr Barroso and on his talks with the Bulgarian Government 's newly appointed candidate .
Nothing has yet been established , but I wanted the House to have this general information about what our next steps will be .
At all events , the European Parliament is in full control of the situation .
There are no exceptional situations here , and we are acting in accordance with democratic procedures .
These procedures are of fundamental significance to us and this is how the European Parliament will always work under my Presidency .
I would also like to tell you about how the European Parliament envisages working with the two-and-a-half-year permanent Presidency of the European Union and the European Council and how it will work with the rotating Presidency .
The rotating Presidency , in this case the Spanish Presidency , will always present its six-month plan of action at the beginning of the six-month period and will then present a report of its work at the end of the period .
The permanent Presidency of the European Council will present the results of its work at European summits .
As you know , in every six-month period , there are two summits , and the President of the European Council will present the results of the summit twice in each period , hence , four times a year .
Presentation of the programme of the Spanish Presidency ( debate )
The next item is the statement by the Council on presentation of the programme of the Spanish Presidency .

Mr President , Mr Barroso , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to address my first few words to a country that is suffering pain and tragedy : Haiti .
I know that we all share the concern , solidarity and commitment of all the institutions of the European Union , starting with the rotating Presidency , the Commission , the Council and Parliament , for a country that is suffering , for a people that is being torn apart by death , destruction and violence , following on from a history of poverty and also conflict .
There are few occasions where we can show what we can do as Europeans in the manner in which we are going to do in response to the tragedy in Haiti .
We are going to demonstrate our commitment to what is happening in the world and to the countries that are suffering most .
Right from the very first moment , holding the rotating Presidency , and in coordination with the Commission and the High Representative , we have sought to respond to the tragedy in Haiti .
Last Monday , the Council of Ministers on Development met , and next Monday the Council on European Affairs will meet in order to plan a rapid response in terms of aid and humanitarian cooperation on all fronts , for the future of Haiti .
I am entirely convinced that the response of the international community is a strong , joint response , and that the European Union is going to rise to the occasion .
In response to the tragedy in Haiti , the only protagonists should be the people suffering there , and I hope and trust that we will do everything we can to help set in motion a complete recovery .
Both European society and , above all , our deep-seated convictions , demand it .
Mr President , it is an honour for me to appear here before you in order to explain the main priorities of the Spanish rotating Presidency over the next six months .
It is more than an honour , it is a great honour .
It is a great honour because I am speaking on behalf of a country which , in the next six months , will be celebrating its 25th anniversary of joining what was then the European Communities .
I am speaking on behalf of a European and pro-Europe country , a country which , in the last 25 years , has experienced a major transformation in terms of progress and welfare , largely due to being part of the European Union .
Europe was the dream of generations , of many generations of Spaniards .
It was the dream of democracy , of opening up to the world , of progress , of welfare , of the welfare state , of freedom .
This is what we have seen in Europe , what has been brought to us by Europe , and what we have brought to Europe .
Twenty-five years later , we feel loyal to Europe and committed to the Union , and there is no more powerful way to be loyal and committed to Europe than to exercise the responsibility of making commitments , taking the initiative and putting forward proposals .
This is what we want to do during the next six months .
These will be six months of change because we are taking on the rotating Presidency at a time of economic change , as a result of the most serious financial crisis for eighty years .
It is a time of political change because of the Treaty of Lisbon , which is changing the way that the European Union is governed .
It is a time of change in terms of foreign relations , because the phenomenon of globalisation is growing and there are new emerging countries .
It is also a time of change in terms of the relationship that Europe needs to have with European citizens in order to give effect to everything set out by the Treaty of Lisbon .
It will therefore be a time of change in two circumstances in particular : firstly , the serious economic crisis that we are experiencing , and secondly , the Treaty of Lisbon and its new institutional relationships .
Regarding the economic crisis , I would like to say the following .
We are aware that it is a much more serious crisis than we have experienced for eighty years , and we know that , as was the case then , there has never been such a huge decline in global production and international trade .
We are aware of the serious effects that it has caused in the world and in the European Union .
The number of unemployed has increased by eight million , many of whom are indeed in my country .
There has been an effect on public finances , and therefore on the prospects for financial stability , which has impelled and is still impelling us to take urgent cooperative measures .
It has also driven us to look towards making changes to the European economy and to its production capacity , and towards improving competitiveness in the whole of the Union .
We need to continue maintaining the fiscal stimuli until the recovery is a reality .
We need to commit ourselves to maintaining the Stability Pact and fulfil the Commission 's indications for 2013 .
We also need to set out an economic strategy for 2020 , which the Commission is drawing up and which , in the view of the Spanish rotating Presidency , must be a key matter in the next six months .
We know what the European Union 's strengths and weaknesses are .
We know that since the mid-1990s , we have been losing our capacity for economic growth , our potential for economic growth .
We know that since the mid-1990s , we have been losing productivity relative to the big economies that we compete with .
We also know that we have difficulties in some specific areas that will determine the future of our growth , competitiveness and innovation in a globalised world .
We do , however , also have strengths , and we should remember them .
Our strengths are clear : we represent almost a third of global GDP .
We are undoubtedly the leading exporting power and the second most important , behind the United States in terms of research , development and innovation .
We represent almost 60 % of global development aid , which is a great strength for the European Union .
What does Spain see as the fundamental priorities for renewing Europe 's economic strength , for creating a sustainable economy from a competitive , environmental and social point of view ?
I will mention four main themes that I want to promote , which should be included in the 2020 Strategy .
I would summarise these by saying that , in terms of the economy , the European Union needs to bet on itself .
It needs to move forward with economic union and cooperation , starting with the sense of responsibility of the Member States , but also ensuring that the Community institutions , specifically the Commission , have new powers to lead and achieve objectives .
Ladies and gentlemen , in the last ten years , our energy dependency has increased by nine percentage points , and this is one of the primary areas in which we must take steps and make changes .
Energy dependency has increased from 44 % to 53 % in the whole of the European Union .
These nine percentage points amount to exactly EUR 64 million that we send to other countries as the European Union .
Do you know what this amount represents ?
It represents practically the same amount that all the countries of the European Union spend on public investment in research , development and innovation .
We need to change our energy dependency and reduce it , because otherwise , our economic fragility will increase .
What do we need to do ?
Progress has been made in the field of energy , but not the progress that we want .
We need to permanently create an energy common market that will strengthen the whole of the Union and the Union 's economy .
There are two key elements that we need in order to do this : energy interconnections , as the expectations set out in 2002 have not been met , and a common regulatory framework to consolidate an energy common market .
If we achieve energy interconnections in the South , East and North of Europe , if we put it forward as a major priority , giving authority to the Commission , we will see our energy dependency reduce , and we will encourage the development of renewable energy sources which , by their nature , require versatility in energy distribution .
Ladies and gentlemen , Europe will not become a leading player in terms of economic competitiveness until it takes definite steps to tackle all the decisive aspects of energy interconnections and the issue of a common market .
The second main objective : in a modern society , what brings the most growth and innovation ?
Investment in the information society and in the new technologies that have changed almost everything in the world .
Forty per cent of the increase in productivity in the European economy is due to information and communication technologies , ICTs .
We are leaders in this field as Europeans , because we have leading companies , but we do not have a digital internal market .
We want to take steps to establish a digital market .
What does this involve ?
It involves removing barriers , it means committing to new-generation networks and facilitating e-commerce , which is growing every day in every country , but which is not making progress in terms of being possible between several countries .
If we make progress on a digital market , we will facilitate the creation of content and strengthen intellectual property .
We will also ensure that , thanks to the innovation that information and communication technologies bring to all areas of the economy , we will see results in terms of productivity within a very short period .
I would like to point out that this is the sector that currently has the greatest capacity for innovation , for increasing productivity and creating stable employment .
The third area is the economy or sustainable industry .
I will only give you one example of what we see as a priority in the context of combating climate change .
We want to launch and promote , along with the Commission , a plan to develop electric vehicles .
The vehicle industry is going to undergo a major transformation , which has already begun .
If we make an integrated commitment in this area of industry , as Europeans , to a common , shared vision and a common strategy for electric cars , we will help to reduce our energy dependency .
We will also contribute to combating climate change and to the technological innovation that is undoubtedly going to be opened up by electric cars and will also be directly associated with the information and communication technologies industry .
The fourth central element of this sustainable economy and economic regeneration that the European Union needs is education , especially university education , which is the forum for research .
In the last ten years , Europe has not made progress in terms of the number of universities of excellence in the ranking of the top 100 universities .
We need to conclude the Bologna Process .
We need to promote , facilitate and open up expectations for increasingly European universities and increasingly European research , because they are undoubtedly the impetus for the future .
We are no longer competing country against country , but as Europeans , as Europe , because the other players are the size of China , India , the United States and the emerging countries .
If we do not make the most of the synergy represented by the 500 million citizens in the economy , which means tens of thousands of enterprises with huge capacity and millions of workers , who need to be provided with increasingly better training , we will not be the real leading players of the future , in terms of economic prosperity through innovation and technology , in this scenario of globalisation .
We will be spectators , not leading players .
The way forward is the Union : more common economic policy , more integration , more shared vision , more Europe .
Not putting up more barriers , but removing barriers , not dividing but bringing together , having a vision of the Union that promotes competitiveness , integration and innovation .
We have confidence in the Commission regarding this 2020 Strategy , which must also incorporate a discussion about the future of the Common Agricultural Policy , which is a fundamental policy in terms of environmental protection , food safety and the incomes of many European citizens .
We are convinced that the debate that is going to take place in the European Council and the Commission and , of course , the dialogue with the European Parliament , must bring about a 2020 Strategy that involves serious governance and is demanding in its objectives and focused on the areas that I have just mentioned .
Economic change and political change , and change in the government of the Union .
The Treaty of Lisbon establishes new institutions : the permanent President of the Council and the High Representative for Foreign Affairs .
It strengthens Parliament , the heart of European democracy , and also strengthens the Commission .
I can make a commitment before Parliament , which represents all European citizens , that the Spanish rotating Presidency will be loyal to , and will cooperate with , the new institutions .
We want those institutions to have the meaning established in the treaty : namely , the need for the European Union to function so that the permanent President of the Council can represent the European Union and carry out all his functions , along with the High Representative .
We are aware that this six-month period will be the first proof of how the new institutional structure works , and we will also support a strengthened Commission and Parliament , which is increasingly the political centre of the European Union .
We are going to do this , and I hope that we will be judged satisfactorily at the end of this period , because our commitment is very firm .
There are various powers governing the European Union , and they need to have a common thread , which is cooperative loyalty .
That is how we shall work .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we are also experiencing changes in the area of external relations , not only because of the existence of the High Representative and the launch of the European External Action Service .
There will also be changes because in this context of globalisation and change , we have a decisive six-month agenda .
I will tell you what our objectives are in terms of external relations for all the summits that we are going to hold .
Firstly , shared security , secondly , energy , thirdly , promoting and extending the opening up of trade and technology transfer , and fourthly , development cooperation aid , in which the European Union is a major ethical leader in the world .
Over the next six months , we will hold a dialogue on these objectives with North and South America , in the Mediterranean , in Africa and Asia and with the other European countries that are not part of the Union .
We will be holding a dialogue with a large proportion of the continents and areas through an intense calendar of international summits in which we will , of course , be working in full cooperation with the President of the Council and with the Commission - because we will be making important agreements during the next six months - and also with Parliament .
Economic changes , political changes and changes in vision , in our external outlook , as a result of new players and globalisation .
In addition to the economy , I said a few minutes ago that Europe also needs to bet on itself in the area of external policy .
I must say that Europe needs to bet on itself , that external policy needs to take into account European interests and how to defend them .
The matter of neighbourhood relations must be a priority .
In my opinion , we must establish more ambitious objectives and more intense relations , because that is undoubtedly where a large proportion of European interests are going to be settled .
The changes that we are experiencing and that we want to drive forward through reform and renewal also have a bearing upon European citizens .
The Treaty of Lisbon , in line with the will of Europeans , wants citizens to feel closer to the European institutions .
It wants them to see the Union as being ' their Union ' and Europe as a government that is closer to them .
In order to achieve this , there are new instruments that we are going to launch and promote in the next six months .
The first of these is the people 's legislative initiative , which is so important to Parliament .
The second is that we want to make it a priority during this period , in cooperation with the Commission , to make progress on the most important citizens ' right that the European Union can focus on , which is equality between men and women .
The most advanced , perfect societies in which human rights and prosperity are best realised are those that achieve greater equality between men and women .
They are the societies that are most active and committed to fighting what is represented by gender violence and mistreatment of women , which is improper and unacceptable in an advanced society such as the European Union .
We therefore propose launching new judicial protection systems through a European protection order and maximum extension of protection against the scourge of gender violence that a large proportion of European societies suffer from .
European citizens also need to know , based on our deliberations , our proposals and our initiatives , that social cohesion and social inclusion in response to poverty in Europe are inalienable aspects of the Union , and that , along with democracy , the most important elements of Europe 's identity are welfare and social cohesion .
The 2020 Strategy for the economy will therefore , as I said before , have to be economically , socially and environmentally sustainable .
In order to achieve this social sustainability , I propose that we make a major new social pact in Europe between enterprises and workers , a major social pact in the development of the 2020 Strategy .
Social dialogue and social agreement made Europe strong when it first came to be , in periods of weakness and now , in this period of renewal and change , after a serious economic crisis ; social agreement - namely the social pact - could be a major driving force behind the objectives that we are setting ourselves for effective governance .
Mr President - I am finishing now - ladies and gentlemen , I would once again like to express Spain 's thanks to all the countries of the European Union , especially those that promoted our integration and contributed to our development .
I would like to reiterate our commitment to Europe and to the European Union , our commitment to a way of life , but also to a way of thinking and feeling .
This involves thinking that favours democracy , equality , human rights , peace , and the sense that living together , uniting our peoples , uniting our aspirations and uniting our history has enabled us to live in peace with ourselves , and today and tomorrow , it can enable us to continue to live in the great region of prosperity , welfare and ideals .
Mr President of the Spanish Government , over the next six months , Spain will assume the rotating Presidency of the Council .
It is a country with a great European tradition and great European commitment , in its government as well as in all its political forces and in public opinion , and a President , José-Luis Rodríguez-Zapatero , whose European credentials are unquestionable .
The institutional engines of European integration will be operating at full power once Parliament 's vote of confidence in the new Commission gives these two institutions a strong , solid basis in order to move forward with an ambitious political agenda .
I hope that the vote will take place very soon .
First of all , at this very tragic time for Haiti , I would like to reaffirm our complete solidarity and desire to help its people and all the victims of the earthquake .
The devastating earthquake has been at the forefront of our minds since 12 January , and efforts began straight away to provide all the assistance we can .
The Commission is currently in a position to mobilise EUR 130 million , and the total European Union effort in terms of immediate assistance , including that of the Member States , is more than EUR 222 million , not counting civil protection assistance .
The Commission could mobilise a further EUR 200 million in longer-term aid .
I can assure you that the Commission and the European Union are demonstrating the values and principles of solidarity through action .
Haiti is a Caribbean country .
I would therefore like to highlight the fact that there is a very ambitious external relations programme for the six-month Spanish Presidency of the Council .
I would particularly like to note that Latin America and the Caribbean are a priority for the Spanish Presidency .
I am sure that we can count on Spain 's special vocation to ensure that the summit to be held with the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean in Madrid in May will be a success for Latin America and for Europe .
Let me now turn to the policy priorities for the weeks and months ahead .
Everything points in the direction of determined and united European action .
The failed attack on the aircraft at Detroit was a reminder that we need to act together if we are to face up to the threats to security .
Copenhagen was a reminder that the global community does not automatically share Europe 's level of ambition : as we have been doing in the G20 discussions , we need to keep driving a positive and forward-looking international process .
Only with a united Europe can we shape globalisation .
But we have to look at the situation of our economy .
We all know that the European economy is at a delicate moment .
Determined action has succeeded in preventing the worst .
But we still face the risk that unemployment will continue to rise , and we need to make a judgment about when to switch the focus to restoring our public finances .
At the same time , we must learn from the crisis .
We fully realised that globalisation is a reality and that we need to use it to our advantage .
We have demonstrated that our social protection systems have been able to respond to exceptional circumstances and by providing new safety nets .
But we also saw the clear limits for Member States acting alone and we saw that coordinated European Union action not only brought results for Europe , but also triggered an unprecedented global response by the G20 .
Now we have to shape the right future for Europe , its economy and its society .
The challenges we were facing before the crisis are still there , if anything , they were reinforced : how to cope with the consequences of ageing , of our demographics , how to remain competitive in a global world , how to secure the transition to a more sustainable economy , to mention just a few .
However , I am confident in the capacities of Europe .
I believe that an economy rebuilding its strengths has a real chance to redirect its energies .
A society which has proved robust in the face of economic crisis is one that can build for the future with confidence .
And a European economic system whose resilience flows from its single market , its competition rules and the euro will now need these assets as the drivers for recovery .
I see the next six months as a springboard to set ambitious goals , goals I have presented in my political guidelines and which we debated last autumn here in the European Parliament .
This will constitute the ' Europe 2020 ' strategy .
We need a fundamental reworking of our economy to meet the challenges of the future .
To agree on a transformation agenda , with the European Parliament , with Member States , with social partners , with societies at large .
To offer a clear direction towards a competitive , innovative , sustainable , socially inclusive market economy , able to prosper in the global marketplace .
Europe 2020 must offer both a mid-term vision and short-term action .
The more we can shape our immediate measures to put us on the road to our longer-term objectives , the more we will have a head start to future growth and employment , our number one priority .
The renewed Lisbon Strategy was able to build an understanding of how structural reform feeds directly into growth and jobs .
But let us be frank about it : the crisis has wiped out many of the gains and there were also some shortcomings .
The truth is that we still lag well behind our competitors on our research effort , our investment in education , our share of high tech .
We must now use the Europe 2020 strategy to create new sources of growth , to unleash the potential of the internal market to drive our economy forward .
That means using knowledge and creativity to generate real value in our economies , unlocking innovation and promoting its market uptake from ICTs to new energy , clean technologies , for instance .
It means empowering people for the future with the right skills and with a labour market ready to seize the opportunities for job creation ; and targeting action on the big problems , like youth unemployment .
It is obvious that we are now facing an emergency situation from a social and unemployment point of view .
This requires a strong focus from the European Union .
We need to define together actions at European Union level to complement national actions with positive social impact .
It also means an economy shaped for the future - a sustainable and resource-efficient economy - that is also productive and innovative .
Europe 's huge industrial assets need to be re-directed to seizing the first-mover advantage in tomorrow 's markets .
But Europe must be able to retain a solid , modern and competitive industrial base .
The crisis means that , more than ever , we must use every euro of investment to best effect .
And , of course , we must complete our reform of financial markets to put them back at the service of the economy , and not the opposite .
This also includes our SME-friendly approach .
SMEs are the sector which can create more jobs in the European Union and we will be doing them , and their workers , a good service if we reduce administrative burdens and apply a better and smart regulation approach .
In our interconnected economies , we all have an interest in what is happening - at national and European Union level , from one Member State to the next .
The present crisis shows us not only the consequences of global interdependence but also the negative effects that a specific situation in one country may have in the whole euro area .
So , Europe 2020 must bring with it stronger coordination mechanisms , a common vision and an effective European leadership .
I want to thank Prime Minister Zapatero for his clear commitment to this European approach when discussing economic policies , his commitment to Community matters and his commitment to the role of the European Commission in this vision and in implementation of this vision .
Only with a European approach , a European vision and European instruments can we deliver results for our European citizens .
This will be one of the distinctive features of Europe 2020 : reinforced coordination of economic policies , in which the Commission will make full use of the new possibilities given by the treaty , including those concerning the euro area .
This is the vision I would like to debate with you in the coming weeks , because one thing we have learnt from the Lisbon Strategy is that a European economic strategy needs the full commitment of the European political community and the social partners .
Let us be clear : in the past , some national politicians have resisted stronger mechanisms of governance within the Lisbon Strategy .
I hope that , following the lessons of interdependence not only at global but also at European level - all the lessons that were given to us by the crisis - all EU governments will now recognise the need for full ownership of Europe 2020 and for a truly coordinated and coherent action in economic policy , as foreseen in Articles 120 and 121 of the Lisbon Treaty .
Finally , let me add that I see Europe 2020 also as the way to bring confidence and hope for our citizens .
We must not hide the fact that Europe , like most of the developed world , will go through a long period of slow growth if we remain inactive .
The phase of ' getting worse before getting better ' is probably behind us , but the getting better will be slow .
We will have to address the real problem of the economy , that the potential growth of Europe may be reduced if we do not act now in a coherent and effective manner .
Our citizens , be they households or entrepreneurs , should feel that the European Union is part of the solution to their difficulties and anxieties .
Europe 2020 is , for me , above all , also a response to this .
It is to connect the European project to the concrete needs of our citizens .
This is why I also welcome the initiative to hold an informal European Council on 11 February to have a first discussion at Head of State or Government level .
I also think it is crucial to find opportunities to discuss these issues with this House - with Parliament - both before and after the Commission presents its outline for Europe 2020 .
That is why I have discussed this with the Council and with the President of the European Council .
I think we should have at least a three-step approach : the informal European Council for Heads of State or Government to discuss the issue , the Spring European Council for the first important proposals and the June European Council for the approval of the guidelines , so that we will have the time to discuss this issue broadly and with a very active contribution from the European Parliament .
I have focused today on economic policy because I see this as our number one priority in terms of urgency .
But , of course , this does not exhaust our agenda .
The challenges of the coming weeks and months are manifold .
Let me just mention one of many examples : the follow-up to the Copenhagen conference on climate change .
While we need some time to collectively reflect on the right strategic orientations for the future of the international process , we should not lower our ambition regarding commitments already made by the European Union .
We should also intensify our efforts namely through our internal policies of promoting the upgrading and modernisation of the industrial base of our economy , the innovation and the development of new clean technologies , energy efficiency and the energy security agenda , also by putting this matter at the top of the transformational agenda for Europe .
This is how to make the best case for the European Union on the global stage : a European Union ready for action , with a clear vision for the future and a determination to get there .
The more we are united and effective at home , the more our case will win through internationally .
I am very much looking forward to working with this Parliament to help make the Spanish Presidency of the Council a success and to ensure that the next six months put us on the road to realising our common ambitions for Europe , a European Union that is closer to our citizens and that is focused on clear results for our Europe .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Barroso .
Before I ask the leaders of the parliamentary political groups to speak , I would like , once again , to emphasise the importance of the vision presented by Mr Rodríguez Zapatero .
It is a vision of development of the European Union , based on the Community method .
Thank you , Mr Zapatero , too , for stressing the role of the European Parliament , a role which has grown significantly with the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , and it is that cooperation between the European Council , the Council of Ministers and the European Parliament which will be the basis of future interinstitutional structure and balance in the European Union .
Today , we are forecasting our role for many years to come .
Not everything is found in the treaties .
Therefore , what happens during the Spanish Presidency is very important , because it will establish the political customs which determine the way we work , as well as the effectiveness of the European Union .
The Spanish Presidency is of special significance , here , and I am grateful for the presentation of a vision which concurs to a large extent with that of the European Parliament .
I would like to thank Mr Barroso for presenting the point of view of the European Commission .
The Commission is still working with the same composition as before , but I would like to stress very strongly here : we do have a European Commission , it still is not the new Commission , but work on this is going on all the time .
I would like especially to thank Mr Barroso for presenting the 2020 Strategy and the way it will be coordinated .
This is a fundamental matter : how we are going to coordinate the 2020 Strategy in the future - this , too , needs to be based on the Community method . Thank you very much .
Now I would like to ask the leaders of the political groups for their comments and remarks .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the economy , the social field , climate and energy are the major priorities of the Spanish Presidency and they will rightly be the focus of Europe 's attention .
That is why Mr Van Rompuy 's first decision , namely to convene a European Council dedicated to the economy and to climate change and now also , of course , to the Haiti strategy - you spoke about this issue and it is one on which I believe that Europe has to show both its heart and its know-how and you must intervene to ensure that the Council has a greater presence in Haiti - is , in my view , a positive position .
This is why the debate that you yourself , Mr Rodríguez Zapatero , launched on a possible European economic government is also welcome , despite and maybe even because of the fact that opinions currently differ on this matter .
That is normal ; we should not be frightened , ladies and gentlemen , to speak at European level of politics with a capital P , and we have to be honest with ourselves .
We should not fear major debates , and I wish to thank you , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , for having made your contribution , because economic and social policy is the major debate , the one that is of most concern to our citizens , the one that demands our response in the short , medium and long term .
As Mr Barroso said , this is the right time to raise the question of the economic objectives of the countries of the Union .
It is , in fact , a matter of survival for Europe and its social model .
Mr Rodríguez Zapatero , you know what economic difficulties are .
They are the record unemployment of almost 20 % and a public deficit of almost 11 % in Spain .
It has to be said , yours is a country that is experiencing problems .
I therefore welcome your will to restore growth and to create employment as the be-all and end-all of your Presidency .
To be honest though , Mr Zapatero - I said that we have to tell the truth - I am not sure that the solutions that you and the political family to which you belong are proposing in order to end the crisis and to make social Europe a reality are the most suitable .
For the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , an end to the crisis and the creation of jobs cannot be achieved by more public spending but by an economic , fiscal and environmental regime that is favourable to enterprises , especially small and medium-sized enterprises .
I am specifically thinking of small and medium-sized enterprises where employment in our countries and in our regions is concerned .
Social cohesion , which has been greatly tested by the crisis and by the scandals of the bonuses and rewards for the incompetence of some managers , cannot be built on small crafts , but on lasting growth that benefits the greatest number of people .
To conclude , I wish to address the Council , whether the rotating Presidency or the permanent Presidency , to say to you formally that , with the Treaty of Lisbon , times have changed .
The Council and Parliament must now work in close cooperation and as equals .
This new relationship obviously requires legal standards - and for this , I put my faith in our legal experts zealously to apply the new treaty - but it also requires mutual political trust and symbolic gestures .
In this connection , I repeat my wish for the Presidency of the Council to regularly participate in the interplay of spontaneous questions and answers with the Members of the European Parliament , as the President of the Commission , Mr Barroso , has been doing for several months , and as you yourself have done this morning , Mr Rodríguez Zapatero .
You have six months to establish this principle .
I therefore offer my best wishes to the President-in-Office of the Council for the coming six months and hope that , together , we can succeed in moving Europe forward during this time .
The best of luck to you .
Mr President , the Spanish Presidency has an ambitious programme , which you have described to us , Mr Zapatero .
You mentioned the four major priorities of greater energy security , more investment in information technology , more education and training and the creation of a form of European economic governance that is to ensure that these priorities can also be implemented .
That is the right approach and it will take Europe into a new phase .
The challenges faced by this continent are not to do with holding parliamentary sittings or arranging one summit after another .
We have held many summits in the past .
The summits do not solve the problems , they delineate them .
What we need is for the solutions to the problems to actually be implemented in the Member States .
( Applause )
The reactions to your proposal for economic governance indicate that this is exactly where the problem lies .
Where did the Lisbon strategy fail ?
It was not that it would not have been possible to implement it .
No , it was possible to implement it .
The Lisbon strategy failed due to the reluctance of the Member States to keep their own promises .
This new approach , this breath of fresh air that you want to bring into European policy with this ambitious programme , is therefore the right one .
The old structures that we have had up to now remind me somewhat of Don Quixote 's beautiful horse , Rosinante , which thought it was a racehorse .
In reality , it was an old nag .
We will not make it into the 21st century on Rosinante .
For this , we need new approaches and , therefore , you are on the right path .
What Europe needs is to adopt some aspects of the Spanish model .
The reason why - and I am saying this only once - we as Socialists specifically support you is that we believe that your government in Spain is a forward-thinking government .
You have succeeded , in the face of a lot of opposition and with a great deal of courage , in giving your country an enormous push towards modernisation .
You have our greatest respect for that .
( Applause )
If you act at European level with the same energy and the same determination , you will also bring this modernisation drive to Europe .
I think it is courageous for a Head of Government to say , for example , that marital violence is not a national problem but a problem that affects the whole of society everywhere and that we in Europe , in our highly developed , civilised society , must not regard violence against women as a minor offence , but as a violation of human rights , and that is what it is .
( Applause )
The political re-energising that we need in Europe is tied in very strongly with our expectations of your Presidency , Mr Rodríguez Zapatero .
I would therefore like to add that we also need more economic control in Europe .
I will give you an example to illustrate the fact that social cohesion gets destroyed in society because there is not enough control or not enough courage to exert control .
When we talk about regulation of the financial markets and regulation of the banking system , we also need to mention the fact that the same banks that , a year ago , received hundreds of billions of euros in government money in order to ensure their survival , are not using this money today to give credit , but to speculate , using taxpayers ' money , in order to generate soaring profits .
That is destroying people 's trust in the economic system .
It is destroying social cohesion .
The part of your programme that involves finally implementing the control of the financial markets is therefore an important element that we Socialists fully support .
( Applause )
The Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament will give its support to your Presidency , Mr Zapatero .
I believe that what you have presented here is an approach that brings genuine reason for hope .
I also hope that the Commission will act with the same intensity and the same political direction as your Presidency .
We will do whatever we can to put the Commission on the right path in the next six months and beyond , because we hope that , as a result of the 18-month long triple-shared presidencies , there will not be a completely different programme every six months , but that we will instead have continuity .
Therefore , over the next six and the subsequent twelve months of this trio of presidencies , you will be able to count on the support of the Socialists and Democrats .
So , I wish you good luck , Mr Zapatero .
( Applause )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have , in fact , two priorities for the Spanish Presidency .
I believe you also have , in fact , two priorities .
However many issues are raised to be solved in the coming six months , there are , we believe , two main issues .
First of all , there is the post-Lisbon EU 2020 Strategy .
I believe , in any case , that this name is more appropriate as , at the end of the day , the population had ceased to differentiate between the Treaty of Lisbon and the Lisbon strategies .
This is , therefore , already a major advance .
However we , in this House , have to be serious .
The fundamental question is not about knowing whether there is a desire to reduce unemployment or to increase spending on innovation .
We all agree on this .
We agreed in 2000 , we will agree in 2010 , and we will agree again in 2020 and 2030 .
No , the question concerns a different issue : in short , are the Council and the Member States ready to change the method that failed in the Lisbon Strategy ?
I am referring here to the open method of coordination , a wonderful expression , meaning that it is the Member States , not the Union , that decides , and that all that one does is compare results from the various Member States .
It is as if the Union has become the OECD .
That is the reality : publishing one document after another , after another .
( Applause )
Already , Mr President , your initial declarations have encouraged me greatly : ' yes , we are going to change ' , you say .
Things must change ; we need sticks , we need carrots .
Where needed , we must have sanctions .
Above all , though , do not let yourself be discouraged - I say this frankly , both to you and to Mr Moratinos - by the German Minister for Economic Affairs , who did not hesitate for one second to criticise your proposals .
It must be a good omen , though !
One cannot , on the one hand , say , for example , that Greece is not making enough effort , that other countries are not making enough effort and , at the same time , fail to provide the Commission and the European Union with the resources and the instruments that they need to intervene .
It is either one thing or the other .
One cannot have it both ways .
I encourage you therefore to continue on this path , and I can tell you that the whole of this Parliament supports you , together with the Commission , as you confront those who continue to dismiss the need to intensify this Lisbon method .
Well , as for my second priority , it is to attempt to find another strategy for the issue of climate change , post-Copenhagen .
We must acknowledge that our approach failed .
We must say it , we must recognise it .
There is no sense in saying ' yes , but we were right , it was the right method ' , and so on .
No , it was not the right method .
The strategy was bad , because the result is bad .
Therefore , the strategy has to change .
I myself suggest that we adopt a strategy based on three components .
The first of these components is for the European Union to appoint a climate change ' tsar ' with a mandate to negotiate on behalf of the 27 Member States , unlike what happened in Copenhagen , where we had the Danish Prime Minister , the Swedish Prime Minister , the President of the Commission , Mr Sarkozy , Mrs Merkel , yourself , Mr Brown .

That meant that there were at least eight European political leaders who wanted to negotiate .
There was not enough room around the table though !
There was scarcely room for Mr Obama even .
There was the South African , the Brazilian , the Indian , the Chinese , then Mr Obama , and on top of that , the eight Europeans .
How do you expect to agree a position and be heard by others in such circumstances ?
Let us do like the WTO then ; it works for the WTO .
There , there is someone who is in charge , who negotiates for the whole of the European Union , and who produces results .
We need the same thing at European level if we are to avoid a repeat of what happened in Copenhagen .
( Applause )
Moreover , we must , I believe , be realistic .
We must be realistic on this matter .
We need a trilateral agreement between the United States , Europe and China .
That must be the aim .
All of those strategies that consist of saying ' yes , we will see ' , which have no allies in the United Nations , will count for nothing in tomorrow 's world .
Tomorrow 's world is one of empires , and we must be an empire .
This means that we must be at the table .
With whom ?
With the United States and with China .
It is we three who need to reach an agreement ; let us not start dreaming about rallying I know not how many countries around a programme .
At the end of the day , we have to create an alliance with the United States .
It is with the United States that we must find common ground .
Such common ground can be found , in my view , in the emissions trading mechanism .
We have that , and they will follow us if we can reach an agreement on it .
That will give us common ground in order , together , to negotiate with the Chinese .
Those , Mr President , are my two major priorities for the Spanish Presidency , and I am convinced that , with his tenacity , Mr Rodríguez Zapatero will make this a very important and very effective Presidency .
( Applause )
Mr Rodríguez Zapatero , Mr Barroso , I would like first to reply to your remark about Haiti .

I remember that , in 2006 , a European commissioner by the name of Michel Barnier proposed the creation of a European social protection force , which was to have been known as EuropeAid .
This was during Mr Barroso 's Commission .
If we had had EuropeAid today , Europeans would already have a greater presence in Haiti .
Mr President , take up Michel Barnier 's proposal .
You see , I am no sectarian .
I would like now to turn to what you said about Europe 's future .
I would like to continue with another theme , which Mr Verhofstadt discussed .
You talk of growth , but what growth ?
What type of growth ?
Because one of the reasons for the crises , for the environmental crisis - because there are various crises and not just one - was growth in production , which was , at the same time , destructive .
Therefore if , at European level , we do not discuss the quality and content of growth , we will merely repeat the errors of the past .
That is already one issue for consideration .
The second issue we must deal with concerns what you said about growth and a pact , for example , against energy dependence .
One of the pillars of the fight against energy dependence is energy saving .
We in Europe must develop a major pact for European investment in energy saving .
The environment is about energy savings , it is about billions in investment and , at the same time , it is about creating jobs .
So do not forget : renewables , yes , but renewables with energy savings .
And on this matter , I ask that the European Union decides now , not to make 20 % , but rather 30 % in energy savings by 2020 .
We can do it , if we want to .
Now to the second issue ; you spoke about electric cars .
Very well !
However , there is another consideration .
Mobility is not just about cars .
There is a major project that could be developed in Europe .
You had Airbus , you have the TGVs .
Why not develop a major European tramways project ?
Throughout Europe , there is a need for renovation and modernisation of tramways , in central Europe , in the south , in Latin America , everywhere in fact .
This is a source of employment , and there is a part of the car industry that you will be unable to save .
In this way , you will be able to give it another mobility-related function .
A European tramways project is also a solution to the climate problems linked to traffic .
On a different note , you rightly spoke of education and the Bologna process .
Fine !
The problem with the Bologna process , though , is that it has been diverted from its original purpose .
Instead of making a Europe of equal higher education , higher education in Europe has been turned into school education , where universities are no longer places of research and reflection , but learning factories .
Curricula have been created that students are unable to follow .
If , therefore , you wish to pursue the Bologna process , we first need to take a step back and call into question all of the curricula which are linked to the Bologna process .
The response can be seen on the streets of university cities throughout Europe , where students are protesting not against the idea of a European education , but against the deterioration in higher education ostensibly in the name of a European idea .
I would like to end on your European social pact .
A European social pact and a social and environmental pact .
Bring the companies , bring the unions and bring the major environmental associations around a table .
Social protection will not work without environmental protection .
That is the new idea , and , for the Members on the right , this is one of the good ideas that Mr Sarkozy in France had ; it was called the Grenelle , or round table , on the environment .
I believe it is time to have a Brussels for the environment , bringing all of the social partners and the major representatives of the environmental organisations together around one table .
If you go down that path , we will be in agreement , and Europe is the solution .
As for the instruments , we shall have to develop them together .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I am happy at this crucial time in the work of the European Union that Spain takes on the Presidency of the Council .
Along with Greece and Portugal , Spain 's membership of the European Community was an early example of the way in which Europe could help encourage and support a new democracy - a path followed successfully by many others since 1989 .
Spanish Members from all parties have made important contributions to the work of this House , holding distinguished office in both Parliament and in our groups .
Their impact has been substantial and , in this context , I would like to pay particular tribute to our friend , Jaime Mayor Oreja , one of Parliament 's most influential personalities .
The Presidency starts at a critical time for the European Union and I wish it well , but I confess I have misgivings .
It stumbled in its first few days in office .
The suggestion that , rather than simply coordinating plans for economic development , the European Union should be able to establish compulsory economic policies with sanctions or corrective action against Member States who do not comply is deeply disturbing .
It reflects a very old-fashioned socialist command-and-control approach to economic policy which is not relevant to solving the problems of the 21st century .
Without interfering in the politics of Spain , there is a saying in the United Kingdom which suggests that you put your own house in order first .
Socialism does not do that .
What we do need are economic policies that respect the rights of our Member States , stimulate the sharing of best practice and focus on delivering EU added value ; policies which defend the benefits of the internal market and extend them further ; policies which provide a climate in which entrepreneurs and businesses can thrive in order to create jobs , raise our standard of living and contribute to a stronger society .
We in the ECR Group have high hopes of the Europe 2020 initiative as a framework for a sustainable , competitive European economy , and we have drafted our own additional proposals which we hope will help to take this debate forward .
I would like to touch on foreign policy .
I know that this has been given some prominence in the Presidency 's programme , but I must speak about one issue which is mentioned , but without enough emphasis in my view .
That issue is Iran .
Its illegitimate , brutal and dangerous government must be dealt with firmly .
If we are serious about nuclear non-proliferation , the Iranian Government must understand that , whilst Iran has the right to develop nuclear energy for peaceful purposes , it will not be allowed to deceive the world in pursuing its ambition of having nuclear weapons .
A regime which resorts to murder and violence to oppress its own people , a people cheated of a government of their choice , simply cannot be trusted , and we must take action .
The Spanish Presidency takes office with a full agenda .
Our group will judge its proposals and initiatives on their merits .
If it proposes progressive policies to stimulate economic growth , to deal with climate change , to strengthen individual freedom and responsibility , and to encourage cooperation on the world stage where we share common interests , all of these are areas where Europe can offer a benefit rather than impose a burden .
If it does that , then it will have our support .
Welcome , Mr Rodríguez Zapatero .
Unfortunately , my group feels that your programme does not resolve the fundamental problems .
In our view , the fundamental requirement of this Presidency would have been to rectify the current economic policy , through public intervention in the economy and , of course , by regulating the market through progressive fiscal policies .
The recession in Spain and in Europe , and the unemployment figures , the like of which have not been seen since the 1930s , are the consequence of not intervening in the market and not intervening in strategic production sectors , including the financial sector .
From this perspective , unfortunately , there is nothing new in your programme .
Income from employment is being punished and capital gains income is being favoured , because there is no harmonisation in fiscal policies and , as part of what is meant by the liberalisation of services , the European social model is being dismantled .
Articles 43 and 49 of the treaty protect a model that favours the market and the freedom of the market as opposed to workers ' rights and , as you are well aware , we already have European Court judgments legalising social dumping .
This is the actual reality .
Therefore , unfortunately this part of your programme , which for us is substantial , does not change or alter anything and does not introduce anything new .
In other words , it contradicts the slogan that you have used for the Spanish Presidency : ' Innovating Europe ' .
On this specific point , there is no innovation .
There is continuity , due to the election of Mr Barroso , which we opposed - although you , of course , gave him your support - and we think that this continuity is damaging to the European model .
On foreign policy , we do not agree that we need to increase military capacity .
The images of the disaster in Haiti where combat helicopters and marines are being deployed are damaging to us .
They are damaging !
This is not what is needed when there are disasters such as the one in Haiti .
We need civil protection .
We need doctors , architects and people to relieve the pain of the tragedy .
Finally , Mr Zapatero , the summit with Morocco .
We do not agree with the advanced status of Morocco while the Saharan people are not allowed to exercise their right to self-determination and they are permanently under persecution , I repeat , permanently under persecution from the Moroccan authorities .
We do not agree with this summit .
We believe that there should be a European summit regarding the right to self-determination of the Saharan people .
With regard to the State of Israel , we need to be much stricter in the Neighbourhood Policy and ensure that Article 2 of this Association Agreement as part of the Neighbourhood Policy is complied with , because Israel is systematically failing to comply with international law .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , thank you .
Mr Rodríguez Zapatero , I have listened with attention to your proposals for the Spanish Presidency , and I can only wish you luck .
I will now refer to a reality .
I represent the south-east of England , and many of my constituents - together with other European citizens - have been suffering urbanisation abuses on the Mediterranean coast and in other parts of Spain for a long time now .
Three reports have been adopted by this Parliament urging the Spanish authorities to take action but , other than the conviction of a few politicians and the passing of a new Land Law , no specific action has been taken to defend the people who are suffering prejudice .
The problems my constituents face range from the dramatic situation of Len and Helen Prior of Berkshire , who saw their house being demolished because the authorities said it was built in breach of coastal law , to cases like that of Doreen Snook , also from Berkshire , in Alicante , and Mr Lohmann in Lanzarote , who cannot actually live in the houses they have purchased because of the lack of proper infrastructure and services .
As a national of Spain , I am ashamed to see what is going on in my country .
I have big concerns for the future of the Spanish tourism business now that the press is writing about the bad fortune of these people .
( ES ) Mr Zapatero , I will now address you in your mother tongue , which is also my own .
The people affected are not people of great wealth , they are simply people who have used the fruits of their labours to buy a house in this country with its mild climate and good people , a place to live when they retire .
These people are unfairly having to pay fees to lawyers and other experts in order to defend themselves in the courts , without much chance of success .
The European Union has been convincing its population that it is there to maintain peace in Europe .
Is this situation I describe going to bring peace to Europe ?
You are telling us that you are going to get Europe out of the crisis .
If you cannot solve the problem I am referring to , how much credibility can you have in solving Europe 's financial crisis ?
Mr Zapatero , we want a solution now .
We want the people to be able to live in the houses they bought .
If this is not possible , they need to be granted a fair compensation that allows them to buy a similar property .
This Parliament has only threatened to block payments of subsidies to Spain , but I can assure you that , if this situation is not resolved during the Spanish Presidency , I will do everything I can to turn this threat into action .
( ES ) I am delighted to be in this very special forum with the President of the Spanish Government , someone whom I have valued very highly since the time when he was a strong law student .
I think that by chance , the rotating Presidency of the European Union has given my country the best possible opportunity to demonstrate once again that Spain wants to play a decisive role in Europe .
As the President said , joining Europe was a dream for the people of Spain during the long years of the dictatorship .
We are therefore especially happy to be here and we relish the experience , because we know , ladies and gentlemen , that this Union of Member States which we represent here is the only answer to the problems that the world faces , since traditional States are incapable of finding effective solutions .
It is very important for Europe to find its place by defining itself and defending the values that it created in the cradle of revolutions , in the books written by its brilliant minds , and in the cries of its peoples .
Those values are freedom , the rule of reason , laicism and solidarity .
I therefore know , Mr President , that you want to make the most of this opportunity to put the Treaty of Lisbon into practice .
I agree with the objectives that you have proposed , although some of them are vague and also do not manage to distinguish matters which are incidental from those which are fundamental .
One of the objectives , which concerns climate change , makes me think that the European policy implemented by the Commission is the right one , even though it failed in Copenhagen .
What is important is that the waste of so many nations has to stop , because billions of earth 's inhabitants should not have to suffer the consequences of the selfishness of rich societies .
I would also place more emphasis on defending human rights in the world .
When the European Union is accused of being a bureaucratic organisation with no soul , people forget that its soul is our Charter of Fundamental Rights .
In this respect , I believe that the Spanish Presidency should involve itself in the following matters : it should not hold the Morocco Summit until Morocco commits to complying with the resolutions made regarding the Sahara by the United Nations , a body that you have invoked on other occasions .
In Cuba and Iran , you should promote joint action for the recognition of the organisations that oppose the governments , in line with the debate that took place here yesterday .
If rights are our soul , the soul of Europe , I will venture to remind you that you place a great emphasis , as you rightly said in your speech , on the backbone of Europe being a common energy policy .
Without this , everything is held back and even international policy runs the risk of evaporating like smoke .
Finally , I would like to remind you not to forget your commitment to giving the cities of Ceuta and Melilla status similar to that of the most remote regions .
I will conclude : esteemed President Zapatero , my dear friend José Luis , I wish you every success for the good of this strong , federal Europe in which we both believe .
Mr President , I would first of all like to express my thanks for the tone and content of the speeches that have been made on behalf of the various parliamentary groups this morning .
I will talk about the most important matters , starting with Mr Daul .
Thank you for your words regarding this positive drive for economic governance , the common economic policy .
You raised the question as to what is the objective of such economic governance , of such an economic policy , or , if you will pardon the expression , offered an ideological foray into the possible postulates of a social democratic idea or project .
In particular , I heard you express your reticence regarding indiscriminate increases in public spending and your preference for an environment that is favourable to enterprises .
I would like to clarify something .
It has little to do with my speech , but a great deal to do with my political convictions .
I am a strong supporter of the Stability Pact .
I am a strong supporter of fiscal balance throughout the cycle .
This is so much the case that in its first four years , before the economic and financial crisis , the government of which I was and still am the President had a surplus in its public accounts and decreased its deficit to 32 % of GDP .
I am therefore a convert .
Deficit and surplus are tools , depending on the economic cycle .
Now I , like the majority of European governments , have been in favour of responding with a fiscal stimulus that results in a public deficit , and public spending has increased slightly because private investment slowed down .
This is not an ideological problem .
It is a problem of reality .
The financial crisis meant that private investment and private credit froze and was halted .
It seems reasonable that the only way to compensate in some way for this slowdown in the economy was through public stimulus .
This needs to be corrected , as far as circumstances allow , and we need to return to the Stability Pact .
Like other countries , my country is going to have , and in fact it does have , a large public deficit .
I can also assure you , however , that my country is going to fulfil its commitment to the Commission for 2013 and return to the path of stability implied by a 3 % deficit .
In order to achieve this , as the Commission knows , we have an austerity plan , a strict fiscal consolidation plan .
It is strict in terms of our public accounts , and we will put it into practice .
I agree that we need to create an environment that is favourable to enterprises , economic activity , initiative and competition .
In fact , in my speech , I strongly advocated a common energy market and a European digital market .
This means nothing more than promoting economic freedom , initiative and trade between Europeans in the field of energy and promoting competition because it reduces prices and promotes technological innovation .
In the digital field , which I have focused on a great deal here today , we are largely betting on the future , insofar as we promote e-commerce and the transfer of all the products being generated currently in communication technologies , which represent a growing percentage of gross domestic product .
Our proposal , and our plan , therefore , is for the 2020 Strategy to favour a Europe without trade barriers , to favour competition , innovation and an entrepreneurial environment in Europe .
What governments also need to do , as far as possible , is not to correct the environments behind business activity , but they do need to intervene in order to correct the environments that have favoured speculation , either financial speculation or property speculation .
This is something different .
Sometimes , due to particular ideas , speculation is promoted , intentionally or unintentionally , in the financial field or the property field .
Spain has been a victim of this , as have some citizens , not only British citizens .
This is the will of the government , within its scope of competence .
You should be aware that in Spain , there is a distribution of competence , which lies not only with the central government , but also with the autonomous communities and the councils .
There are , of course , laws and judicial proceedings , but I am very aware of what you have said , and we will therefore act .
Therefore : an economic environment that is favourable to business activity , initiative and innovation , but which is not favourable to financial and property speculation .
Of course , I am in favour of reasonable fiscal pressure , and I do not represent any opposing model , because while I have been in government , I have reduced tax on businesses , income tax on workers and personal taxation .
I am in favour , on the basis of an interventionist perspective , of what is represented by its philosophy on taxation and the fiscal position .
Finally , I want to say to Mr Daul that I note the position of his group , which is the majority group in this House , regarding the role of the President of the Council - the permanent President - and of Parliament .
I think this is an important matter .
I am in favour of all the European institutions , the great European institutions , having a fluid relationship with Parliament .
Of course , insofar as we want to make Europe bigger , we need to move towards a more powerful Parliament .
That is my opinion .
Mr Schulz , thank you for your words .
I am convinced that the principles of the European Union have a great deal to do with the principles of social democracy , and that social democracy has been a major lever behind the construction of the European idea and European ideals .
I would like to affirm - despite the force of other ideas , which have had many problems in terms of application - our commitment to a vision of social cohesion , a vision in which it is essential for democracy to be social in nature .
Mr Verhofstadt , I am extremely grateful for your words .
I agree with practically everything you said .
With regard to coordination and the failure of Lisbon , open coordination failed .
We are aware of this .
We revised it in 2004 , and now either we take it seriously or , in 2020 , we will once again be saying that it did not work .
Government requires a Community method .
I do not know why some of you are surprised by the words ' sanctions ' or ' requirements ' .
There are many decisions in the workings of the European Union that involve sanctions .
If directives are not complied with , if the Stability Pact is not complied with , it is natural that there should be sanctions .
Also , it works .
What Parliament needs to be clear about , because the European Union needs to be clear about it , is that the things that we have done together are producing good results .
These are things such as the euro , the Stability Pact and the internal market , which needs to be developed and deepened , because it is one of the major levers for growth and competitiveness .
I completely agree with what you proposed regarding Copenhagen and the subsequent strategy , the new strategy .
I think that it is an interesting initiative for there to be a High Authority for this issue , and it is true that Copenhagen did not produce the results that we would have wanted .
It is true that Europe held a positive position , but that was not the result .
Mr Meyer , with all due respect , there are some things that we do not agree on .
Of course , aside from the fact that the European Union does not have competence , for example , in fiscal policy , I did not present a conservative programme , but rather a programme of reforms .
It is , above all , a programme to save time in the future , to anticipate the future , which , in my view , is the best way to move forward with a progressive programme .
A progressive programme is one which sees changes , one which anticipates them and is capable of innovating .
I hope and trust that the European Union will keep in step with this .
I respect your position on Morocco , but I do not share it .
North Africa , especially Morocco , is of strategic importance to the European Union .
Let us ensure that its modernisation process moves forward through dialogue and cooperation , and let us leave the arbitration of the Sahara conflict to the right body , which is the United Nations , which is taking steps which Spain naturally supports and respects .
Regarding Haiti , it is true that we frequently see helicopters or fighter planes promoting conflicts and bombarding areas of the planet , and they have a difficult place in our conscience .
It is often difficult for our conscience and our convictions , but I must say that for me personally , seeing helicopters and marines bringing food , bringing order and saving lives is something worthy of applause .
( Applause )
For me personally , it is something worthy of applause .
If Europe does have a rapid action force , as I hope we shall , I would be in support of Mr Barnier 's proposal .
As has been said here , it will have to have civil and military components , to enable us to take effective action in the shortest possible time , with the resources that we have available .
I have taken note of your suggestions , Mrs Andreasen .
Of course , I would like to confirm to the representative of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance that I agree with many of the suggestions that you made in your speech .
In the whole of my speech , I talked about sustainable growth , environmentally sustainable growth .
I agree with you that the electric vehicle is , or should be , something that promotes another mode of transport .
I note your suggestion that in the Social Pact , the dimension of environmental sustainability should be an essential dimension , and I do , of course , have a deeply-held conviction that the future of innovation , competitiveness and productivity lies in the so-called ' green economy ' .
It also lies in the potential of communication technologies and , of course , in a common or single vision of energy , as Mr Sosa Wagner said , as this is central to the future of the European Union 's existence .

Mr Kirkhope , I agree with what you said about the relevance of the personality of my compatriot , Mr Mayor Oreja , but I do not agree with you that there was any suggestion whatsoever of more control or of more centralisation in what is represented by the ideas , the initiatives and the political proposal that I put forward in this House .
No , it is a political initiative so that the internal market might be bigger and cover more fields , and for there to be more competitiveness and more innovation .
It is for us to join forces .
Joining forces does not mean controlling , uniting does not mean leading .
On the contrary , joining forces is more democratic , uniting promotes cooperation .
What I think would be even more negative would be for us to continue operating 27 small , centralised control systems since , in a globalised world , this would mean that the players competing with us that have internal markets and common policies , such as the United States , China and India , would have us at a disadvantage .
We will see that , in a very short space of time , if we do not make this major change as Europeans , and implement this new , more Community-oriented economic policy , India or China will catch up with us in terms of production and innovation .
No , we have no interest - if you will allow me to say so , with all due respect - no interest in control or interventionism .
That is not what we are debating .
When we talk about 2020 and government , we are talking about our collective capacities , the sum of the synergies represented by 500 million citizens on a continent that has succeeded in generating and launching the industrial revolution , the best use of energy and the greatest scientific advances .
If all these forces are joined , we will have the capacity to play a leading role , to maintain our economic model , our prosperity model and our welfare model .
These are the objectives .
Of course - I completely agree - I believe that the European Union has a clear position regarding Iran .
Iran must comply with international rules and the international community - and , of course , the European Union needs to assert the requirement for Iran to comply with international rules regarding nuclear proliferation .
I share your concern and your feelings on this subject .
Mr Sosa Wagner , I am happy to be here with you in this forum , in this great institution , at this time and in this debate .
I have taken note of your suggestions .
I fully agree with what you said about energy , which was largely the focus of my speech .
It is largely energy that is going to define the European Union 's capacity to be a great continent , both politically and economically .
Undoubtedly , insofar as we have more energy interconnections and less energy dependency , we will be stronger economically and politically .
As we are well aware , energy has determined the course of history .
It has determined how certain powers have dominated other countries .
This has been through the control and use of energy but , of course , now it is also about saving energy .
The European Union promotes a policy , just as it will continue to promote for the next six months , of defending fundamental rights .
It does so intelligently and by seeking to ensure progress is made where we have the expectation and the hope that it is possible .
It does so where we feel that offering our hand is better than closing the door .
We will therefore maintain the summit with our neighbour , Morocco .
We will , at all times , promote the defence of human rights .
All in all , Mr President , I am extremely grateful for what has been said by all the spokespeople for the different parliamentary groups .
I would like to express my respect for all their positions .
I am taking note of the more direct , specific issues that have been raised in relation to my country , which I represent with the utmost pride given what we have achieved in the 25 years during which we have been part of the European Union .
I also represent my country with the utmost humility , because we are here to share , and I think that the best way of sharing is to come with humility , to come prepared to unite , to join together and to defend the great ideal of the European Union together .
( Applause )
Mr President , I believe that there has been general consensus on the priorities of the Spanish Presidency of the Council , with , of course , some nuances depending on the stance of the various political groups , but there is one issue which has figured in several speeches and to which I wish to refer , namely the question of European coordination , or consistency , whether it be in our response to natural disasters outside Europe , or in our response within the framework of external relations , for example post-Copenhagen , or in relation to economic policy .
And on that matter , I believe that we have a solution , which is to apply the Treaty of Lisbon .
We do not have to go very far .
As for our response to humanitarian crises , we have the famous Barnier report , which has already been mentioned today .
This is a report that I and the rotating Presidency at the time , the Austrian Presidency , requested from your fellow Member of Parliament and my good friend , Michel Barnier .
He was not a commissioner at that time , and it was on my own initiative that I asked him to draft this report .
We received this report , which had my support and that of the then Presidency of the Council .
Thereafter , it was not applied because the Council did not wish to apply it ; let us be clear on that .
This is why we must do more on the issue of consistency in the European Union 's external humanitarian action .
Now , I believe that the answer lies in the Treaty of Lisbon .
We have a High Representative who is the Vice-President of the Commission and , at the same time , Chair of the Council of Foreign Affairs Ministers .
This is why , in the new Commission , I have created a new ' International Cooperation , Humanitarian Aid and Crisis Response ' portfolio .
This will be a commissioner , in this case , probably a female commissioner , for whom this will be the first task and who will need to work in tandem with the High Representative and with the Council so that we may , one day , I trust , have a true external service , but also competences in the area of crisis response and civil protection .
That is all on the first question .
The second question concerns international negotiations , for example , in the wake of Copenhagen .
Here again , I have to read out the Treaty of Lisbon , because I believe many people have not read it .
Article 17 : ' With the exception of the common foreign and security policy , and other cases provided for in the treaties , it shall ensure the Union 's external representation ' .
It is henceforth the Commission that represents the Union in foreign affairs , not the European Council .
Without doubt , there will be Heads of State or Government who will represent their own countries .
Who , though , represents the Union in foreign affairs , except for the CFSP ?
The Commission .
This is why I created a climate agenda portfolio and thus hope that the commissioner , in this case , a female commissioner , will , in future , have all the support required to represent the Union in the post-Copenhagen negotiations .
Let us be clear on this point too .
The third question concerns economic policy .
Here , too , the Treaty of Lisbon has to be read .
There are those who think that economic policy is a purely national matter .
That is not the case .
Article 120 : ' The Member States regard their economic policies as a matter of common interest and coordinate them in the Council ' .
Article 121 ( 2 ) : ' The Council shall , on a recommendation from the Commission , formulate a draft for the broad guidelines of the economic policies of the Member States and of the Union , and shall report its findings to the European Council ' , and , further on - you have to read the full article - ' In order to ensure closer coordination of economic policies and sustained convergence of the economic performances of the Member States , the Council shall , on the basis of reports submitted by the Commission , monitor economic developments in each of the Member States and in the Union ' .
There is , therefore , joint monitoring .
Beyond that , and this is something new in the Treaty of Lisbon , the Commission may now make concrete recommendations , especially , and I quote : ' Where it is established that the policies of a Member State are not consistent with the broad guidelines or that they risk jeopardising the proper functioning of economic and monetary union , the Commission may address a warning to the Member State concerned ' .
And further on : ' The Council , on a recommendation from the Commission , may address the necessary recommendations to the Member State concerned ' .
This is very interesting , though , because Parliament , too , will have powers in this context : ' The President of the Council and the Commission shall report to the European Parliament on the results of multilateral surveillance ' .
In other words , henceforth , we have the mechanisms in the Treaty of Lisbon - there is no need to invent anything new ...
( Comment made off-microphone )
No , yes , of course , I have already done it .
I do not need to have your support to say it ...
And the truth is that we have , in the Treaty of Lisbon , if we truly wish to apply it , the instruments that we need to guarantee coordination and consistency , with no need for political or ideological divisions on this issue .
This is my point - and this is why I must stress it here today : this is the first time that we have had a new rotating Presidency of the Council at the European Parliament .
The Spanish Presidency has a great responsibility .
This is the first time since the Treaty of Lisbon came into force that we have had a rotating Presidency .
Furthermore , as Mr Zapatero has said - and he has my full confidence because of his commitment to Europe - I believe that we have a responsibility to apply the treaty in both letter and spirit .
Both the letter and the spirit of the Treaty of Lisbon are very clear .
A stronger Europe !
A stronger Europe , not for the sake of the institutions , but so that the institutions are better able to serve the real interests of our citizens .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Barroso .
We have all read the Treaty of Lisbon , and we know it does not say everything .
This is why it is so important that , working together , we establish an interpretation of what the Treaty of Lisbon does say , and that , together , we plan our work in the European Union for many years to come .
( ES ) Mr President of the Spanish Government , I would like to say to you that we are not living in just another period , we are not living in just any moment in and for the European Union .
What you and Chair Daul said is true : the European Union and the European people know that their main concern is the crisis .
It also needs to be pointed out here today , however , that before the economic crisis , in various elections in which there was a low turnout , Europeans were also showing signs of a growing disinterest and distance from the European institutions .
Therefore , the crisis of values has manifested itself before and also during the European integration project .
I want to say this to you because , in view of the obvious impetus which will be provided by the Treaty of Lisbon , we have our first opportunity to reduce this rift between the European people and the European institutions .
We are therefore living - or at least we should be living - in a period of transition and of change , which you referred to .
I would like to say , however , that the first challenge that we have ahead of us is to be able to find the turning point in the process of Europeans becoming distanced from European policy .
Transitions are always an opportunity .
They are also a risk , but I obviously encourage you to have a small number of clear ideas that can always be communicated to all Europeans .
I would therefore like to say that a change in attitude in all the European institutions , in all of us and in the national governments and parliaments , in politicians , is undoubtedly much more important than the Treaty of Lisbon itself .
It is not enough for the Treaty of Lisbon to enter into force in order for us to be able to talk about transition and change in the European Union and ambition in the European project .
I therefore want to say to you that the prime ambition is for Europeans to understand us better , as they do not understand us .
Our language is unintelligible and , at times , incomprehensible , and we therefore have to know how to say that this is a problem in itself and a challenge in itself , so that we can move closer to the European people .
We need to devote much more time , much more political energy and much more political impetus to ensuring that Europeans can understand us .
Ladies and gentlemen , due to the Treaty of Lisbon , all the presidencies are going to be distinct , different and more demanding , and they are going to demand more sacrifice and more generosity from us than ever .
I therefore would like to say that I am very pleased to say here today that the Spanish Partido Popular has supported the objectives of the Spanish Government in the European Presidency at such an important time for the European Union .
What we need to do now is to apply them in the right way .
I am going to tell you how the Spanish Presidency should not be measured .
It is not going to be measured by the number of meetings that we hold .
The measure of a good Presidency is not conventional speeches or great words , or common places .
It will be measured by the results , the realities , our capacity to change our attitude - in all the European institutions - and our capacity to prioritise the real problems that Europeans have .
This will be the only way that we will truly move closer to all Europeans .
( Applause )
( ES ) On behalf of the Socialist delegation in this European Parliament , which , as you said , is the European parliament with the most extensive representation and democratically the strongest in the whole history of the European Union , I would like to join in extending an extremely warm welcome to the Spanish President of the European Union , and express my best wishes for success at such a crucial time .
It is a crucial time owing to the entry into force , finally , of the Treaty of Lisbon .
It is also crucial given the launch of the new institutions : the new Commission , the permanent President of the Council and the High Representative of the European Union .
Above all , however , it is crucial because it gives us an opportunity to do what needs to be done by means of the Treaty of Lisbon and the new institutions , which is to respond to the most serious and most severe crisis that we have seen for 80 years , which has had a serious economic , financial but also social impact .
For 10 years , European citizens have been watching an institutional debate , and on 7 June , citizens elected this Parliament , which represents 500 million people .
Those people are watching us , they have expectations of us and they are demanding answers from us .
They want coordination and monitoring where there was a lack of governance and , in response to a lack of transparency and greed , they want the ethics of responsibility to be restored .
What they therefore want is for us to emerge from the crisis and to emerge better , but true to our model .
I therefore believe that the Spanish Presidency is right to start by reaffirming values : the importance of equality .
The European Union is built on equality , equality before the law , but also equality as the backbone of the social model , combating exclusion and discrimination , protecting the weakest in society , a commitment to combating gender violence and to the European protection order .
It is also built on quality as a lever for the future in innovation , education and training , which have always been a way of opening up new opportunities for those who do not currently have them .
In addition to this , the Presidency is right in terms of content , and it has referred to the importance of the 2020 Strategy , which recognises that the Lisbon Strategy did not work , and therefore we are not happy or satisfied and that we need to commit to more innovation and better energy sources .
There is also the European External Action Service , to make a difference in Haiti , and the action plan for the area of freedom , security and justice .
If you will allow me , I would like to say that it is also right in its attitude and in having the courage to promote change in the face of national prejudices and in the face of the decline or the resignation ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

( ES ) President of the rotating Presidency , Mr Zapatero , I sincerely wish you luck and success , as this will be good for Europe and for its citizens .
The crisis necessitates global thinking and local action , but you need to join forces with everyone .
Make use of successful local and regional models , those based on the real economy , collaboration between the public and private sectors and proximity to the people .
Include the regions , build decision-making processes with them .
This also means applying the Treaty of Lisbon , which gives them a role for the first time .
Your programme forgets the regions and does not clarify how the subsidiarity protocol will be applied .
Take risks , innovate , but earn some credibility , because no one here believes what you say after Spain reduced its budgets for innovation .
I am pleased that you back equality between men and women , but your programme is written in a masculine form , the language does not even address the perspective of gender .
Does this not seem a bad symptom ?
As far as the Basque Country is concerned , work for peace , give support to the productive economy , push forward the Basque high speed train , and integrate our fiscal system , our police and our language into the European institutions .
Europe will be built by bringing together people , knowledge , will and political reality .
That means Parliament , to which , if I may say , you have brought your programme and timetable poorly and too late , and which merits a level of respect which I have not seen , even at the Official Opening on 8 January .
( ES ) Prime Minister , welcome .
I fear , however , that your Presidency runs the risk of being regarded as a political crocodile , that is to say , with a big mouth , expressing big ideas , but which ultimately has no ears to listen with .
Nothing would please me more , I promise you , than to be able to congratulate you in six months time for having put in place measures which enable us to emerge from the crisis - something which effectively implies greater and better economic government - and for having reorganised the European Union from a social , ecological and democratic point of view .
However , today I must confess my concern about the fact that in the Presidency Programme , the aims for stimulation plans , for example , are uncertain and references to economic government of the Union are marginal .
Furthermore , in order to tackle a real fiscal reform , which includes European resources in order to form social policy and which clearly has a green , ecological dimension , we need to make it very clear that those who pollute must pay , and that this also applies to those who behave in a fraudulent and irresponsible manner , whether they are a bank , a multinational or a tax evader .
However , I also see timidity in your proposals and too many concessions to those who shamelessly mortgage our social and environmental present and future .
Nevertheless , it is certain that there are many summits planned during your Presidency , be they with Latin America or the Mediterranean , but I also wish to show my concern on two aspects .
The first is your decision to revise universal jurisdiction , since this weakens us when faced with genocide and universal criminals , whether they be in Israel , China or Guatemala , and the second is where , in cases such as the Sahara or Columbia , for example , among many others , trade agreements take precedence over the defence of human rights .
I wish to finish , however , by congratulating you and giving you my support on one particular matter , that of equality between men and women .
Yes , there , I give you credibility , there , I see potential , there , I believe you can do fundamental work , because you have earned it in many areas .
I hope and I trust - and you will have the support of this Chamber in continuing to do so - that you continue to set an example to many other countries which are very behind in this respect .
( PL ) Mr President , Mr Rodríguez Zapatero , your country has taken over the Presidency at an exceptionally difficult time - the last , I hope , phase of the worst economic crisis to hit our continent for 80 years .
Therefore , it is fully understandable that you have made returning to a path of economic development and the fight against unemployment your main priorities for the next six months .
However , if you are talking about a growth in competitiveness of the European economy , we must remember that this cannot be achieved without reform of the economy and without completion , for example , of building the common market , or without fighting against the revival , for example in France , of economic nationalism .
I am glad that the matter of energy security has also been included in Spain 's priorities .
Mr Zapatero , I come from Poland , which understands better than most countries the need to diversify the supply of materials used for power generation , and that means diversification of the sources of supply and not only the channels of distribution , as lobbyists working for the Russian firm Gazprom are trying to convince us .
I hope that in six months ' time , you will be able to show some real successes in this area , too .
Finally , the matter of EU enlargement , which Mr Moratinos rightly recognised recently as a matter of fundamental importance .
We are debating , today , at a moment when our important neighbour , Ukraine , which is also an important neighbour from the point of view of energy security , has just passed its next examination in democracy .
I hope that in six months ' time , we will be able to say that Ukraine is closer to membership of the European Union .
( EL ) Mr President , the Spanish Presidency , in describing the priorities for consumers , devotes a total of two lines to the governance programme .
That is illustrative of the importance which it ascribes to consumer protection .
We therefore wonder what the Presidency is intending to do about the rights of its citizens .
Does it intend to safeguard them by revising the proposed full harmonisation downwards or to restrict the commitments announced ?
The lack of vision in the social sector is not limited solely to consumers .
Unemployment as a consequence of the recent crisis is hitting citizens of the Union hard and they are waiting for action to be taken .
Young people in particular are in a quagmire .
In response , the Presidency is promoting the employability of young people through apprenticeship schemes , thereby exacerbating their exploitation and the excessive profits of undertakings .
We call on the Spanish Presidency to revise its programme so as to safeguard permanent jobs for its citizens .
( LT ) I also hope that the Spanish Presidency will be a success and that , in addition to the priorities laid out , Spain will also devote attention to a problem that is particularly relevant these days , that of human rights and freedoms .
Following an investigation carried out by the Lithuanian Parliament into CIA prisons , it came to light that in another state , a European state , the infrastructure had been established for the illegal imprisonment of people .
The European Union and the United States of America are like two cornerstones of global politics and economics , allies and partners enjoying equal rights , but this does not mean that CIA agents are entitled to play the master in sovereign states in our own backyard .
I think that the European Parliament should renew its investigation into the illegal rendition of people and their imprisonment in European states .
The conclusions of this investigation should crown a document obliging Member States to ensure the rights and freedoms of every citizen without condition .
( NL ) The Spanish Presidency 's statements on immigration policy , and border controls in particular , blow hot and cold very curiously .
In particular , Spain 's creed that such matters should be regulated at European level rings very hollow in view of the country 's recent mass legalisation of illegal immigrants ; of which the - shall we say - more northerly European countries , too , will soon pay the price without ever having a say in the matter .
It also struck me that the Spanish Presidency is continuing to advocate an active immigration policy at a time of very serious economic crisis , when no one knows how many million Europeans are unemployed .
What we really need is to close our borders , put a real stop to immigration and , of course , provide economic support to countries that need it .
The further large-scale immigration you are advocating can only lead to large-scale problems .
( DE ) Mr President , Mr Rodríguez Zapatero , I must compliment you on your eloquence .
However , what do you really have to say ?
What is your message to us ?
What is the substance of what you said ?
I have heard many speeches - you are the 32nd Head of Government that I have witnessed - but I have rarely heard anything so non-committal in content .
In view of the crisis , the forthcoming summit , the necessary stringency of financial market regulation and the fact that the Council has left the Commission to its own devices over the last few months , where is your strategy ?
Mr Schulz must have been in a different room if he is recommending that we adopt your Spanish Government model here .
I would like to make one thing clear : Europe cannot afford a 20 % unemployment rate .
What is so good about this Spanish model then ?
How have you responded to the crisis ?
How can you coordinate things here ?
We call for your leadership .
Then we will support you .
However , what can we do with something so non-committal ?
Of course we are opposed to marital violence , who would not be ?
Your only concrete proposal was the electric car - and with the crisis and the summit in mind - is that all you can come up with , Mr Zapatero ?
I am also amazed by the fact that the President of the Commission had to read the Treaty to you with regard to economic policy coordination , and you listened very attentively because it was clearly the first time that you had heard it !
All I can say to you is that you should follow the recommendations of your fellow party member , Mr Almunia .
He resisted the opposition of the Council to the Stability and Growth Pact .
He is the example you should follow .
Help him to secure the Stability and Growth Pact .
Help him to do this and you will have us on your side .
However , with this non-committal pie-in-the-sky approach , we will not make any headway in Europe .

( DE ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I do not think that Mr Langen was listening very closely , because otherwise he would have heard a clear modernisation strategy and a social pact mentioned .
I am not surprised that you did not hear the social pact mentioned , because it is an important part of this strategy .
Mr Zapatero most definitely mentioned unemployment , including unemployment in his own country .
Unemployment as a whole is something that worries us .
However , he is not the one responsible for this ; it is those who , in the last few years , have pursued a policy of maximum deregulation who are responsible .
Those in your ranks who played their part in causing this bear the responsibility .
This social pact is needed now in particular , because we know - and this is the point on which you are right , although only partly - that we must consolidate the budgets .
However , we also know that this must not be at the expense of the vulnerable members of society , as there are currently many - you only need to read today 's newspapers - who , for example , do not have unemployment insurance .
It is not only a tragic fate for these individuals , it is also something that affects economic growth , because we know very well that people in the lower levels of society tend to cut their consumer cloth accordingly , and one of the reasons that economic development and economic growth is at risk is because there is not enough consumer spending .
If we do not protect the vulnerable members of society by means of a social pact , it will not only be humanity that we will be failing , but we will also have failed to bring about economic development .
Therefore , this social pact is very important .
Mr Zapatero , with regard to the social pact in particular , you have our full support .

( ES ) Mr Rodríguez Zapatero , last September , the Commissioner , Joaquín Almunia , appeared in Parliament before the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
After reporting on the recovery of German exports and the growth in French consumption , Mr Almunia said that the crisis would be much longer and deeper in Spain .
In fact , the European Commission foresaw a continued increase in unemployment and a large deterioration in public finances for Spain in the next few years , and this year it is very probable that we will see a reduction in bank credit for families and businesses .
I asked Commissioner Almunia in September why Europe was already recovering and why Spain would continue to fall into the mire and he replied literally ' because the Spanish Government is not carrying out the reforms that you and I agree on ' .
The crisis is global , but the solutions are local .
Many European countries quickly acknowledged the crisis , acted quickly and are already recovering .
You have wasted two years and are still not providing concrete solutions .
Mr Zapatero , you have broken the fine tradition of the PSOE in Europe .
Felipe González had the European social-democrat reformists as a reference point , but you are much nearer to revolutionary South American populist policies .
Reforms help nations to progress more than revolutions and Europe is a model of good practice in this regard .
Come here with humility and learn , do not seek to lecture .
Two specific questions : when will we be able to speak Catalan in this Chamber ?
And , finally , when will the Spanish state revoke the international treaties which prohibit flights from twenty three countries into Barcelona airport ?
( ES ) Hello , Mr Rodríguez Zapatero .
A couple of years ago , you assured us that Spain had exceeded Italy 's per capita production and that it would soon surpass that of France .
However , at present , according to international rating agencies , Spain heads the European Union poverty index , with 20 % unemployment and a deficit of EUR 78 billion .
What has happened , Mr Zapatero ?
Will your economic prescriptions for Europe be the same as those you have applied in Spain ?
Furthermore , this deficit has not been used to build extensive communication infrastructures .
When will we , the citizens of Europe , benefit from a rail freight axis uniting the north and south of the continent which passes along the Mediterranean coast ?
It is a deficit that has not been used to propel change in the productive model , either .
How can we Europeans have confidence in your will to implement the European Digital Agenda when you have just halved the budget for research .
Finally , in contrast to your fellow European members represented here , Spain still refuses to recognise Kosovo .
For how long will you continue to take advantage of the international community 's patience , refusing to accept referenda on self-determination as the democratic expression of the will of the people ?
( ES ) It is quite significant , and also symbolic , that the Prime Minister of a country which now has the highest rate of unemployment in the European Union should be speaking about the importance of creating employment .
For this reason , I would like to ask the Prime Minister of the Spanish Government what , specifically , are the most important measures to achieve the objective of reducing unemployment , not just in Spain , but also in Europe .
The Spanish Government 's programme is extremely ambitious .
It wishes to adopt a new strategy of growth and employment .
At the same time , it is forgetting the Community Lisbon Programme , which had forecast the transformation of Europe into the most competitive region in the world .
How can one envisage a new strategy and prepare it within a month , without first analysing the reasons for the failure of the previous programme ?
( PT ) Mr President , this period should herald a sea change in European Union policies and priorities .
Unemployment has reached alarming levels , with more than 24 million unemployed and an increase of over 5 million in the last year alone , a situation that has also exacerbated poverty , which now affects more than 80 million people .
We need a social development and progress pact that aims at production , particularly in the fields of agriculture and industry , at employment with rights and social inclusion , instead of coming back to insist upon the Stability Pact , with its liberalisations and neoliberal diktats , as the President of the Council has done .
As we have already seen , they were the ones who contributed to the rise in inequality , to the prioritisation of greater profits and gains for the main economic and financial players .
At the same time , an average of more than 21 % of young people cannot find a job in the European Union , one in five children lives in poverty and discrimination against women is on the rise once again .
In view of all this , the challenge now is to make a break with these current policies ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , according to the Eurobarometer indicators , Spain has the fourth highest percentage of people - 21 % - who live on the poverty line , after Latvia , Romania and Bulgaria .
Under these circumstances , and with the data that has been brought to light on several occasions , not least regarding unemployment , what kind of immigration policy does the Spanish Presidency propose ?
The Spanish Presidency says it wishes to increase immigration .
At present , all this appears to me to be clearly contradictory .
From Madrid 's point of view , why does Spain and why do European countries - Spain is not the only one to have this unemployment situation - need to import a new workforce ?
Do we want new immigrants who have no homes or jobs ?
Do we want to increase this already worrying number of people who are living on the poverty line ?
I believe that we must focus , instead , on a fundamental objective in the field of immigration , that of integrating the immigrants that we already have in our country and stopping ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , welcome , Mr Rodríguez Zapatero .
I confess that as a dyed-in-the-wool conservative , I had prepared myself for this debate as if it were a bullfight ; however , you have spoken of equality and human rights in such a way that I can now recognise what unites us , not what divides us .
You have been a cautious matador ; I will be a cautious bull and I will remain in my enclosure .
However , please allow me to return to two extremely tiresome questions on the contribution that you can make to the interpretation of the Treaty of Lisbon 's implementation .
You have laid down in your country various policies based on the principle of subsidiarity , thus supporting the identity-related demands of many communities , from the Catalans to the Basques , from the Valencians to the Galicians , and not without controversy .
How do you now intend to defend the principle of subsidiarity in the relationship between the Member States and the European Union , in other words , the Member States ' request to have their own traditions , their own identities , their own values recognised , so that the founding principle of the European Union - ' United in diversity ' - is affirmed ?
My second question concerns the role of the High Representative for Foreign Affairs : after Lisbon , who among yourself , President Van Rompuy and President Barroso , is responsible for explaining to Baroness Ashton that perhaps after 12 days , it is time to get on an aeroplane and fly to Haiti ?
That it is time that the European Union 's foreign policy had not only a budget but also a face and a human capacity to support , just as the other leaders of international organisations have done ?
Unless , of course , we are confusing Haiti with Tahiti .
Mr President , the Spanish Presidency is the first to take place under the new Lisbon Treaty .
Here is the first challenge .
We have the treaty , but we need its proper enhancement and even more than that .
The European Social Pact and European economic governance might be part of this ' more ' , but all these parts require more European financial resources and harmonisation of Member State tax policies .
Unfortunately , such endeavours have always been undermined by national governments .
I hope that the Spanish Presidency will be able to bring them together more than in the past .
The Spanish Presidency should cope with the two main contradictions of the European Union : the contradiction between pan-European needs and European national egoists , and the contradiction between the level of development in the western territories of the Union and that in the eastern territories , with their consequences in terms of political sensitivity .
There is a political sensitivity which is different in the two parts .
There is a sense of the need for more Europe , which is slightly different in the two parts following social and economic cleavages .
I hope that the Spanish Presidency will be able to cope with this .
These really are challenges which again require more common resources and better political coherence .
I therefore think that we not only need to read the Treaty , which is very right and gives us possibilities for more coherence , but also to provide ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

( DE ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Spain is now taking on the Presidency of the European Union for the fourth time .
You know what it is to cooperate with the European Parliament in a very wide range of situations .
We now have the Treaty of Lisbon , which means that the European Parliament is now your key contact partner .
In your programme , you say that you want the EU to take root in the will of those who render it legitimate , namely European citizens .
That is a very ambitious aim .
The path to achieving it can only be found via the representatives of European citizens , in other words the parliaments .
I am therefore very pleased to hear you say that cooperation between the national parliaments , the parliaments of the EU Member States , and the European Parliament is the cornerstone of such a path .
You want to bring the parliaments closer together in order to bring citizens closer together .
That is a good thing .
You have a great responsibility in this regard , as you are the first Presidency following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Other Presidencies will use you as an example .
You are therefore creating the blueprint , so to speak .
I would like subsequent presidencies to have to measure themselves against you where cooperation structures are concerned .
I wish you much success !
( NL ) The Presidency wishes to accelerate accession negotiations , including with Iceland .
My group does not oppose that country 's accession per se , but the uncertainty about the repayment of the Icesave loans to the United Kingdom and the Netherlands is too great at present .
Iceland and Icesave have been taking great risks for many years .
The sky seemed to be the limit , and the consumption and granting of loans just kept on going .
International bodies such as the International Monetary Fund warned against these risks but , no , this behaviour continued unhindered until the recession struck .
Curious , then , that the government in Reykjavik is now shedding crocodile tears .
The writing had been on the wall for a long time that things would go seriously wrong .
Forewarned is forearmed .
In short , Iceland can join the EU if it meets its international obligations , and it has been laid down clearly how and when the Icesave loans are to be repaid .
That is the only way of building the confidence required for accession .

( PT ) Mr Rodríguez Zapatero , you know as well as I do that growth of production in Europe will be slow and lacklustre over the coming years .
Given this , I fail to understand why you are insisting on the withdrawal of the Stability Pact in its original form , or with the shrinking of public investment and social spending .
I would also like to ask you about what you omitted from your speech .
Why was nothing said about tax havens ?
Why was nothing said about the opposition to banking secrecy by certain Member States ?
Why was nothing said about a real European initiative for the taxation of financial transactions ?
In short , the question that I would like to put to you is this : why do your commitments always fall short of justice in the economy , a modicum of justice in economic matters ?
( HU ) Among the joint objectives , I would like to highlight overcoming the economic crisis and the creation of new jobs .
We are all aware that there are signs of recovery appearing in some countries , but this is not reflected in the overall employment situation .
What the citizens of the European Union really need is jobs .
This is the only acceptable basis for renewing the Lisbon Strategy .
We have to make sure that the new EU 2020 programme does not repeat the mistakes of the Lisbon Strategy .
For now , we cannot see the factors that will make it different and more credible than its predecessor .
So far , we have heard only about slogan-like targets , and an extremely tight schedule for adopting it .
If the European Parliament is involved in the process in a way that is commensurate with its significance , it is impossible to finish the process before the end of the second quarter .
We need a mature and harmonised programme instead of a hastily mounted communication campaign .
Let us consider the following . How to share responsibility between the Member States and the Union ?
How to control the implementation of the strategy ?
Whom do we want to benefit with the new strategy ?
How will the Union represent the interests of all its regions , not only of certain industries , companies , or countries ?
How to harmonise the cohesion and the structural policies ?
When working under pressure there will be no time to answer all these questions .
Haste comes at the expense of quality .
I draw your attention to two European-level issues included in the targets of the future Hungarian Presidency .
The first one is to establish a common water management strategy , as water is our common treasure .
The concept of the Danube as a green corridor is related to this .
Our other aim is to lend a hand to the European regions .
We have to take advantage of the strength of these communities .
( SV ) Thank you for a strong social agenda - you have our full support on that .
I have two questions .
The first concerns the Copenhagen Summit .
It was a failure and the question now is how can we regain the initiative as regards the fight against climate change ?
Can Spain pave the way for a binding climate agreement in Mexico in which we do not increase the gap between the poor countries of the world and the richer countries of the world ?
Is it possible , for example , to attempt to secure financing of climate initiatives that does not take funds from regular EU aid for fighting poverty ?
That would be an important matter for the Spanish Presidency to address .
As far as the social pact is concerned , it sounds very interesting .
However , there is a serious problem : there is no longer a reasonable balance between Europe 's employees and Europe 's employers .
We have a Posting of Workers Directive that has upset that balance and which puts such a social pact at risk .
There is too much wage dumping and too much crude exploitation .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Prime Minister for his very sincere and European speech at the opening of Spain 's Presidency .
This is normally a moment to be polite , and my colleagues know I am always very polite , but I have to return to the issue of the many British citizens and other European citizens who are having problems with losing their homes in Spain .
I approach it not like the former speaker from an anti-European perspective .
I approach it from a pro-European perspective , where this Parliament has , time and time again , done reports and had hearings through our Petitions Committee .
It is a European problem .
It is a problem of free movement .
It is a problem of European citizenship .
It is a problem of European justice , access to civil justice .
I am sorry , Prime Minister .
You made many wonderful comments about European citizenship and fairness and honesty .
I do hope , Prime Minister , that you will be able to translate those comments to those European citizens who face homelessness and the loss of their savings in your country because , I am sorry to say , of what appears to this Parliament to have been administrative abuse .
( CS ) Mr Prime Minister , in the programme of priorities for your Presidency , you also mentioned , in the chapter on transport , the Galileo project .
The Galileo project ranks among the European Union 's biggest and most complex projects .
During the Spanish Presidency , this project should already be scheduled into its implementation phase .
I would like to ask you to devote more attention to this project , which is complex not only in technical but also in economic terms , since its funding has not been completely clarified .
I believe that thanks to the Spanish Presidency , this programme will be successfully fulfilled and the entire project launched .
This is a huge task for the Spanish Presidency , since it is to be followed by other highly significant projects in the sphere of innovation , telecommunications and other related matters .

( NL ) Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President Barroso , Commissioner Almunia , I , too , wish to focus on the EU 2020 strategy , as the need for Europe to work for its citizens and their jobs is greater than ever in these times of crisis .
You have announced that EU 2020 is an important priority area , but at the inauguration of your Presidency in Madrid , you made some controversial political statements and received a great deal of criticism , even though it is actually an important responsibility to get Member States singing from the same song sheet , and one that requires diplomacy .
Are you , the Spanish Presidency , perhaps hampering President Van Rompuy with these statements ?
Under the Treaty of Lisbon , as colegislator and important partner for the European Parliament , should you perhaps now be working towards the legislative programme ?
Is it not in fact your job - and this is also in your programme - to ensure decisive financial market regulation ?
After all , in that regard , Parliament was disappointed in the compromise on financial supervision reached by the Council last December .
Should you perhaps be focusing your energy much more on this , and also on the internal market , where there is much room for improvement ?
This is important for our small and medium-sized enterprises , our driving force for jobs .
Where EU 2020 is concerned , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) also wants to see an end to the free-for-all for Member States , of course , and instead specific proposals - here I am also looking at President Barroso - for a solid , transparent governance structure , one that also respects subsidiarity .
Brussels ' remit does not cover the retirement age , for example .
Should Brussels be taking decisions on reforms of labour markets or education systems in Member States ?
Let us be decisive , but let us also respect subsidiarity .

( SK ) The programme you have presented is very ambitious - it may allow the European Union to make quite a lot of progress and , since I have had the opportunity to meet several members of your government , I know that they are professionally very capable and well-prepared to implement this programme - my congratulations .

I am particularly looking forward to cooperating with the Minister for Justice and the Minister for the Interior , because this is the area I focus on as the Vice-Chair of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament .
We have before us a large amount of work and an array of measures , including those mentioned at our session yesterday evening , mainly relating to the fields of justice and internal affairs , which the Spanish Presidency has decided to deal with courageously .
There are many questions and many solutions are needed in the area of fundamental rights of European Union citizens , including material and procedural rights of participants in civil and criminal proceedings and the issue of protection with respect to the reintroduction of the social dimension of European policy .
We have to pay attention to issues relating to immigration and asylum , and I believe we will ...
Mr President , one of the changes the Prime Minister spoke of this morning is the Citizens ' Initiative .
Indeed , I think it is fitting that one of the countries whose citizens voted ' yes ' to the constitution is the country that will start the implementation of the Lisbon Treaty .
Indeed , many times when I was canvassing for a ' yes ' vote in Ireland on the Lisbon Treaty , I quoted Spain and the Spanish people .
But we as politicians have a responsibility to ensure that , while citizens are aware of the real potential of the Citizens ' Initiative , they are also aware of its limitations .
We know that it is not just a question of one million signatures on any issue .
The issue must come within the competence of the Union and we must not promise more than we can deliver .
Secondly , this morning , you mentioned food security , Prime Minister .
I am pleased to see that in the Agriculture Council , you are making progress with the issue of improving the functioning of the food supply chain .
Food security cannot - and will not - be guaranteed unless our farmers can earn a fair and reasonably stable income .
Finally , Prime Minister , well done on your initiative to stamp out gender violence ; I look forward to hearing the details .
( RO ) Let me begin by expressing the hope that , in spite of the fairly general nature of the programme , the Spanish Presidency will achieve concrete results by the end of June .
I welcome the fact that the Presidency is concerned with developing the European Research Area and ensuring mobility for researchers .
However , at a time when there are labour market restrictions , this task is going to be difficult to achieve .
I hope that the informal meeting of employment ministers at the end of this month will end with specific results in this area .
The programme also includes the review of the TEN-T action guidelines .
It would be desirable for the review also to take into account the Danube Strategy which , although not mentioned directly in the Presidency 's programme , is a European Commission commitment for 2010 .
In the energy sector , it would be desirable to improve the European Action Plan for Energy Efficiency and adopt the 2010-2014 Action Plan for Energy .
With regard to the former , I believe that its revision should also include a proposal on financial resources , especially with a view to making buildings energy efficient .
The European Economic Recovery Plan has included the European Union 's involvement in funding the Nabucco gas pipeline .
It is in the European Union 's interest for this funding to continue in the 2010-2014 Action Plan for Energy as well .
As far as the Eastern Partnership is concerned , it is worth stating that the European Union 's relations with Ukraine are extremely important .
I would also take this opportunity to ask you not to forget the Southern Caucasus region , which is an important alternative energy resource for the European Union , or the Republic of Moldova , which is in great need of EU assistance during this period of transition to democracy .

( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Zapatero , thank you for the great commitment you are making during this parliamentary term regarding the items you have announced , even though this is no longer the time to list all the useful items , but to make practical efforts to revive Europe .
We need to end this period of defining institutional structures and to face the major issues which still prevent Europe from being able to compete on an equal footing with its international partners .
We need to know whether the European Union will be able , one day very soon , to have a seat in the United Nations , whether it will be able to have a seat , as the European Union , at the G20 , whether it wants greater fiscal and social harmonisation , and what resources it wants to put into the European economic circuit so that it can truly do what its other international competitors have done .
We need to come here - and I say this also to President Barroso - with concrete measures to revive Europe , because , in six months ' time , we will not see the same results as we have seen previously with other previous experiences .
We would also like to know whether the time has finally come when , as Kissinger would say 30 years ago , the major world leaders know which telephone number to call when they need to speak to someone in Europe , and do not just contact the Member States .
At stake is Europe 's dignity as it emerges from the Treaty of Lisbon , but also the European social model , that fundamental democracy which we Members of the Group of the Progressive Alliance of Socialists and Democrats in the European Parliament strongly demand and on which we want the future well-being of our citizens to be based .


( PT ) Mr President , Mr Rodríguez Zapatero , Mr Barroso , I would like to make it clear that there are certain ambiguities in the speech that we have heard here , particularly with regard to economic matters .
The aims and stated aims are sound , but certain ambiguities remain .
Specifically , there are no concrete measure to combat unemployment .
However , despite this reservation , I would like to focus my speech on institutional matters .
The Spanish Presidency talks a lot about the issue of the Citizens ' Initiative , and about the swift and rapid installation of the system for the External Action Service .
At present , on an institutional level , I think that some statement about the relationship with the remaining institutions would also be important , since we are in the initial stages of the Treaty of Lisbon .
I also believe that it is important that the Council and the Spanish Presidency clearly demonstrate a willingness to collaborate with the Commission and Parliament , so as to clarify how relations between the Commission and Parliament will play out in the context of the Treaty of Lisbon , as the Spanish Presidency now has a unique opportunity to set precedents .
Whatever the Spanish Presidency does in terms of the aforementioned relations with the Commission , on the one hand , and with Parliament , on the other , and with the President of the European Council himself , clearly attests to what will come to be seen as the success of the Treaty of Lisbon .
In view of this , I would like to be given clearer information about how you view the structure of relations between the rotating Presidency , the Commission , Parliament and the Presidency of the Council .
( ES ) Dear Prime Minister Zapatero , welcome , good luck and thank you for your speech .
Thank you , above all , for that reference to the European Social Charter .
Finally , somebody in the Council understands that Europe cannot be formed without workers , and much less so against workers .
Finally , somebody in the Council is beginning to understand that we have a very serious problem , with millions of disillusioned people , with trade organisations which feel they are being kept out of the process of European integration , which only looks at the business aspect , has lost its political ambitions and has little social ambition .
Two actions have poisoned this relationship with the Parliament and with the trade union movement .
One is the movement of workers throughout Europe , which creates a threat to national social models , and the other is the Working Time Directive , which threatens historical achievements and the conciliation of professional and working life .
Prime Minister , you have spoken of six months of change .
Change the procedures , change the course .
You will not be able to change everything , but set off on a new route , a route which Europe needs , because Europe needs workers and it will not be possible to construct just an economic Europe ; it needs to be a political and social Europe , too .
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , I have been told that there is a delegation from the National Assembly of the Republic of Korea in the gallery to whom we extend a warm welcome .
We wish to welcome them and the leader of the delegation , Lee Kang Rae , on the occasion of the twelfth inter-parliamentary meeting between our Parliament and their country 's Parliament .
The European Parliament has always supported peace and stability and the defence of human rights in the Korean Peninsula .
Naturally , we welcome the increasingly active role of the Republic of Korea on the international stage and we also wish them all the best when they chair the G20 this year .
We are aware of the broad association agreement between the Republic of Korea and the European Union which will shortly enter the ratification process .
We congratulate our Korean colleagues , therefore .
We hope that their attendance is successful and , above all , that they enjoy the privilege of following a debate as fundamental as the one currently taking place in our Chamber .
Presentation of the programme of the Spanish Presidency ( continuation of debate )
Ladies and gentlemen , let us continue with the debate on the presentation of the programme of the Spanish Presidency .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Chair of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs for this Parliament , I am pleased that the Spanish Presidency attaches importance to the fulfilment of the structural reforms provided for by the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , in particular , with regard to the European External Action Service , to the Citizens ' Initiative , and to the European Union 's adherence to the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights , for which my committee has already appointed a rapporteur , the Spaniard , Mr Jáuregui Atondo , whom you already know .
However , in an interview published in the Spanish newspaper , El País , last Sunday , you expressed the wish , Mr Zapatero , that the law on religious freedom might result in Spain taking steps towards normalisation within all its public institutions .
Thus , I would like , in this respect , to suggest that we reflect very briefly on the fact that Europe 's structures are a means of achieving an objective , and the European Union 's objective is confirmed in Article 2 of the Treaty of Lisbon : the promotion of dignity , equality , freedom and solidarity .
I must therefore voice some concern about the direction in which this debate on values is heading .
Cultural unity comes before economic unity .
Europe 's spirit is stronger than the public - excuse me , judicial - structure .
Europe 's spirit is rooted in the instinct for truth and beauty belonging to ancient Greece , in the cult of justice belonging to Rome , and on the basis of this extraordinarily great heritage it is Christianity that has added the value of human beings , always as equals from conception to natural death .
Today , it is in the name of the Cross of Christ that we ask to go to Haiti , to be present in Haiti , because all human beings , and the poorest in particular , are at the heart of this .
And so I ask you : what does ' normalisation ' mean with regard to religious freedom ?
Does it mean perhaps preventing all citizens from publicly expressing their religion ?
Does it mean forgetting the roots , including the Christian roots , of our countries ?


( FR ) Mr President , Mr Zapatero , Mr Buzek , ladies and gentlemen , in this period of crisis , trade policy occupies an ever more important place in public debate , as Europeans are increasingly finding that the trade strategy introduced at Union level has a direct impact on growth and employment .
Against a background of increased international competition , the race for reduced costs has led to too many job losses or relocations .
In the face of this situation , our group considers that trade must be a tool to serve objectives such as job creation , the reduction of inequalities and sustainable development .
During his hearing , the Commissioner for Trade , Mr De Gucht , appeared to agree that trade could not be an end in itself .
I should therefore like to know if , in the course of your Presidency , you will support a reform of European trade policy to ensure that it creates more jobs and is linked more closely to a true industrial policy .
Will you also take action to support fair trade at world level , fair trade that is capable of promoting development , decent work and respect for human rights ?
In other words , will you introduce binding social and environmental standards into our agreements ?

( ES ) Mr Zapatero , for a Spaniard , such as I am , it is an honour to greet you here , as you take your turn as the President of the European Union .
This is a period of many expectations and challenges and , of course , we must not fail to live up to those expectations .
It is important that our citizens see that our updated institutions are capable of providing solutions to real problems .
You know that we agree with the programme you have put forward .
You know that , for the Spanish Partido Popular , this is a question of state and that we will be behind you in everything that we regard as being in the common interests of Europe and that is important to Spain .
It is an ambitious programme and , hopefully , a programme full of content .
I hope that in this album of the Spanish Presidency - since it will surely be colourful and varied - people can see every event as a milestone in the very real problems that affect them .
The crisis is hitting economies and unemployment seems like the fifth horse of the Apocalypse .
You have had the honesty to recognise that there is 20 % unemployment in Spain , but that does not curtail you .
I believe that it obliges us all to come up with a solution to a problem that we must solve together .
It is a real problem .
The time available does not allow me to say too much , Prime Minister .
However , I do want to tell you that Spain faces many challenges ahead , that I am certain of Spain 's capability as a nation and that I want to believe and am sure that you will rise to the challenge .
At this time in Europe , we must not fail to live up to these expectations
On the other hand , the globalised world - and you have referred to it with intelligence - means that new centres of power are emerging and it is necessary for the European Union to take a more active and coherent role in defence of its values and interests .
Otherwise , we run the risk of becoming irrelevant .
Finally , Prime Minister , we Spanish will not accept being denied the ability to make proposals .
We have that right .
We must also have the humility to accept the advice that Don Quixote gave to Sancho Panza when he recommended humility in his fantasy about governing the Isle of Barataria .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , I welcome the Prime Minister 's very positive and ambitious programme for the Spanish Presidency .
His emphasis on jobs and growth is vital to us all as we come out of the financial downturn , and I very much look forward to working with a fellow socialist government .
The next six months are crucial for the EU 's economic and environmental future , and we look forward to the February Council for ambitious leadership in reforming the financial sector .
In the wake of the failed climate change negotiations at Copenhagen , I am keen to hear how the Presidency will work with the Commission to put forward a common EU target for emissions reductions for the 31 January target .
It has already been mentioned , but I urge , finally , that , during your Presidency , Prime Minister , you will take the opportunity to resolve the issue of land grab and other issues which cause such distress and heartache to tens of thousands of law-abiding property owners across southern Spain .
We really do need action now .
Mr Zapatero , it is good to see you here , and I wish you a very successful term in office .
Mr President , the Spanish Presidency will be judged on the basis of its institutional implementation of the Lisbon Treaty .
Prime Minister , I wish you every success .
To stimulate economic recovery and the creation of new jobs , your challenge is to bring about the completion of the EU 's internal market , including opening up services markets in areas that are still treated as exceptions .
Until this has been achieved , the success of any EU strategy will have a limited effect .
I support your commitment to the creation of a common energy market , interconnecting energy grids all around Europe .
I wish you would use to this end Parliament 's position on external energy security and solidarity that was adopted back in 2007 and is awaiting implementation .
Agenda 2020 means introducing information and communication technologies into everyday practice , making use of the best practices of Member States that have already made progress in this field .
I hope that your Presidency can decide about starting a central agency for administration of IT systems that Europe clearly needs .
What we also urgently need is to work out a reliable European cyber defence security strategy .
I hope that the EU will play a more active role in stabilising the situation in the South Caucasus , too , within the framework of the new Eastern Partnership strategy .
Last but not least , I suggest that you remain committed to the EU 's common position on Cuba until real changes there can be confirmed .
Sadly , the refusal of the regime to allow our socialist colleague to enter Cuba because he wanted to contact the opposition is not a sign of real change .



( FR ) Mr President , Mr Barroso , Mr Zapatero , thank you first of all , Mr Zapatero , for reintroducing ambition , political perspective and also energy , at a time when the European Union has to bounce back from the crisis and in the wake of the failure in Copenhagen .
I expect the Commission and the Presidency to enable us to put the creation of more and higher quality jobs , the fight against social exclusion , and sustainable development at the heart of the 2020 strategy .
This is true in particular for the agriculture budget , and also for the fisheries budget .
You have committed yourself to this .
Mr Zapatero , we are counting on you to provide the resources for this policy , to associate the decontamination of soil with food security , to create the conditions for green jobs and for the preservation of fisheries resources , to ensure food security and to create fairer trading conditions for the countries of the South .
We need an ambitious agriculture budget , and I would also ask you to link the fisheries budget with this budget .
On these points , our jobs , but also our policy , will be judged on the basis of the results achieved .

( PL ) Mr President , Mr Zapatero , among the matters which were presented today by the Prime Minister in a somewhat general and broad fashion , there are many matters which require elaboration and the presentation of specific proposals .
These matters will fall into two categories - those which , objectively speaking , the Spanish Presidency will have to deal with , and those it will want to deal with because it will be trying to achieve its objectives .
Among those which must be acted upon are questions of the relations between European institutions , and here , I would like to draw Mr Zapatero 's attention to the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon which , in the protocol on subsidiarity , talk about the necessity of defining the roles of regional and local authorities within Member States , too .
Spain 's experience , if we are talking about regionalisation , suggests that perhaps it is the Spanish Presidency which will try to clarify the wording on the roles of regional and local authorities .
This is particularly significant when Mr Zapatero talks about how one of his objectives is the matter of developing innovativeness and education , which , as we know , is , in large measure , achieved with European funds at regional and local level .
The European Parliament awaits with great interest the elaboration of certain matters , the resolution of institutional matters and proposals concerning the future of the cohesion policy , which , as we know , will be forthcoming first in Saragossa , and then at the Week of Innovative Regions in Europe .
We are waiting with great interest for decisions and specific proposals .
( EL ) Mr President , Prime Minister , the fact that Spain is taking over the Presidency of the European Union at this difficult juncture is a huge challenge and a huge opportunity for those of us who maintain that the European recipe to date for dealing with the crisis has been unilateral and has not done enough to limit the impact on the real economy and employment , for those of us who maintain that the recovery strategy should also have been a strategy to change the development model , thereby safeguarding the economic , social and environmental welfare of the citizens of Europe .
The Spanish Presidency is a huge challenge for those of us who believe that European economic governance is needed , alongside democratisation of the economic policy instruments that will safeguard financial prudence and the required solidarity , where deemed necessary , in order to protect the interests of European citizens .
( ES ) I am pleased to have the opportunity to say that José Luis Zapatero has not failed to surprise European women with highly innovative and progressive measures .
He has , of course , done so by forming a truly equal government and through the brave manner in which he has brought the matters of gender equality and mutual respect to the national and European agendas .
Prime Minister , I warmly congratulate you on your ambitious programme of action against gender violence , which is a social scourge .
The creation of a European watchdog on gender violence is an avant-garde proposal which the women of Europe support and applaud .
Prime Minister , on behalf of the Portuguese socialists , I wish you luck .
You can count on our solidarity . Women for Zapatero !
( ES ) I would like to tell you most sincerely , Prime Minister , that you have given a magnificent presentation of what form the Spanish Presidency will take .
I think it was an exceptional speech .
I wanted to ask you about Latin America , Prime Minister .
I think it is very important for Europe and , of course , Europe is also important to Latin America .
There are many human links , many business interests and many emerging nations in Latin America , such as Argentina , Brazil or Mexico , which form part of that new world governance , and which must form an alliance with Europe .
I wish to ask you , Mr President , what are the plans of the European Union and your Presidency with regard to Latin America , what is expected from the summit with Latin America and what plans does the European Union and your Presidency have with Latin America ?
( ES ) As I only have a minute to speak , I will concentrate on citizens ' rights .
The Spanish Presidency is an opportunity for us to put our house in order .
One example is the Canary Islands and the people who live there .
Last year , I was there to take a course in Spanish .
To my surprise , I discovered that , if I take a Spanish course at a school on the mainland or in the Balearic Islands , costs are reimbursed , but not if the school is in the Canary Islands , as it is not part of Europe .
It is part of the European Union , but not part of Europe , with the consequence that language schools in these islands , even where the quality of the courses is excellent , are deprived of the opportunity ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , the Prime Minister spoke in his opening remarks about the need for Europe to develop a more effective foreign policy , especially with regard to its near neighbours , amongst which we must include Israel .
Here we have a country which is in military occupation of another people 's territory , which infringes human rights , which maintains the blockade of Gaza and applies collective punishment to one and a half million people , and yet we regard it as a normal trading partner .
Our principles and our policies are clear : they were restated by foreign ministers just last month , but our words do not seem to be backed up by any deeds .
I think the true test of this Presidency over the next few months will be whether we start to apply some independence in our relations with Israel , and whether we start to demonstrate that our principles mean something and that we will apply them .
( HU ) I also wish the Spanish Presidency , which is the first Trio Presidency in accordance with the Lisbon Treaty , a lot of success .
Regarding the 2020 strategy , it has been repeatedly mentioned that it would play a key role in recovering from the crisis .
However , those Member States who are competent for the policies in this area have a major responsibility .
Please let me draw your attention to the fact that we have Community policies and Community budgets which can work as a tool in reducing the effects of the crisis .
From this point of view , it is extremely important that the negotiations on the new budget period should start at the beginning of 2011 , and that the Commission should submit its budget proposal at that time , allowing us to elaborate these policies .
I would like to ask the Commission to do so in time .
( ES ) Prime Minister , I hope that you , as the Prime Minister of the Spanish Government , really have the courage and the ability to put into practice and implement your very ambitious programme , especially the programme on violence against women .
I have two questions .
One relates to foreign policy .
You have said that Europe must bet on foreign policy but also on the defence of European interests .
I wish to ask you , what are European interests ?
Are they the interests of large , transnational companies which want to make profits without regard to social or environmental agreements ?
Or are they the interests that are enshrined in European values , in the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , such as human rights , democratisation , strengthening of civil society and the rights of minorities ?
To what interests do you refer ?
Another question .
You have not said a single word about the subject of migration , which is so important in Europe .
We need a programme ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , you started off today , Prime Minister , with a very pro-European agenda .
What I would like to tell you is that this agenda is not working .
The euro at this moment in time is in dire straits in certain countries .
Greece is on its backside ; Spain , your country , is in dire straits as well .
You have got a country of your own making with unemployment for 18- to 24-year olds currently running at 40 % .
The Spanish people can speak for themselves .
In your role now for the next six months , you are also speaking on behalf of people from my country .
Initially you mentioned further integration .
I ask you , before you bring more integration in , that you go back to the people of my country , the United Kingdom , and give them the choice of a referendum .
( HU ) Mr President , you have mentioned the importance of change , invoking as justification the global economic crisis , which has been the gravest one in the last 80 years , causing the loss of 8 million jobs .
The tools listed are worth supporting , but do not mean a real turn for the better .
After drawing a lesson from the crisis , we need real economic revolution .
Do you agree that the liberalised market is unable to self-regulate ?
Do you agree that the liberal dogmas should be reviewed ?
Do you agree that it is necessary to increase the regulatory role of the Community , and that government interference is indispensable in a market economy ?
Your response would be most welcome .
Mr President , I note with satisfaction that the European Parliament has more strength and vitality behind it than ever .
There have been a very high number of interventions , specific questions , which would be impossible to deal with completely in my response , without prolonging this session entirely unacceptably .
Allow me to make a compromise and to refer in my intervention to certain questions which I think are most relevant and must be clarified .
My compromise is that each and every one of the specific questions which have been raised by members will get a response at the final sitting that I attend at the end of the six-month period , when Spain 's rotating Presidency will be assessed and judged .
I therefore hope to satisfy all Members on certain specific matters , which I have taken note of .
Allow me to say a few words about the interventions of my compatriots , the Spanish MEPs .
I wish to thank the Spanish Partido Popular for the support it has shown at this sitting , which was confirmed in the national political debate and endorsed through a motion .
This is undoubtedly an extraordinarily positive factor for the job in hand , and highlights our shared European desire , the combined effort and the work that we are prepared to continue to do focused on the very difficult times we are living through as we confront the economic crisis .
I wish to refer to immigration .
One of the honourable Members highlighted the question of what our immigration policy is and even said that no reference had been made to it .
It is true that there was no reference to it in my speech but , in short , one has to prioritise .
It has been expressly stated that I am in favour of mass immigration and that is categorically not true .
What I am in favour of is respecting the human rights of all , of every single person , wherever they may come from .
( Applause )
We have a European pact on immigration , promoted and endorsed during the French Presidency .
We must abide by that pact and , of course , that pact includes border controls , cooperation and political dialogue with the countries the immigrants come from , as the best way of avoiding a massive flow of immigrants .
However , I must add that integration forms part of the policy of the European immigration pact , integration in respect of the human rights of immigrants .
I speak on behalf of a country which has , in the last few years , experienced very intense levels of immigration , but not in vain , as , since the year 2000 , the Spanish population has increased by six million people .
It has also had experience of emigration since , at the time of the dictatorship , there was economic emigration to many European countries .
We well know , through experience , what it is to have to leave your own country in search of a future or some shred of economic dignity .
We know that it is difficult to swallow and we know that countries and nations are not measured purely by their political , military or economic power .
Nations , along with Europe , are also measured by their treatment of and respect for human rights and for the people who come to work in our lands in search of a future which they cannot have in their own .
( Applause )
Furthermore , the European Union must be aware - as indeed it is - that by 2025 , 30 % of its population will be over 65 years of age .
This will not occur in any other area or region of the world .
We will be the area , the continent with the greatest number of people over 65 , and this will result in a decline in our capacity to produce , a decline in the active population and in labour capacity , and this will put pressure on our social protection systems .
In the medium term , Europe needs workers .
Beyond the crisis , it will need workers , it needs to get women into the jobs market and it needs that increase in the active population in order to maintain social protection .
This is a fundamental conclusion .
Secondly , subsidiarity and languages .
Of course , we will be faithful in our application of the Lisbon Treaty , and I would like to point out that it was my government that promoted the use of Spanish co-official languages in the European institutions .
There is no doubt , however , that at the moment , balance between the institutions is highlighted in the application of the Treaty of Lisbon .
There has been some comment , which I believe to be unfair , although I must admit that it has been very isolated in nature .
As the President of the rotating Presidency , I have expressed , declared and supported the institutional role of the permanent President of the Council , of course , the High Representative , and the full collaboration of the Commission , and I will continue to do so .
The new powers of the European Parliament will be set in motion by the rotating Spanish Presidency , in full collaboration with the President of the Commission , who has always demonstrated his continuous working relationship with Parliament .
I refer to the work carried out by Mr Durão Barroso .
I have been criticised for giving him my support .
Yes , I have supported him and I do support him , because I have seen him work in favour of a strong and united Europe , and that is very important , over and above ideological positioning .
Thirdly , the financial system , tax havens and new regulation and supervision .
I did not refer to this so as not to exhaust all subjects , but I fully agree with the application of the rules on new financial supervision and regulation .
As for the requirement to put an end to tax havens , the rotating Presidency will be firm and strict .
( Applause )
It will , of course , promote , encourage and demand all countries to push forward with the necessary agreements for fiscal transparency and for the provision of information in the context of the international community .
On the subject of climate change , on 11 February the Council will carry out an analysis of the Copenhagen Summit , with the help of the Commission .
Of course , the European Union should continue to take steps in favour of a strategy which will bring us to a progressive agreement to promote the reduction of climate change .
I am in favour of the European Union knowing how to intelligently align its own ambition , which it has laid down for 2020 or for the period 2020-2030 , with the demands of other players with regard to reducing their emissions .
In support of European unity and a common strategy , we must entrust this task to the European Commission .
I also fully agree that the United States and China are the two lead players for whom we can see a much more active role .
Of course , I am fully convinced that the common agriculture policy should include fisheries and that the social pact which was referred to by some Members needs revision , a change to incorporate the interests , legitimate representation and the constructive position of a large proportion of those who represent workers in Europe .
They represent the workers , the unions that are the expression of the European social pact which , in the last few decades , has made us the region with the greatest social welfare and the greatest prosperity since the Second World War .
( Applause )
The future of the European Union and European prosperity cannot be written down without the workers , without social rights and without social welfare policies and therefore , we must actively incorporate them .
There was a question concerning the area of foreign policy .
The Middle East , Latin America in particular , and an allusion to Israel .
We hope in the next six months to push forward an agreement on the Middle East .
We know that peace in the Middle East is a necessary , fundamental condition for peace in other regions , where terror and conflict have spread , driven by radicalism and ideological and religious fanaticism .
The European Union will fulfil its role by contributing to that peace process through a commitment to take up talks again .
We know what the aims and the conditions are .
We know that that dialogue must include the recognition of the Palestinian State as one of its fundamental conditions .
( Applause )
To work with Israel is to work for peace .
If we do not work with Israel , in spite of the criticisms that it deserves for many of its actions , we will not be able to see peace on the horizon .
To work with Palestine is to work for its right to a state , a territory , to be able to see prosperity on the horizon and to deal with all the outstanding issues .
We will do this in a determined manner and , of course , with the collaboration of other major international players .
Regarding Latin America .
Latin America is a young , immensely vital continent , with a great future .
It has a population of 500 million people and has a great European imprint , not just a great Spanish imprint , but a great European imprint because , over there , democratic values and progressive values now exist , after a long time , and some difficulties consolidating what its stability and its consolidation as a group of nations mean .
At the Latin American Summit , we wish to achieve or make progress towards trade agreements with Mercosur , with Central America and with the Andean Community .
This is all in the interests of development and progress , for Latin America as much as for European economic interests , which , in my opinion should also be defended .
European interests .
When reference was made , and agreed on by other Members , to Union policies on equality between men and women , I considered this to be a very good example and a policy of citizenship .
Those are European interests .
The European interests I uphold in foreign policy action are the interests involving the values of what Europe represents , which has its origins in the Enlightenment and in all the cultural , religious and civic traditions that have flourished and developed in Europe .
To standardise is to tolerate , to standardise is to respect European tradition , the best of European tradition , which means that this land is the land of religious , ideological , political and cultural freedom .
That freedom demands tolerance and equality of treatment between all faiths and beliefs , so that democracy can be complete democracy .
( Applause )
Mr President , I basically wanted to refer to some isolated interventions , about my country , about Spain , from other countries , and particularly Mr Langen 's reference , a particular reference to Spain , about our economic characteristics , which I feel obliged to answer .
I must say that when I began my speech this morning , I spoke as a European country , as a pro-European country , thankful to be in the European Union , thankful to those countries who encouraged our entry into the European Union , and having experienced a great transformation and great progress in these past 25 years .
So much so , that since we entered the European Union , we have reduced the difference in per capita income by 15 points , exceeding the current European average .
This has been thanks to the efforts of many Spaniards , of its workers and its enterprises .
Currently , after making such significant progress , we are experiencing the economic crisis , which is affecting employment .
It is true that we have a high level of unemployment , as happened during the crises of the 70s and 90s .
This has been a characteristic of our country , just as when there is growth , we create more employment than other countries .
However , I can assure Mr Langen , if the rate of unemployment should increase in his country tomorrow , whoever may be governing it , my response as a political leader , as Prime Minister and as a pro-European , would be one of support and solidarity , and not one of recrimination , which was your response in this House this morning .
( Applause )
It would be a response of support and solidarity .
That is my way of feeling and being European , with the admiration I hold for your country , and I hope this does not happen .
In short , Mr President , we will work during this Presidency towards a European project of solidarity , of cooperation , of more economic union , of reforms and of convictions .
I thank you for your references to Mr Almunia , amongst other reasons , because he was proposed by me for the responsibilities he undertakes .
We also know that in the next six months , Parliament can count on the collaboration , respect and appreciation of my country and my government and that , at the end of this Presidency , I will be here , I will be held to account exhaustively and I will answer any questions that may come up with respect and solidarity .
( Applause )
Thank you , Mr Zapatero , for your speech .
Our cooperation , cooperation between the European Parliament and the Spanish Presidency , is very important .
We work in the area of making law , which is why the governments of successive presidencies are essential for us to be able to carry out the legislative process .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
I enjoyed the speech by the Prime Minister of the Kingdom of Spain , especially the balance between economics , social issues and the environment .
I support the idea of a social pact based on the social partners because , besides it being a condition for the achievement of a major social ambition , I am convinced that it is a factor in Europe 's economic performance .
At a time when the Iberian peninsula holds two important presidencies ( the Council of the European Union via the Spanish Prime Minister , José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero , and the European Commission via Portugal 's José Manuel Barroso ) , I regret that the Spanish Presidency has not demonstrated its capacity to bring added political value to relations with the continent of America outside the United States and Canada .
It is regrettable because the sixth European Union-Latin America / Caribbean ( EU-LAC ) Summit is scheduled to take place in the first half of 2010 , whilst the EU-Mexico and EU-Brazil Summits are to be held in the first and second halves of 2010 , respectively .
I would like to take advantage of this speech to express my regret , once again , that the new President of the European Council , who was elected in mid-November and took office on 1 December 2009 , has still not been to greet the Members of the European Parliament or even sent them a simple message .
I would like to point out that I was a member of the AFET delegation which prepared the priorities for the Spanish Presidency in Madrid , in October 2009 .
Based on my knowledge of these objectives , I have noted points in common with those of Romania .
The Spanish Presidency 's main interest is the Mediterranean area , which can bring major benefits to Romania as well .
Romanian companies will have the opportunity to return to markets in the Mediterranean area ( in countries such as Algeria , Turkey , Syria and Egypt ) .
The major common objective is to ensure the European Union 's energy security , with Romania entering on the agenda in this area : Nabucco , the Constanţa-Trieste pan-European oil pipeline and the interconnection of gas networks in neighbouring states : Romania-Hungary ( Arad-Szeged ) , Romania-Bulgaria ( Giurgiu-Ruse ) Isaccea and Negru Vodă .
At the same time , I feel that the Spanish Presidency must focus particular attention on the Eastern Partnership countries .
Romania has a major political objective , which is that the Republic of Moldova should be included , from the point of view of its prospective accession , in the group of Western Balkan countries .
The negotiations on signing the Association Agreement between the European Union and the Republic of Moldova started in Chişinău on 12 January 2008 .
Moldova is in need of financial and political support at the moment .
This should be a priority for both the current Presidency and subsequent presidencies .
Mr President , for the next six months , you will hold the rotating Presidency of the European Union .
Many challenges await you in the field of foreign policy , especially as regards the southern shore of the Mediterranean .
What do you intend to do to relaunch the Union for the Mediterranean , the headquarters of which are located in Barcelona ?
The Secretary General of the Union for the Mediterranean has recently been appointed .
How do you envisage your collaboration with the Union for the Mediterranean 's first ever Secretary General ?
We need an ambitious policy for the Mediterranean that goes beyond economic partnerships to make way for real political partnerships .
Spain is picking up the baton of the Presidency of the European Union , just as the Treaty of Lisbon has entered into force .
This means that the presiding state will be able to cooperate more closely with the European Parliament in implementing its ambitious programme .
I support the most important priorities provided for in Spain 's agenda on the EU 2020 strategy , the safeguarding of employment and social progress , on initiatives in the areas of education and innovation and matters of energy security .
As a Lithuanian MEP , to me it is very important that the presiding country should also further continue the implementation of the EU Strategy for the Baltic Sea Region , adopted during the Swedish Presidency .
These years are the years of Europe 's struggle with poverty and social isolation .
I would like to ask Spain to take the necessary measures during its Presidency for the struggle with poverty and the safeguarding of minimum social guarantees .
Sweden , a country in the north of the EU , had a successful Presidency , and I wish the southern state of Spain useful work for the good of EU citizens .
I would like to draw the Spanish Presidency 's attention to a number of matters which I regard as priorities and for which I believe that we need to find solutions in the coming months .
Patients ' rights in cross-border health care must be treated as a priority as all patients in Europe must enjoy equality of rights .
I call on the Presidency to make efforts to unblock the situation at Council level on this dossier .
I also ask the Presidency to give its support to the directive regarding informing the general public on medicinal products subject to medical prescriptions , which the Council is opposed to .
Maintaining the status quo in this area is of no benefit to patients or the pharmaceutical industry .
The business sector requires support so that we can emerge from the economic crisis , particularly in new Member States which have severe problems in this area .
In this respect , I believe that support for SMEs is absolutely imperative .
The Spanish Presidency must show strong support for the directive on combating late payment in commercial transactions , which is vital to SMEs .
I wish the Spanish Presidency every success in achieving its priorities and in finding solutions to the challenges which the European Union is currently facing .
in writing . - Europe 's objective is a comprehensive peace agreement in the Middle East with a two-state solution at its heart .
We want a secure state for Israelis and a viable democratic state for Palestinians , based on the pre-1967 borders .
But we are at one minute to midnight for such a solution .
The clear Council statement of December 8 needs to be driven forward with vigour and determination by you .
Creating conditions for early Palestinian elections is a key to progress .
Europe should make it clear that it will deal with those elected in new elections regardless of their political affiliation , on the basis of a commitment to implementing agreements accepted by the Palestinian people .
European policy from now on concerning Israel , the Palestinian Authority and Hamas must be predicated on the movement by them without delay into serious final status negotiations based on the Quartets Roadmap and the Arab Peace Initiative .
We must insist that the Israeli siege of Gaza and the appalling human suffering that it is causing for the 1.5 million inhabitants should be lifted immediately and without preconditions .
Unless Europe takes courageous steps now and encourages the USA to do likewise , the situation could very quickly become irretrievable .
The current Spanish Presidency has been entrusted with the important task of drafting an action plan for implementing the Stockholm Programme .
This plan must include among its most important objectives the whole package of issues dealing with immigration and asylum , border controls and security , as well as the fight against organised crime and terrorism .
In a nutshell , guaranteeing EU citizens ' security .
Achieving these objectives will require , in the future , an even wider exchange of information between institutions and specialist agencies , as well as a consolidation of the EU database , therefore , the ongoing collection of citizens ' personal data .
However , a stable balance must be maintained between the provision of security and respect for the citizen 's right to privacy .
Consensus must be promoted between Member States with regard to finding a reasonable correlation between the two objectives mentioned .
Respect for fundamental human rights must be the key objective of all European policies and must be given the most attention by the three countries which are going to hold the EU Presidency during the next 18 months .
I wish the Spanish Presidency the greatest success .
Spain is the first Member State to actually give life to the new institutional model that has come into force with the Treaty of Lisbon .
We hope that the priority already stated by Prime Minister Rodríguez Zapatero - to pull Europe out of the crisis and consolidate the resumption of economic growth - will be realised , and that we can continue to combat climate change and defend energy security .
It is also important to adopt an integrated forestry policy and pursue greater efficiency in water management .
In this European Year for Combating Poverty and at this time of economic crisis , we hope that there will be consolidated policies for the most vulnerable in society .
I hope that the Member States and the European institutions will cooperate so that the EU will become more prosperous and united , and will have a greater presence on the international stage .
I also hope that relations between Portugal and Spain will be strengthened through this Presidency .
Everyone is aware of the interdependence and interconnectivity between our respective economies .
A good example of unity of effort is the Iberian Nanotechnology Laboratory , in Braga , which will allow the development of scientific research , innovation and knowledge , leading to greater competitiveness for our companies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the President-in-Office has put forward his priorities .
They are all important matters , but the deafening silence regarding the fight against illegal immigration , defined as a non priority , is unmistakeable .
No reference is made to strengthening the FRONTEX programme , or to the need to make the agreements on the allocation of refugees more binding ; no commitment has been made to increase our cooperation with the countries of departure of illegal migrants , or to support , within the UN , the need to establish in-situ identification centres for asylum seekers , which will verify who is really eligible for asylum .
This shortcoming is a very serious indication that we are diverging from the positions recently reaffirmed by the European Council and from the position of the Italian Government , which has always fought to put matters relating to immigration control at the top of the European agenda .
I hope that the Spanish Presidency , beyond making general appeals regarding human rights , can review its priorities and act on the immigration-related commitments made by previous Presidencies-in-Office .
We will continue to put pressure on Mr Zapatero and his government until this occurs .
I welcome the fact that the programme of the Spanish Presidency lists ensuring equal opportunities for women and men as a priority regarding the European labour market , along with agricultural development and relations with third countries .
It is also welcome that the programme lays emphasis on the fight against gender-based violence and the protection of victims of such crimes , while also stressing among the general goals the role gender equality plays in the growth of the European Union .
It is an extremely important development that , in the chapter on anti-discrimination , the Presidency commits to reducing the existing wage gap between men and women , promoting the gender equality roadmap 2011-2015 , establishing a European Monitoring Centre on Gender Based Violence , and organising a forum assessing the result to date and future challenges of the UN 's ' Beijing Platform for Action ' .
Although the programme does not mention its plans for the social integration of the Roma people , I truly hope the Presidency will continue the work started by its predecessors and , in light of the European Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion , will use all means to support the social and economic integration of the Roma people , the largest and most vulnerable minority in Europe .
I further hope that at the summit to take place on International Roma Day in Córdoba , the Spanish Presidency will also contribute greatly to the rapid finalisation of the European Roma Strategy currently being shaped .
I am glad to hear about the ' Innovating Europe ' programme introduced by the Spanish Presidency , because it has set the acceleration of developing a policy on tourism as a priority , including giving consideration to the viewpoints of tourists regarding the EU policies related to the industry .
To this end , the Presidency is focusing on creating a European model of tourism , taking into account group tourism as well .
I call your attention to the fact that the interests of persons with disabilities should also be given maximum consideration .
Furthermore , in the field of transport , the Presidency proposes to support intelligent transport systems , which I fully agree with , and I take the opportunity here to repeat : the European Union should discontinue the legal practice of adopting and keeping in force as many regulations as there are means of transport .
At present , people with different transport needs are not provided with the same level of transport services , in spite of all having the same passengers ' rights .
I suggest the Presidency take into consideration the statement made by Siim Kallas , Commissioner-designate , in which he referred to free movement as one of the most fundamental freedoms of European citizens , manifested in modern transport .
The Commissioner-designate agreed with the initiative , and promised to create a uniform Code of Conduct pertaining to all sectors of transport .
By doing so , he can ensure during his mandate that all European citizens have clear and transparent rights , and the Spanish Presidency could and should play an important role in this .
I am very pleased that the Neighbourhood Policy is among the priorities of the Spanish Presidency .
I know how important it is to Spain to develop cooperation with the countries of the Mediterranean Basin , and the importance Spain attaches to the concept of the Union for the Mediterranean region .
I understand , of course , that this concerns many countries which are neighbours of the EU and important economic partners of the Union .
I was even more pleased to hear the declarations of Mr Zapatero and other representatives of the Spanish Presidency that they want to continue the efforts of their predecessors , especially the Czechs and the Swedes , to develop cooperation with the EU 's eastern neighbours , in particular , the states included in the Eastern Partnership programme proposed by Poland and Sweden .
In this context , I would like to appeal to the Presidency , and personally to Mr Zapatero , to take a special interest in the situation in Belarus .
It is extremely important to rethink strategy towards Belarus and to monitor the country 's internal politics .
The EU should demand that the Belarusian authorities respect human rights and change their attitude to the institution of civil society .
Mr Zapatero emphasised the importance of human rights .
Unfortunately , prisoners of conscience are still being held in Belarus , and the attitude of the authorities to the democratic opposition , free media and non-governmental organisations , including ethnic minority organisations , falls far short of European standards .
Democratisation and respect for basic civil rights is a factor which should be a condition for the development of cooperation between the EU and Belarus in the Eastern Partnership .
One of the priorities of the Spanish Presidency is stimulation of the EU economy , which is to be achieved by approval and realisation of the European strategy for sustainable development by 2020 .
The document presented by the Commission shows that this mainly concerns promoting a knowledge-based and more environmentally friendly economy .
Another idea put forward by Spain was a system of financial penalties , consisting , for example , of a reduction in subsidies from the EU budget for countries which do not achieve the objectives contained in the strategy .
Spain is now going back on this idea , in response to resistance from many countries and interest groups .
I have , however , a question : why were consultations not carried out before announcing such a revolutionary idea ?
Does Spain not realise , bearing in mind its own experience , that poorer countries might have problems meeting such ambitious conditions , not because of a lack of will , but because they are not able ?
Do you not think , Mr Zapatero , that the introduction of additional penalties will cause an effect opposite to the one intended , that it will lead to the appearance of still greater disproportions in the development of particular regions , and that this will weaken the entire Union ?
We all want a strong Union , and a strong Union means a Union of strong parts .
The policy of evening out the differences between regions is working , so let us not squander its results with drastic measures .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to welcome the fact that the Spanish Presidency has assumed the task of guaranteeing the European Union 's energy security as a priority .
With this in mind , diversification of gas supply sources is vital by completing the Nabucco Project in good time .
After signing the Intergovernmental Agreement on Nabucco , the European Union must take action .
I would like to emphasise that the Spanish Presidency 's priorities must also include relations with the Eastern Partnership states .
In this regard , I believe it is important for us to give powerful political support to the successful completion of the negotiations which started recently between the EU and the Republic of Moldova .
These negotiations must lead to the signing of an Association Agreement , marking a significant step in the implementation of European values in this European state in the EU 's immediate vicinity .
I think that it is vital for us to send out a positive signal to the Republic of Moldova 's citizens , the majority of whom declared themselves in favour of the Coalition for European Integration at the 2009 elections .
It seems rather strange that the Spanish Presidency is calling for us to combat the economic crisis and wants to make implementation of the economic policy objectives mandatory .
Coming from a country whose unemployment rate , at almost 20 % , is twice the European average , this sounds absurd .
What is even worse is that it is promoting the old idea of European economic governance .
Such violation of the principle of subsidiarity must be rejected in the strongest possible terms .
The EU must remain a union of diversity and of nation states - it owes that to its citizens .
It also owes it to its citizens to finally do some plain talking in the negotiations with Turkey .
The Spanish Presidency is shutting its eyes to reality , in other words , to the fact that Turkey is not part of Europe , either geographically or from a spiritual and cultural point of view .
Ethnic and religious minorities are still being discriminated against in this Anatolian country and Ankara stubbornly refuses to recognise Cyprus , which is an EU Member State .
To say here that the conflict that has been going on for decades will shortly bring ' positive results ' is nothing more than a pious wish .
For financial reasons alone , the EU could not cope with Turkey 's accession .
A mass influx of Turks and exploding parallel societies would finally finish the EU off .
It is high time that we ceased our accession negotiations with Ankara at once and worked to secure a privileged partnership .
I welcome the fact that the Spanish Presidency is assuming in the agricultural sector priorities which are really the most important among the objectives during this period : the continuation of the debates on the future of the common agricultural policy and the adjustment of the common agricultural policy to the ever-changing realities of present-day Europe .
Furthermore , I noticed other important ideas in the Spanish Presidency 's programme : guaranteeing sufficient resources for European agriculture and continuing the process of phasing out milk quotas according to the results of the Health Check .
Last but not least , I welcome the discussions already under way during the first session of the Agriculture and Fisheries Council on Monday on a better functioning food supply chain in order to control price fluctuations and ensure a fairer distribution of the surplus within this chain .
All these are ambitious objectives and , at the same time , of fundamental importance to Europe 's citizens .
Thank you , Mr Zapatero , for your inaugural speech .
However , it lacked a clear reference to the problem of huge deficits .
I cannot imagine that the Spanish Presidency will not take up this problem and make it a priority .
Mr Zapatero , the situation not only in Greece , but also in Spain and other countries , would appear to be your most important task .
Are you not afraid that , if you do not bring public finances in Spain under control , there will not be any money for the purchase of your ' electric cars ' ?
You must be told that the cavalier policies of some European governments , including the Spanish Government , are reducing Europe 's competitiveness , limiting the numbers of jobs available in Europe and putting off enlargement of the euro area with new countries , and all because of Europe 's internal instability .
Please face up to this challenge very seriously .
You are obliged to do so .
The Spanish Presidency comes just as the Treaty of Lisbon is entering into force .
The practices which will be developed in relations between the permanent President of the European Council and the High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy , on the one hand , and other Community institutions and leaders of Member States , on the other , depend in large measure on the Presidency which is just beginning .
I would like to appeal , here , for the new institutions to be given the maximum recognition , in accordance with the letter of the treaty and the spirit of the reform being undertaken .
It is important that the European Union speak in the international arena with one voice .
It is even more important , however , that its voice should not be ignored , but that it should create new trends and have a key influence when decisions are being made .
To avoid a repeat of the situation at the COP 15 conference , the Presidency must take action already to create a climate which will make it possible to take decisions at the COP 16 summit which accord with the position of the European Union .
The Union must also speak with unanimity about the fight against the crisis and building a new financial order .
It is the role of the Presidency to take an active interest in all kinds of intellectual reflection on changes in the European economic and social model which have resulted from conclusions drawn during the current economic crisis .
For my part , however , I am counting on sympathetic support from the Presidency for work on reform of the common agricultural policy .
This will soon be one of the most important political questions in the European Union .
The plan of the Spanish Presidency includes important objectives which must be achieved , thanks to which we will be able to feel secure in a competitive and economically strong Europe .
Most important among them , I think , are three matters :
1 .
Resolute and rapid action to slow down rising unemployment .
The creation of new jobs requires much preparatory work and large financial support , including for market research and training .
The year 2010 is the best time for people to raise their qualifications and even to retrain , in accordance with the needs of an economy which is coming out of a crisis .
2 .
The fight against domestic violence , including the proposed draft directive on EU protection for the victims of domestic violence .
The scale of this phenomenon in Europe leaves no doubt that many women feel least secure in their own home .
This is an absurd situation , and it also compromises the Member States of the EU , because they are not coping with this very important social problem .
Politicians are very much at fault here , because they do not sufficiently oppose violence against women and often pretend that it does not exist on such a large scale .
The lack of support in the European Parliament for a resolution against violence against women was compromising for the Right .
Fortunately , the resolution was passed by votes from the Left .
3 .
Further action in the fight against discrimination , including progress on a new directive against various forms of discrimination , and severe penalties for countries which delay implementation of EU anti-discrimination legislation .
Once again , the Spanish Presidency of the EU has come at a crucial time .
Eight years ago , in the first half of 2002 , Spain had to face up to the challenge of introducing the euro as a common currency .
Now , the Spanish Presidency stands before an equally momentous task - implementation of the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon .
The division of competences between the Member State Presidency and the President of the European Council will be of great significance .
Giving priority to foreign policy which strengthens the Union 's position in the world arena is worthy of support .
However , will the newly appointed High Representative for Foreign Affairs and Security Policy do this ?
These fears result from Mrs Ashton 's statements and her past , but also from her first actions since taking office .
I do not suppose we need to convince anyone that the fight against the crisis and its negative economic and social consequences is still necessary .
Such action is especially in the interest of Spain , which has been hit by the recession exceptionally hard .
How can we return to maintaining the criteria of the Stability and Growth Pact by both large and small Member States ?
How should the fight against the crisis in Europe and the world be coordinated ?
An additional challenge resulting from the provisions of the Treaty of Lisbon is the necessity to arrange cooperation within the Trio Presidency .
Spain is going to have to coordinate its work with Belgium and Hungary .
It is especially important to ensure a smooth transition between individual presidencies so that continuity of work is maintained .
I wish the Spanish Presidency success .
Mr President , I would like to welcome the Spanish Presidency very warmly .
I must admit that I have specific expectations of this Presidency .
Firstly , because one of the priorities of the Spanish Presidency is energy security .
I am very pleased to note this fact .
This is something which should be a priority of each successive Presidency .
I would like to stress that the Solidarity Action Plan is a very important element of energy security .
Continuation and acceleration of work on its introduction is an absolutely crucial matter .
I agree with the principles of the Spanish Presidency related to measures for controlling climate change .
I would like to draw attention to how important it is to coordinate the process of informing European Union citizens of ways in which they can fight climate change themselves .
As the recent Copenhagen Summit showed , the will of politicians on its own cannot change much .
In connection with this , we must involve Europeans as fully as possible and convince them that climate change is not an abstract process , but is something which , on the contrary , affects everyone individually and all of us together .
As a representative of Hungary - and part of the Spanish-Belgian-Hungarian Trio Presidency - I welcome the Spanish Presidency .
It is truly rare to hear a visiting prime minister have such a clear vision about the future of the EU and the programme of the Presidency like we did this morning from Mr Zapatero .
I agree with the notion that without implementing an economic union , the global competitiveness of Europe is at risk .
The four priorities for the next ten years listed by Mr Zapatero in fact determine the most important strategic targets .
It is in the interests of the Union as a whole , but especially of the new Member States , including Hungary , to reduce their dependence on energy .
Without ' green economic growth ' , a digital market , establishing a common innovative capacity and the true development of European education , the Union has no potential for renewal .
I also warmly welcome the decision of the Spanish Presidency to speed up the debate on the future of the common agricultural policy .
Time is pressing : first , we need to develop the CAP framework and then use it as a basis for the budget , and not the other way around .
Otherwise , the beneficiaries of CAP and the whole Community itself would lose a great deal .
The Hungarian Agricultural Academy is an important venue for discussing the future of CAP in Hungary ; I hope the Spanish Presidency will be able to attend its 2010 event .
The Spanish Presidency comes at a strategically important time for Europe .
The fact that it comes just as the Treaty of Lisbon is entering into force increases its accountability for the effective application of the new treaty , which is a prerequisite for the development of its programme .
I am eagerly looking forward to the debate on the future of Cohesion Policy , and trying to make sure it includes the issue of territorial cohesion .
As an MEP from one of Europe 's outermost regions , my attention is focused on what the new Presidency will do with development policy for island regions .
The EU-Morocco Summit is sure to be an ideal forum for galvanising the Euro-African Atlantic Cooperation Area , particularly through cooperation between Madeira , the Azores , the Canaries and neighbouring countries .
It will receive my full commitment .
Because of its geographical and historical proximity , Portugal , and its outermost regions in particular , such as Madeira , are looking forward to seeing how the Spanish Presidency intends to implement and develop a new European strategy for these regions .
Within this context , I will be closely following the actions of the Presidency as it implements the recommendations that the Commission made in The outermost regions : an asset for Europe , and the discussion of future financial perspectives .
The Spanish Presidency must finalise the institutional arrangements for the implementation of the Treaty of Lisbon .
Defining the new comitology rules is a key element of the legislative process .
There are several dossiers , including the Energy Performance of Buildings Directive and the Intelligent Transport Systems Directive , whose adoption depends on how quickly these rules for institutional cooperation will be drawn up .
In addition , the economic crisis is having a severe impact on European citizens , who are losing their jobs and hoping that measures will be outlined for facilitating economic recovery .
The EU 2020 Strategy must find solutions to meet these expectations .
This is why the European Union 's trio format made up of the Spanish , Belgian and Hungarian presidencies must strengthen Social Europe by creating jobs and improving living conditions for European citizens .
Last but not least , 2010 marks the mid-term point of the financial outlook for the 2007-2013 period .
This year , Member States have a unique opportunity to review the Operational Programmes in order to maximise the absorption of European funds and implement projects which can create jobs and improve European citizens ' quality of life .
I urge the Spanish Presidency , along with all Member States , to make the most of the mid-term review with the aim of achieving economic recovery in the 2012-2013 period .
The priorities of the Spanish Presidency for the effective application of the reactionary ' Lisbon Treaty ' and to promote the continuation of the anti-grassroots Lisbon Strategy with the EU-2020 strategy , strengthen the CDSP , and strike at democratic rights and freedoms under the Stockholm Programme are the priorities of the plutocracy .
The Spanish Presidency 's programme maps the haste of euro-unifying capital to promote capitalist restructurings and to continue its attack on the rights and standard of living of the working and grassroots classes unabated .
This attack has as its focal point wage and pension cuts , the full dismantling of industrial relations , the general application of flexible and temporary forms of employment , the demolition of national insurance systems and farmers ' incomes , with drastic cuts in the Community budget for agriculture and livestock farming and cuts in social benefits , as well as the commercialisation of health , welfare and education , by raising the spectre of ' public deficits ' and the application of the Stability Pact .
The way chosen by euro-unifying monopoly capital is to strengthen the imperialist policy of the EU with new political and strategic intervention mechanisms , such as the ' European External Action Service ' , to strengthen its militarisation with ' combat groups ' and to increase their penetration with NATO .
Ladies and gentlemen , Spain is going to lead the Union for the fourth time .
However , it will do so for the first time under new principles , and will , for the first time , carry out its work in connection with the new institutions provided for by the Treaty of Lisbon .
These circumstances give particular significance to Spain 's role and increase its responsibility , in view of the fact that the financial crisis and changes in Europe coincide with the coming into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
After a reasonably successful Czech Presidency and the professional Swedes , the eyes of Europe are turned on the Iberian Peninsula .
The priorities which have been presented , that is : work on the rights of the European citizen , economic revival and financial control , upholding justice and developing a strategy for the internal security of the states of Europe , and all this when the new treaty is coming into force with full effect , are very ambitious .
Spain stands before a huge opportunity and a great challenge , because the new legislation has to be converted into specific action and adapted to the dynamically changing world situation .
Leading the European Union at a time of global financial crisis is no easy matter .
All the more , I wait impatiently for results , and I wish you success with the introduction of the ' new Europe project ' . Thank you .
* * *
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Italian police force last night arrested five people who were planning a mafia attack on one of our colleagues , Mr Crocetta , a Member of this Parliament and a former mayor of the Sicilian town of Gela .
According to the magistrates , the attack could have taken place on any given day , starting from today , 20 January .
I would remind you that the Belgian authorities have yet to provide a suitable escort for Mr Crocetta , who has been under protection in Italy for some time now , as Parliament 's Presidency is aware .
I would ask the Presidency to show solidarity with our colleague on behalf of this House and of the European Parliament and to take action to ensure that Mr Crocetta receives adequate protection in his role as an MEP .
1 .
Election of the European Ombudsman ( vote )
Vice-President of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , I want to congratulate Nikiforos Diamandouros on being elected European Ombudsman .
As was pointed out in his report from last year , the crucial work is about building citizens ' trust in the EU , and we can all subscribe to that .
We all have an important role to contribute to that important work , both as institutions and as individuals .
Relations between the Commission and the Ombudsman have always been very good and very constructive .
I think our cooperation has become even smoother and more productive .
Through his inquiries , the European Ombudsman and his team have done a lot to help develop and reinforce a culture of service within the Commission .
Very important lessons have been drawn from critical remarks made , and we also see an increase in the willingness to achieve friendly solutions .
This development should continue , and I know the Commission will continue to follow closely the Ombudsman 's activities and welcome his proposals .
The years to come are going to be interesting and challenging for the Ombudsman .
I am , of course , thinking about the new possibilities offered by the Treaty of Lisbon .
As you all know , the right to good administration is enshrined in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
I am in no doubt that the Ombudsman will enhance his contribution to strengthening democracy in Europe .
The tools are transparency and service-minded institutions .
We all have a responsibility to support him in that work .
So , again , congratulations on your appointment , and I wish you all the best for the very important tasks that lie ahead of all of us .
2 .
Temporary suspension of autonomous Common Customs Tariff duties on imports of certain industrial products into Madeira and the Azores (
3 .
Decision of the European Parliament on the proposal for a member of the panel for the selection of Judges and Advocates-General of the Court of Justice and the General Court ( vote )
4 .
Second revision of the ACP-EU Partnership Agreement ( Cotonou Agreement ) (
Voting time
Τhe next item is the vote .
( For details of the outcome of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( IT ) With this vote , the European Parliament has expressed its confidence in the European Ombudsman , whose mandate will last until the end of our parliamentary term .
I must point out that this is a positive vote for all of us , for all European citizens .
The European Ombudsman will deal with citizens ' complaints concerning the maladministration of our institutions .
The Ombudsman has responded before Parliament , he has answered questions concerning how to make his own work more transparent , how to improve cooperation between Parliament and the Ombudsman 's officers , as well as communication with the public .
His role will be very important in defending European citizens , in helping them in their contacts with public administration , and perhaps also in making European citizens feel they are in a common Europe .
Reducing what is , at times , an unproductive burden of bureaucracy is an objective that we must all work towards .
The European Union will be even more political if it is able to put citizens at the heart of its action .
This is why I hope that the new Ombudsman will be able to apply past experiences to further improve the positive relationship with European citizens .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I believe that our rapporteur , Mrs Joly , and all the political groups , have done an excellent job of drafting this report , which I , along with my colleagues from the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , strongly support .
In particular , I would like to express my support for the part of the report in which it is highlighted that negotiations on the revision of the Cotonou Agreement should take account , on the one hand , of the consequences of the financial crisis , and , on the other , of migration and , above all , of the need to curb illegal immigration .
This , in fact , has a very negative impact , both on the economies of the ACP countries , which , as a result of immigration , are losing the labour force and the qualified workers that are necessary for development , and on those EU countries that are the worst hit by illegal immigration , countries such as Italy , whose capacity to absorb immigrants has economic and occupational limits that cannot be exceeded if a social decline is to be avoided .
( NL ) Mr President , I voted against the Joly report even though I believe we all agree on one of its central arguments , namely that we need to conduct a policy that focuses on promoting the economic development of the African countries themselves , in order to combat the brain drain and enable skilled Africans to devote themselves to the development of their own countries at long last .
I understand and support this .
Why , then , does the same report argue so stubbornly in favour of a policy of new emigration from African countries and of new immigration to Europe ?
After all , this actually promotes the brain drain of the most skilled , dynamic and enterprising Africans .
I maintain that the ' Blue Card ' is disastrous for Europe and particularly harmful to Africa and the African people .
The ' circular migration ' that is mentioned , last but not least , is a pipe dream , as these immigrants do not return home and a new breeding ground for illegal immigration is created .
Mr President , our agenda this week , and today particularly , has been thin , meagre and truncated .
We all know why .
The week has been given over to backroom manoeuvring .
I would say manoeuvring in smoke-filled rooms but , this being Brussels , I will say smoke-free rooms .
We have come through this nonsense of the hearings .
It has produced candidates concerning whom I have to say that I have not heard of a single Member of this House who thinks we are now about to appoint the 27 best-qualified men and women in the whole of the European Union to the awesome powers concentrated in the hands of the European Commission .
Not only will they be the executive , they will also have the right to initiate law - a concentration of power that is extraordinary in any context , but all the more so when we bear in mind that they are not directly answerable to the electorate .
This is the most exclusive electorate in Europe - 736 MEPs get to decide who will run the continent .
You do not have to be a eurosceptic to find that objectionable .
It seems to me extraordinary that this continent , which exported the idea of representative government and parliamentary democracy , which carried the seeds of democracy to far continents where they found fertile soil , should now have taken the axe to the ancestral tree here in Europe .
All of us are diminished by that process .
Mr President , when considering EU-ACP relations , surely the first principle should be how we help take people out of poverty in many of these countries .
When I speak to entrepreneurs in these countries , they complain to me about how , even 40 years after independence for many of them , they have suffered from the problems of 40 years of socialism , where they are still dependent on primary economies and also over-dependent on aid .
The entrepreneurs in these countries also tell me how trade barriers actually harm these countries and how it makes imports of food and medicines more expensive for the very poorest citizens .
They complain about EU tariff and non-tariff barriers , and I am glad that the EU-ACP goes some way to tackling some of the tariff barriers , if not the non-tariff barriers .
I am also pleased that the Commission has actually set up a unit that helps entrepreneurs in developing countries to export into the EU .
We must remember the first principle is that the best way to help the poorest out of poverty is to encourage more trade and to help the entrepreneurs in poorer countries .

( NL ) Mr President , paragraph 31 alone , which calls on the Commission to include the principle of circular migration and its facilitation by granting circular visas , was sufficient reason to vote against the Joly report .
' Circular migration ' is a mirage .
It is something that exists in official EU documents and the like but not - with a few exceptions - in the real world .
What circular migration boils down to is that an immigrant is granted a limited residence permit but remains in Europe after its expiry date and goes underground .
This is the reality of so-called circular migration .
Circular migration is a driving force for illegal immigration ; the Commission knows it and Parliament knows it too .
Nevertheless , this term is used time and time again to make people believe that many immigrants return to their countries of origin further down the line .
We would do well , therefore , to stop covering up reality as soon as possible .
Mr President , with your permission , I just want to make a point regarding time-keeping because far too often here in this House , too many people are going way over their time - and they are allowed to do so .
Some take nearly double the time allotted .
I would appeal to the President and Vice-Presidents to use their gavel to effect , so that time-keeping is within the rules and that those who want to come in on catch-the-eye , etc. have an opportunity to do so .
Written explanations of vote
Mr President , the role of the European Ombudsman for the citizens is of vital importance for the proper functioning and the transparency of the European institutions , which represent some 27 Member States and almost 500 million citizens .
I would like to focus , in this House , on the importance of the Ombudsman 's role in the protection of EU languages , given the numerous complaints received in the past few years concerning linguistic discrimination , complaints which have also concerned the Italian language .
I am therefore delighted by the reappointment of the European Ombudsman and , as well as wishing him well in his work , I invite him to pay due attention to linguistic protection .
I welcome the re-election of Nikiforos Diamandouros to the office of European Ombudsman for another term until 2014 .
I also support the Ombudsman in his following primary objectives : to ensure that the European Union 's citizens will enjoy the benefits and resources of the Treaty of Lisbon and to achieve better cooperation with national and regional ombudsmen , thereby ensuring greater transparency of activity at European level .
in writing . - I fully support the re-election Mr Nikiforos Diamandouros to the office of European Ombudsman .
The European Ombudsman investigates complaints against the institutions and bodies of the European Union .
The Ombudsman must be an independent , non-partisan and impartial public servant .
Mr Diamandouros has proven himself to be a highly professional and efficient advocate on behalf of the citizen .
He has not been fearful of being critical of any European Institution , including the European Parliament , when necessary .
Now that the Charter of Fundamental rights has the same legal value as the treaties , I am confident that the charter , and especially , the right to good administration , will be at the heart of Mr Diamandouros ' work as Ombudsman .
In a Europe that wishes to be closer to citizens and more at the service of the people of Europe , it is essential that those people are able to exercise effective control over the institutions and bodies of the EU .
This is precisely where the role of the European Ombudsman proves to be indispensable , as the citizens report to him any administrative irregularities , discrimination , abuse of power or absence , or the refusal to answer a specific question put to an EU institution or body .
In this regard , I welcome the election of the new European Ombudsman for the next five years , and hope that in his mandate , he will be guided by the founding values of the European Union - liberty and justice .
This will ensure that European citizens have better institutions and effective control over them , making the EU stronger , fairer and more united .
The European Ombudsman acts in order to tackle cases of poor administration by Community institutions and bodies , either on his own initiative , or by following up a complaint .
This means that the European Ombudsman is helping to construct a Europe of Citizens just as the Treaty of Lisbon has entered into force and the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union has become legally binding .
It should be noted that the right to good administration is a fundamental right for European citizens , enshrined in Article 41 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union .
In 2001 , the European Parliament approved a resolution on the Code of Good Administrative Behaviour , which must be respected by the institutions and bodies of the European Union .
I would argue that this code should become a European law , which would have legislative coherence in the EU and would be a guarantee that those very basic principles would be adhered to by its institutions when dealing with citizens .
It is crucial that European citizens know their rights and how they can go about protecting them and recovering them if they are violated .
Mr President , in the European Parliament , we have , in fact , evaluated Mr Diamandouros ' work as Ombudsman every year when we debated the annual reports he submitted , and they have always received top marks .
In the course of his work during two terms of office , Mr Diamandouros has undertaken numerous initiatives to raise awareness of the office of Ombudsman , which has meant that increasing numbers of citizens have been using his help .
The latest figures , which come from 2008 , show 3 406 complaints in comparison with 3 211 the year before .
It is worth noting the fact that the Ombudsman has not restricted himself just to examining complaints which are formally admissible , but has also given information about the possibility of claiming rights in the case of complaints which do not , in fact , come within his remit .
In addition , Mr Diamandouros has initiated very valuable cooperation between ombudsmen of the individual Member States , which has enabled exchange of information and good practices .
On his initiative , liaison officers have been appointed in the offices of national ombudsmen , and information on the implementation and application of EU law is published in the ' Ombudsman Newsletter ' .
Therefore , I sincerely congratulate Mr Diamandouros on his achievements and on his re-election as European Ombudsman , and am counting on fruitful cooperation during the current term of the European Parliament .
in writing . - Dear colleagues , I rise today in appreciation of the work of our ombudsman , Mr Nikiforos Diamandouros .
He has executed his duties in line with all of the rules and he has done so with independence and integrity .
He is someone who is championing the principal that EU institutions must be transparent .
Let 's be frank colleagues ; our citizens are not as engaged in European affairs as we would like them to be .
Therefore , it is necessary that our EU institutions operate as if from behind a pane of glass .
This ombudsman has so far demonstrated an ability to operate with this principal so I welcome his re-appointment . Many thanks .
in writing . - I am very pleased that Nikiforos Diamandouros has been re-elected as European Ombudsman .
He has been a very good champion of citizens ' rights , and I am pleased he will continue in this role .
In the vote to elect the Ombudsman , I voted for Pierre-Yves Monette .
He was the only one to take the trouble to introduce himself to the non-attached Members of the European Parliament and to answer their questions .
We have , today , reached a decision on the election of the European Ombudsman .
This election is extremely important for the citizens of the European Union , because the European Ombudsman deals with the protection of human rights .
He examines complaints made by EU citizens about improprieties in European institutions .
In this way , Europeans have a certain kind of control over every body , office , institution and agency of the Union .
Therefore , it is extremely important that our citizens be aware of their rights .
They need to know that , following the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon , their influence on the functioning of EU institutions has increased .
In addition , according to the new ombudsman , the European Ombudsman is going to work more closely with other European institutions .
It is also pleasing that citizens of the new Member States are making use of the possibility to lodge a complaint , which is testified by the relatively high number of complaints recorded in previous years .
This shows that the residents of the new Member States are interested in issues connected with the European Union and are not indifferent to the EU .
I voted in favour of the report on the temporary suspension of the autonomous Common Customs Tariff duties on imports of certain industrial products in the autonomous regions of the Azores and Madeira , as this aims to increase the competitiveness of economic operators from the Azores ( manufacturers , distributors , wholesalers and retailers ) .
This would ensure more stable employment in the Azores and thus overcome the economic disadvantages that exist due to the islands ' location .
This temporary suspension of taxes , allowing local economic operators in the Azores and Madeira to import a certain amount of raw materials , parts , components and finished products duty-free , covering areas such as fishing , agriculture , industry and services , provides favourable conditions for long-term investment .
These measures will also go some way to helping small and medium-sized enterprises and local farmers , allowing them to create jobs and invest in the outermost regions .
Given the current economic crisis , the need for specific measures to stimulate economic activity and stabilise jobs is paramount .
I voted in favour of the resolution on the proposal for a Council regulation temporarily suspending autonomous Common Customs Tariff duties on imports of certain industrial products into the autonomous regions of Madeira and the Azores on the basis of the report by my excellent Polish colleague , Mrs Hübner .
The regional authorities of Madeira and the Azores , in agreement with the government of their Member State , Portugal , have requested the temporary suspension of Common Customs Tariff duties to promote the competitiveness of local economic operators and to stabilise employment in these outermost regions of the Union .
I am completely in favour of the Union supporting the special features of the outermost territories , provided that such tolerance does not feed speculation or deviate from its intended objective .
I support the Commission 's proposal on the temporary suspension of the application of Common Customs Tariff duties , as I believe that the EU must demonstrate , and not just declare its solidarity with regions fighting the consequences of the economic crisis .
I believe this measure is coordinated with the European Economic Recovery Plan , because the economic crisis has affected different EU Member States and EU regions in different ways , and therefore we must ensure that there are measures to meet the specific economic needs of each Member State or region .
Since these islands are dependent on tourism , and tourism is in decline , there is a growing threat of unemployment and the collapse of small and medium-sized business and this would hit the inhabitants of these far off islands particularly hard .
By applying the customs exemption , the Community must also ensure that this measure ensures the basic objective - to promote local enterprise and help local farmers and small and medium-sized businesses to survive this difficult period - and that these principles are applied to other EU Member States .
The development of the outermost regions is severely hampered by factors such as the structure of society and the economy , extreme remoteness and insularity , their small size , difficult terrain and climate , and their economic dependency .
This means that it is vital that the European Union continues to pay special attention to these regions , identifying problems and areas of potential , studying their differences and weaknesses , so that it can implement policies and measures that are suitable for their economic and social development .
I welcome the proposal for a Council regulation , as this represents an incentive for sustainable development and the integration of the outermost regions into the world economy .
The temporary suspension of the Common Customs Tariff duties will allow the autonomous regions of Madeira and the Azores to overcome the economic disadvantages that arise from their geographical location , and also tackle the specific effects that they are experiencing due to the economic crisis .
I applaud the initiative by the regional authorities of Madeira and the Azores and their commitment in contributing to a development strategy for their regions , which also contributes to the competitiveness of the European Union , and its capacity for sustainable economic development .
I voted in favour of the report on the temporary suspension of autonomous Common Customs Tariff duties on imports certain industrial products into the autonomous regions of Madeira and the Azores .
This suspension will help to strengthen the competitiveness of local economic operators and will contribute to creating and maintaining jobs in the outermost regions , acting as a counterbalance to the economic disadvantages arising from their geographical location , without affecting the consolidation of the internal market or the principle of free competition within the EU .
I believe that the temporary suspension of autonomous customs duties is essential in order to strengthen the competitiveness of economic operators in the Portuguese Autonomous Regions of Madeira and the Azores , so as to ensure more stable employment on these islands .
This suspension will allow local economic operators on Madeira and the Azores to import raw materials , parts , components and finished products duty-free , since these products are to be used locally , for processing or manufacturing .
The approval of this exception is crucial for the development of these Portuguese Autonomous Regions , both of which rely heavily on the tourism industry and are consequently highly vulnerable to the volatility of this sector .
This means that their full economic development is limited by the characteristics of their local economy and their geographical position .
In the light of this , any incentive for local industry certainly provides support necessary for improving the living conditions for local people , and opens the way for the creation of jobs on the islands , which is essential for retaining people and creating conditions for development .
The temporary suspension of the Common Customs Tariff duties will allow local economic operators in the autonomous regions of Madeira and the Azores to import a certain quota of raw materials , parts , components and finished products duty-free .
These raw materials will have to be used in farming and for industrial processing and maintenance in the autonomous regions .
This suspension will be in force until 31 December 2019 , and measures are expected to be put in place to prevent this giving rise to any unfair competition .
This strengthens the competitiveness of SMEs and farmers in our autonomous regions of Madeira and the Azores .
This measure is tailored to the specific needs of these outermost regions , and will stimulate economic activity , thus helping to stabilise employment .
The local economies of Madeira and the Azores largely depend on domestic and international tourism , which have been affected by the current economic crisis .
This means that this suspension is completely justified , and it is expected to have a positive impact on the economic development of these regions .
I would like to call for swifter analysis and decision making in these kinds of processes , so that we can respond to them in a more efficient and timely manner .
I therefore voted in favour .
The regional authorities of Madeira and the Azores called for the introduction of the temporary suspension of autonomous Common Customs Tariff duties on imports of certain industrial products , with the aim of strengthening and ensuring more stable productivity and employment in these outermost regions .
We agree with the content of the proposals contained in the document . However , we believe that components which fall outside the agricultural purposes stipulated in the regulation could also be considered as components for industrial purposes , particularly in the field of energy and the environment , such as parts and components for the energy industry , especially so-called ' clean energy ' ( wind power , solar power , etc . )
The suspension of the autonomous Common Customs Tariff duties on imports of certain industrial products into the autonomous regions of Madeira and the Azores until 2019 is very important for these outermost regions of the EU at this time of global economic crisis .
It is vital for helping SMEs and local farmers , as it will strengthen the competitiveness of local economic operators and ensure more stable employment in these regions .
The regional authorities of Madeira and the Azores have requested the temporary suspension of the Common Customs Tariff duties in order to strengthen the competitive position of the local economic operators and stabilise employment in these outermost regions of the Union .
In order to ensure that the goods imported , be they raw materials parts or finished products , do not distort competition , they will be subject to controls ensuring their use by local companies on the islands for a period of at least two years before they can be sold freely to companies situated in other parts of the Union .
How is that to be implemented in practice ?
As no plausible clarification can be given , I have abstained from the vote .
I welcome the position that the Commission has taken on the 10-year suspension of autonomous Common Customs Tariff duties on imports of certain industrial products into the autonomous regions of Madeira and the Azores , and the report by Mrs Hübner , which together :
1 . Establish positive discrimination in favour of the outermost regions of the Azores and Madeira , acknowledging that the structural limitations that affect these regions are permanent by their very nature ;
2 . Create conditions for stimulating economic activity and employment in the island groups , thus also contributing to demographic stability in the islands .
This is an example of the cohesion that can be achieved by a European Union built on the principle of solidarity .
The development of the outermost regions is circumscribed by their remoteness , insularity , climate and difficult geographical features , and their economic dependence on a limited number of goods and services .
The regulation that we will vote upon today will allow Madeira and the Azores to import a range of finished products for agricultural , commercial or industrial use , along with raw materials , parts and components for use in agriculture , processing or industrial maintenance , with the benefit of exemption from customs duties until the end of 2019 .
Furthermore , this exemption will be extended to the whole territory of both regions , not only their duty-free zones , thus benefiting all types of local economic operators .
I recall that this matter was subject to a simplified legislative procedure so as to speed it up .
The Chair of the Committee on Regional Development herself was the rapporteur for the proposal , which has allowed it to be submitted to plenary for voting without it being put to debate .
I am very happy with the final result , which incorporates the amendments that I proposed , covering a range of products to equip the Free Zone of Madeira , contained in a regulation from 2000 but having lapsed in 2008 , along with additional requests presented in 2008 and 2009 , which were not contained in the initial proposal by the Commission .
The proposal from the European Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs proposing the appointment of Ana Palacio Vallelersundi to the panel set up under Article 255 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union is , in principle , to be welcomed .
However , from an institutional point of view , it is incomprehensible why a separate panel of seven people should make binding proposals to the national governments .
I therefore voted against this proposal .
In today 's vote on the appointment of Ana Palacio Vallelersundi to the panel set up to assess candidates ' suitability to perform the duties of judge or advocate-general in the Court of Justice and the General Court , I voted against the proposal , because , in addition to the candidates ' first-rate legal knowledge , I expect the person appointed by the European Parliament also to examine their social suitability and competence .
In this regard , I have no confidence in Mrs Palacio , because I fear that she would not take account of the possession of social values and an understanding of human nature when assessing the judges and advocates-general .
Particularly in view of the stipulation of the goals and values in the Treaty of Lisbon - the social market economy has been mentioned here - and the enshrining of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights in primary law , this will be absolutely essential in the selection of judges and advocates-general in future .
The temporary suspension of autonomous Common Customs Tariff duties on imports of certain industrial products into the autonomous regions of Madeira and the Azores is intended to give a long-term perspective to investors and enable economic operators to reach a certain level of industrial and commercial activities .
As a socialist , I believe that these measures should be retained for as long as these regions are facing major economic problems .
I welcome the Commission 's proposal because the adoption of this measure will bring stability to employment in the medium term and to the economic and social environment in these outermost regions of Europe which are faced with specific problems .
However , I cannot but draw your attention to the risks which the temporary suspension of customs duties entails for products which have originated from such countries .
This is why we must monitor closely the impact this suspension has on competition .
In accordance with Article 255 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union , the European Parliament is one of the institutions which proposes candidates to be members of the panel whose task it is to give an opinion on candidates ' suitability to perform the duties of Judge and Advocate-General of the European Court of Justice .
In view of the fact that there are only seven members of the panel and that their task is a very responsible one , it is important they be persons of impeccable reputation and high ability .
As a Member of the European Parliament and thanks to the new powers given by the Treaty of Lisbon , I have an influence on the election of one of the seven people on the panel , and I am pleased with the candidature of Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi .
Mrs Palacio Vallelersundi was a Member of the European Parliament for eight years , and was twice elected by fellow Members as a member of the Conference of Committee Chairs .
She was also Chair of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and the Committee on Justice and Home Affairs .
In addition , her other professional achievements , such as holding the position of Chief Adviser to the World Bank and being Spain 's first female Minister for Foreign Affairs , do not leave any doubt that she will be the right person in the right job .
I voted in favour of the report on the revision of the ACP-EU Partnership Agreement because I believe that this text contains key elements to be taken into account in the negotiations that are currently under way .
The coherence of different European policies - whether in trade , development or agriculture and fishing - should be the principle foundation for our relations with this bloc of developing countries .
The new situation , represented by strategic partnership agreements , must be taken into account .
These agreements , which are essentially trade agreements , create new platforms for parliamentary dialogue and are to be respected .
The new challenges that we are facing , such as climate change and the economic crisis , should give rise to responses that will be included in the new Cotonou Agreement , which is expected to be finalised in March .
It is also important that the European strategy for relationships with ACP countries takes account of the closeness and contacts which the outermost regions have with these countries .
The outermost regions can act as the prime intermediaries for the EU in economic partnership agreements .
The outermost regions give a special dimension to external action by the EU , thus participating in the development of a genuine policy of broader neighbourhood .
I voted in favour of the report by my fellow French Member , Mrs Joly , on the second revision of the ACP ( African , Caribbean and Pacific ) -EU Partnership Agreement ( ' Cotonou Agreement ' ) .
I share the positions of this report on the need to adapt the use of this special instrument with the ACP countries in the light of the current crises , such as climate change , soaring food and fuel prices , the financial crisis and extreme poverty in Africa .
The ACP countries are partners of the European Union , and we must nurture this partnership with the aim of having allies in the major negotiations on global governance that are due to take place .
I voted in favour of the report on the Second review of the ACP-EU Partnership Agreement ( the Cotonou Agreement ) .
This is a timely report and it is right and proper that the issue of the Economic Partnership Agreement be discussed on a continuous basis .
The primary aims of the Cotonou Agreement are to end poverty , to support sustainable development and to help ACP countries integrate with the global economy .
The agreements and trade talks which are currently taking place , and those which will take place in the future , must move toward fulfilling and strengthening the provisions of the EU and its partners in relation to child labour .
Article 50 of the Cotonou Agreement relates to the promotion of fair working standards and to the improvement of international measures to end child labour .
Issues that relate to child labour must be given top priority in EU trade agreements .
As such , I welcome the articles of the report which request that the EU and the ACP start discussions on the future of ACP-EU relations from 2020 onward and which recommend giving a larger role in this process to independent parties , i.e. organisations that are not states or governments .
in writing . - The second revision of the Cotonou Agreement is taking place in a very challenging environment when the global economy is facing crisis .
I believe that the revision of the agreement will allow the major principles of cooperation between the EU and the ACP countries to be refreshed and reinforced .
The situation has changed since the agreement was first signed and new challenges and problems have arisen .
The negotiations on the agreement should encompass such extremely important points as the fight against climate change in developing countries , the practical use of immense renewable energy resources , the food crisis and the acquisition of arable land .
A lot of attention should be given to migration problems .
In recent years , we have witnessed hundreds of young Africans drowning off the shores of the EU .
Massive immigration is a result of failing economies , impoverishment of the people , human rights violations and many other causes .
Those things should be addressed clearly in the revised agreement .
in writing . - I am voting in favour of the draft report on the second revision of the Cotonou Agreement , which introduces key issues about sustainable development and the gradual integration of ACP countries into the global economy .
Issues such as climate change , energy security , training and cooperation in educational matters are essential for economic and social development in the ACP countries .
Global warming , which predominantly affects developing countries , may also present an opportunity for us .
The renewable energy resources that these countries have at their disposal are essential for their economic and social development , and allow them to move towards a state of energy independence , thus helping to tackle the global crisis .
Likewise , investment in education and training is important in combating poverty , unemployment , illegal immigration and the brain drain , contributing to development in the ACP countries and helping them to build their own economy .
in writing . - I support this report , which asserts that the second revision of the ACP-EU Partnership Agreement must be consistent with the actual global crisis and be carried out in a way that fully respects a partnership of equals .
This current second revision of the agreement is a great opportunity to address the root causes of the financial , climate change , food and energy crises , and to learn from past mistakes , bringing meaningful changes to the Cotonou framework , as well as enhancing ACP unity , cohesion and solidarity .
The report calls for a stronger reinforcement of the human rights clauses and sanctions .
Also the report expresses our regret that parliaments ( European Parliament , JPA and national parliaments of the ACP countries ) were not consulted by the Member States and had no input in the decision-making process leading to the identification of the areas and articles for revision and to the establishment of the negotiating mandate .
The primary objective of the Cotonou Agreement is the reduction and , eventually , the eradication of poverty in a way consistent with the objectives of sustainable development and the gradual integration of the ACP countries into the world economy .
I voted in favour of the report on the second revision of the ACP-EU Partnership Agreement to defend the need for changes that will allow us to tackle the great challenges that we are currently facing , such as climate change , the financial crisis and the food crisis .
I welcome the support that Parliament has given to the ACP countries , which want to see climate change addressed as a cross-cutting issue in the second revised version of the Cotonou Agreement .
However , I regret that the parliaments ( the European Parliament , the Pan-African Parliament and the national parliaments of the ACP countries ) have not taken the opportunity to contribute with proposals and to participate actively with Member States in the decision-making process for revising this important agreement .
I hope that the second revised version of the Cotonou Agreement will help to promote sustainable development in ACP countries , which will allow social cohesion and facilitate the fight against poverty .
The effects of the crisis , linked to climate change , are severely felt in the ACP countries , and are becoming increasingly worse .
In view of this , the issue of food sovereignty is a vital one .
Natural resources should be used properly and the development of renewable energy should be encouraged .
We need to guarantee that all the ACP countries will benefit from a commercial framework that is at least equivalent to the situation previously in force .
I would also argue that the European Development Fund ( EDF ) , which backs the cooperation policy for development within the scope of this agreement , should incorporate the budgetary powers of Parliament .
I therefore voted in favour .
Like the rapporteur , we also believe that the second revision of the Cotonou Agreement is a good time to make amendments .
The report sets out principles which , if implemented , would be a step towards improving the agreement , as illustrated by the defence of food sovereignty and security for ACP countries , along with the fight against tax havens .
At the same time , I would condemn certain important aspects , such as the attempt to move towards greater regionalisation in ACP-EU relations , due to the threat that this would pose to the coherence and strength of the ACP group of states .
Elsewhere , the report falls short of what is needed .
The state of dependency and subordination to which the ACP countries are subject and the role that current policies on cooperation and development aid have played in establishing this state - a key issue - are not adequately addressed .
The consequences that may arise from the implementation of the Economic Partnership Agreements proposed by the EU within this context are not addressed either .
The reservations and objections raised by several ACP countries should have been welcomed in the report , along with their priorities regarding , for instance , the European Development Fund .
in writing . - Dear colleagues , it is with delight today that I address this parliament as we have moved towards a more equal role in the relationship between richer and poorer countries while strengthening human rights .
The revision of this agreement must be consistent with the needs of the new world we live in and must be based on a partnership of equals .
This is a new world with a new economy where fair distribution of wealth and tackling climate change are new priorities .
I wish to commend the work of my own group in the European Parliament who have inserted those principles of eradication of poverty into this revision .
This report undeniably contains some very valuable suggestions and often laudable intentions .
The priority given to renewable energies , the obligation for multinationals operating in ACP countries to declare their profits and taxes , the incorporation of the concept of food sovereignty and the criticism of the externalisation by Europe of the management of migratory flows are all proposals that we support .
However , we cannot ignore the fact that this report does not change anything in the Cotonou Agreement .
That agreement is a symbol of the European Union 's complete adherence to the ultra-liberal logic of the WTO .
We are not taken in : the ' development ' referred to is a front for the self-serving motivations which have dominated this dismantling of the Lomé agreements .
We denounce the implementation of the European Partnership Agreements set out in that agreement , the Commission 's use of blackmail in the form of development aid to ensure their conclusion , and the resultant pillaging of the economies of the ACP countries .
We are voting against this text so as not to support the European Union 's abandonment of the one economic cooperation instrument that is not governed by the obsession with free and undistorted competition or its bowing to the demands of the United States at the WTO .
The recent tragedy that hit Haiti is proof that partnership agreements are not adequate for resolving problems .
Therefore , this second revision of the Cotonou Agreement is an excellent opportunity to make adjustments relating to current challenges such as climate change , the steep increase in the price of food and petrol , the financial crisis , and the extreme deprivation in several ACP countries .
This is the time to devise measures that will effectively solve the various problems that continue to affect the great majority of countries involved .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur and the various political groups on their excellent work on this report , which I fully support .
Within the report , I would like to focus attention on the negotiations on the revision of the Cotonou Agreement .
In fact , such agreements should take account of varied critical aspects , such as the effects of the financial crisis , the increase in migratory flows and , above all , in illegal immigration .
I am convinced that only an adequate assessment of economic cooperation would make it possible to control the negative impact of the crisis and its consequences , both for the economy of ACP countries , which are losing that workforce and that qualified labour that are necessary for development , and for EU countries that are the worst hit by illegal immigration .
in writing . - It is important that all aspects of the Cotonou Agreement are reviewed in the light of recent developments which are having a significant impact on ACP countries .
But I would particularly like to add my voice to the concerns about regional integration , which is relevant not just to ACP countries but also to Latin American countries and particularly the Andean Community .
The effect of some trade agreements ( agreements which are , according to Commission officials , supposed to promote development ) can be to jeopardise trade between countries in a given region and therefore run contrary to the stated development objective of promoting regional integration .
The European Union must constantly re-evaluate its trade policies and the impact they have in this regard .
Failure to do so , or to act appropriately , risks negative effects on long-term development .
in writing . - I will vote for this report but I must make the point that certain organisations supported by the Commission , given the responsibility of delivering projects under EU-ACP partnerships , have been mired in corruption and have orchestrated a campaign of discrimination and victimisation against the members of staff who brought the said corruption to light .
I refer , of course , to the organisation known as CDE , who , with Commission support , have dismissed all whistleblowers from office and have done little to put right failings in the governance and senior management of this organisation .
When the OLAF investigation into CDE found that corruption had taken place and that the Commission had failed to exercise due diligence as members of the management board of the CDE at the time the fraud was taking place , one would have expected action and certainly protection for the whistleblowers concerned .
Neither has happened , to the ultimate shame of the European Commission .
Whilst I vote in favour today , I wonder whether there is an urgent need in future to examine in more detail what appears to be the inability of the EU side of these partnerships to exercise proper financial control .
The Cotonou Agreement , dating from 2000 , which regulates the cooperation between the EU and the African , Caribbean and Pacific ( ACP ) countries , is revised every five years .
Its objectives are the eradication of poverty and the gradual integration of ACP countries into the global economy , whilst adhering to the objective of sustainable development .
This revision is taking place against the background of a global financial crisis , rapid climate change , strain on food and energy prices , and a discussion on land use and the sustainability of foreign investment .
It is high time we strengthened parliamentary control of the country strategies and the European Development Fund ( EDF ) and strove for consistency in our trade , foreign and development policies .
It is time we took a holistic approach to tackling climate change and put the maximum focus on renewable energy .
It is time we combated illicit financial flow from developing countries and reformed European Investment Bank ( EIB ) policy in the direction of greater transparency with regard to tax havens .
It is high time we recognised that land ownership and clean water are fundamental rights .
It is time we admitted that fair access to natural resources really can help lift people out of poverty .
The report emphasises this , and thus receives my support .
I abstained on Mrs Joly 's report on the second revision of the ACP-EU Partnership Agreement .
This report contains a large number of specific proposals on the renegotiation of this agreement - more commonly known as the Cotonou Agreement - which I support .
For example , the need to take account of the situation of the world 's poorest countries , in the light of their particular characteristics with regard to climate change , democracy and human rights , brain drain , corruption , and the particular features of their economy , particularly their agricultural economy .
However , the amendments tabled by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) adopted in plenary alter the report completely .
A particular example is Amendment 3 , which denies populations the right to define their own agrarian policies .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of the second revision of the ACP-EU Partnership Agreement ( the ' Cotonou Agreement ' ) .
This agreement , which regulates the political , trade and development cooperation relations between the European Union and the 77 ACP countries , and which relates to the period 2000-2020 , was already revised in 2005 .
In the provisions forming the subject of the second revision , it is rightly requested that ad hoc provisions relating to climate change be included , that the provisions relating to renewable energy be reviewed , that the provisions relating to rural development and food safety be enhanced , and that greater efforts be made to curb illegal financial flows and tax havens .
I am certain that this revision will be able to strengthen the partnership relations between the EU and ACP countries and to ensure greater synergy and cooperation in view of the common objectives to be achieved .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
SWIFT ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the Council statement on SWIFT .
Mr President , this is a Council statement on a programme which is an agreement between the European Union and the United States , as you know , for tracking the financing of terrorism and , therefore , with the aim of exchanging and passing on financial data , which I believe everyone agrees upon .
This agreement has been in place for the last few months .
It has worked well and gives continuity to the flow of information destined for the Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme .
This agreement formally expires on 31 January .
Therefore , during the previous term of the Swedish Presidency , the Council thought about the need to sign an agreement to enable the continuation of that Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme .
For this reason , on 30 November 2009 , the Council adopted a Decision on the signing of that agreement , the TFTP ( Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme ) .
It is a provisional agreement .
It is therefore valid for a short period , which , in principal , expires on 31 October 2010 .
Therefore , the provisional agreement which , as I have said , the Council agreed last year , will in any case will become invalid , unless this European Parliament takes a prior decision , in 2010 .
This is the present situation .
There has been no communication between then and now on the part of the Commission about the content of that agreement , which is still not known by the European Parliament , but I can tell you now that it will be produced in the next week , on 25 January .
It will be known to the European Parliament on 25 January .
That agreement will arrive in this Chamber , properly translated and will be passed on in order for it to obtain the approval of the European Parliament .
This has not been done before for the following reason , given to us by the Commission : the Commission has not finished the relevant translations and , therefore , the Council has not received them from the Commission .
As I have just told you , these different language versions are still being finished , and as you know , the Council can only pass that document , that agreement , to Parliament , when the different language versions are available , which the Commission has in hand .
This is what will be produced on 25 January .
Furthermore , for the future and with a view to an agreement , not provisional , but definitive , the Commission intends to make recommendations in that regard for the formation of a long-term agreement , not an agreement which finishes in October of next year , such as the one we are talking about , but one for the long term .
This long-term agreement must be negotiated and entered into according to new legal bases , as provided for by the Treaty of Lisbon , in which the European Parliament has full involvement .
The European Parliament already has full involvement in those agreements , and that is how it will be for the forthcoming agreement , upon which the Commission has not yet made any recommendations .
To finish , I want to say that this is a matter of extreme importance .
This is a procedure , a programme to combat terrorism .
The Detroit incident has shown that there is present danger , that the threat persists and , therefore , the Member States must not allow that continuing flow of financial data to the TFTP to be abandoned .
Judge Bruguière explained this in his in camera intervention filmed before this Parliament in November .
He said that , in his opinion , several Member States had been able to benefit and take advantage of the information which was provided to the United States to uncover and avoid terrorist activities .
This led the Council , during the previous Swedish Presidency , to make a provisional application for a new agreement , to avoid the expiry of the current one on 31 January and , therefore , the cancellation of any possible flow of information .
It was the only option that the Council had to do so and , of course , yes , Parliament 's position on obtaining information is understandable .
This has not been produced , as I have told you , due to the European Commission 's delay in producing the relevant translations .

Mr President , Mr López Garrido , ladies and gentlemen , this whole debate was , of course , initially coloured by the frustration and irritation that many people in the European Parliament felt because we had the impression that , once again , things were being rushed through in the Council before the entry into force of the Treaty of Lisbon .
For that reason , I am now thankful that the Council has realised that it is good to consult Parliament , to now apply the new Treaty of Lisbon in the ratification process and also to give us the opportunity to assess whether this agreement is to be applied or not .
In this legislative process , if we now start it , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) will apply clear decision-making criteria .
There are two sides to the coin .
On one side , we as the PPE Group hold the clear principle that for European data - wherever this is stored - European data protection standards should apply .
We hold the principle that we want a right of appeal for people who feel they have been unfairly treated in being subjected to data checks .
We hold the basic principle that data should be passed on only in individual cases and only if the person is suspected of something , not simply as a general rule .
These are things that we regard as important .
On the other side of the coin , there is the fact that we , of course , want cooperation with the United States .
We want to cooperate with our partners in the fight against terror .
We do not want a situation in which individual states - if agreements expire - are put under particular pressure , like Belgium for example , because then states might start to operate on a bilateral basis .
Careful consideration is also needed here .
As the PPE Group , we will give consideration to this when the legislative proposal is presented .
I would ask the Council and the Commission once again not to play for time , but to send the text now so that we can deal with it .
As Parliament , we are capable of working quickly and we will be able to deal with this quickly .
Then it will be up to the ministers - and just to make this very clear : the interior ministers - to convince Parliament that these methods that are now being proposed in this agreement really are necessary for the fight against terror .
We are open to this process , but the task of convincing us is still to be done by the executive , in other words the ministers .
Mr President , this is a serious law-making process that we are beginning now with the Treaty of Lisbon .
Mr López Garrido , if you are telling us that translations or the lack of translations in such a sensitive area is causing delays that we will just have to accept , then , with the greatest respect , I have to say that that is merely an excuse intended to protect yourself and pacify us here a little .
However , we cannot take that seriously .
I will simply take note of it now and then overlook it .
The essence of the matter is something else entirely : the lack of involvement of the European Parliament .
In the case of international agreements of such far-reaching importance , that is simply impermissible .
We want Parliament to be genuinely involved from day one in the implementation of this agreement .
Why is that ?
Mr Buzek , the President of this House , worded it very precisely in his letter , saying that the SWIFT agreement provides for far-reaching infringements of citizens ' fundamental freedoms , which are constitutionally guaranteed in most Member States and are also guaranteed by the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
However , if there are to be executive measures on the basis of such an agreement that provide for infringements of citizens ' fundamental freedoms , the legal protection of citizens against such infringements must be absolutely guaranteed .
That means that data protection must be guaranteed in every respect , the deletion of data after a certain , reasonable period must be guaranteed and appeal facilities must be precisely set out for citizens in the event of the violation of their fundamental rights .
One of the constituent elements of the principle of the rule of law is that citizens are able to protect themselves against arbitrary treatment on the part of the State .
The European Union cannot invalidate this legal tradition , which is enshrined in the systems of 27 States , by referring to unavailable translations .
If we are serious about wanting to develop the rule of law at European level , we must also transfer to the European level the model of the necessity of intervention on the grounds of security but also the legitimate protection of citizens .
The Council must therefore explain to us where the added value of the SWIFT agreement is if it is now - as the Council desires - provisionally to enter into force .
I am not going to talk about the data breaches from the numerous security services in the United States .
Someone stuffs some explosives into their underwear and flies over the Atlantic .
That is what the intensive security work carried out by the American secret services has so far achieved .
That cannot be what it is dependent on , though .
I am wondering why we have to apply this fast-tracked procedure when there has been an agreement in place between the EU and the United States since 1 February on provisional legal assistance , Article 4 of which describes precisely how bank data is to be passed on where there are justified grounds for suspicion .
This means that the entry into force of the SWIFT agreement would not provide any added value in terms of protection .
Therefore , this undue haste , - or a ' pig 's gallop ' , as we would call it in German - this pressure to speed things up , is incomprehensible and so our unanimous request to the Council must be put very precisely : send us the relevant documents !
We will debate this matter and conclude the parliamentary procedure with the necessary speed because we want security , but not only for the security bodies ; we want security for the citizens who are supposed to be protected by these security bodies , too .
I believe that is the purpose of this agreement , but in that case , we also want it to be enacted as an appropriate law .

Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let us start with the good news : the Spanish Presidency has announced that the document is due to be submitted on Monday 25 January , in other words , next Monday - I have made a note .
This therefore means that we now have one week to discuss it in Parliament ; that is the reality .
My request , Mr President - I have already announced this , and I hope that I will have the support of the other groups - is that a decision be taken , at the Conference of Presidents , to hold both a committee meeting and a part-session to examine this interim agreement , because it would be pointless to allow it to enter into force on 1 February without Parliament having discussed it first .
There are therefore two options , Mr Zapatero : yes or no .
I can tell you that obtaining a ' yes ' will depend on a range of conditions ; it is important to know that , and we must have an answer on this before 25 January .
No response to the conditions laid down by Parliament has been received .

These conditions are as follows : firstly , that Parliament be kept fully informed and receive all the necessary information ; secondly , that Parliament be involved in the negotiations on the definitive agreement ; and , thirdly , there are the specific conditions , nine in total , set out by the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs in its resolution - which has been approved by Parliament - relating to the actual content of the agreement .

Our request to you is very simple : you must not only send us the interim agreement on 25 January ; you must also provide your response to Parliament 's three requests .
If your response to our three requests is positive , our approval of the agreement might then be a possibility .
If it is not positive , I think that the vote is likely to be negative - that is the opinion of my group , in any case .
I have to point out that a negative vote will mean that the interim agreement will not enter into force on 1 February .
This is the current situation , and thus tomorrow , I will , in any case , ask the Conference of Presidents both to convene an appropriate committee on the issue and to hold a part-session to discuss this interim agreement .
Mr President , all of Parliament 's frustration is now raining down on the Spanish Presidency , which has only just taken up office .
Accept it on behalf of the Council as a whole , but I still consider you , yourselves , to be involved in this .
I am annoyed that there are no representatives of the Commission in seats 21 and 22 because , if I understand it correctly , the Commission would have had a duty to expedite this whole matter once Parliament had been asked to set the approval procedure in motion .
However , the Commission is avoiding its responsibilities and has stayed away from the debate .
I do not want to repeat what my fellow Members have said , but I would like to say that I think it would be extremely dangerous for the Council to have this provisional SWIFT agreement enter into force without Parliament having first voted on what you intend to present to us .
I consider the procedure - if you continue to push this through by 1 February at breakneck speed , or at a pig 's gallop , as Mr Schulz quite rightly described the whole procedure - not only to be a provocation of Parliament , but also a violation of the treaties , a violation of the Treaty of Lisbon , after it has only just entered into force , and that is irresponsible .
In matters of urgency , you have every possibility of exchanging vital information by means of bilateral legal agreements with the US and with any other country in the world with whom such agreements exist .
So there is no hurry .
I would like to emphasise once again that the citizens of the EU are watching with interest to see how we respond to the highly acclaimed Treaty of Lisbon .
If we do not , at this point , ensure parliamentary control , if we accept this breach of national data protection laws and contravene the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which was so often cited in the debate about the Treaty of Lisbon , it will , I believe , be a kind of kamikaze action and completely unjustifiable .
However , Mr López Garrido , you share the responsibility for this with the Commission .
I would like to ask you one more thing .
I have just been informed by text message that some language versions of the SWIFT agreement have already been published .
Please could you tell us which language versions have been published in the Official Journal , when this was done and why these versions have not yet been made available to Parliament .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , recent events have once again reminded us all how important it is that we share information in order to ensure the security of EU citizens .
SWIFT has been a valuable tool in achieving this .
Luckily , having met with US Government officials , particularly Mr David Cohen , the Assistant Secretary for Terrorist Financing in the US Treasury Department , recently in Washington , I was reassured by the multi-layered control systems and safeguards and independent oversight which I hope will lead to the implementation of this new agreement being beyond reproach .
Where I must express grave concern , as others have done , is in the Council 's substandard consultation with Parliament , and alleged Commission delays .
It is essential that Parliament and the elected representatives of this House are frequently and properly informed , and parliamentary consent must not be a retrospective tool .
For the Council to treat it as such undermines the values and democratic principles that lie at the heart of this Chamber and this Parliament .
I do hope that the Council , and indeed the Presidency , will take careful note of these remarks .
Mr President , this House has been treated in an insulting and almost humiliating way throughout this whole process .
To tell us that we have to wait for the language versions is unacceptable when we know that there are several versions circulating in the press , following leaks of information .
Nevertheless , we were presented with an outline of the agreement on a Friday in Brussels , when the MEPs had gone to Strasbourg .
Only one MEP was present in Brussels . That MEP happened to be me .
The repeated references to the Bruguière Report , a secret report , are also unacceptable .
This is hardly convincing , as anyone who has read the Bruguière Report knows that it contains almost no empirical data .
It is unacceptable to say that this is a provisional report , when the data collected over the next nine months will be in the hands of the US administration within five years , and it might be a Sarah Palin administration , rather than the Obama administration .
How can a European citizen feel safe ?
You clearly give us no alternative but to reject this agreement , and you are not making our life any easier .
In rejecting it , however , we are doing the Commission a favour , as there are two new commissioners , Mrs Malmström and Mrs Reding , who we know will certainly be able to negotiate the best possible agreement from scratch , and we are sure that they are willing to do so .
( DE ) Mr President , very many measures have been adopted under the guise of combating terrorism in recent years , including by the Council .
However , very many of these measures are not reasonably proportionate to the actual threat posed by terrorism .
On the contrary , they have resulted in unacceptable restrictions of citizens rights .
The systematic exchange of data , unrelated to any grounds for suspicion , provided for in the SWIFT agreement is clearly no exception to this .
Even the German Federal Criminal Police Office , which is not really known as a data protection group , had to admit the disproportionate nature of this measure .
We must put a stop to these permanent restrictions of citizens ' rights and we must not approve the provisional agreement .
With regard to the Council 's methods , I would once again like to say quite clearly that the US examined and stored the data of SWIFT users without any form of restriction at all .
However , the Council did not sanction this procedure , it legalised it !
I would , of course , also like to urge the Council to pass on all of the information relating to this matter to the European Parliament .
There was a particular intervention , I think it was Mrs Harms , referring to the possible publication of one of the language versions .
Obviously , I do not have that information .
I will check it out and let you know the situation in writing .
What I have told you is that on 25 January , the agreement which will come into force provisionally on 1 February will be in the hands of the European Parliament .
In accordance with European law , in accordance with Article 218 of the Treaty of Lisbon and in accordance with the Vienna Convention , signed agreements can provisionally come into force .
Therefore , it is valid .
For the European Union and , of course , for the Council , it is important that this agreement remains in force .
It is important that these agreements on the Terrorist Finance Tracking Programme remain in force .
We feel that it is a positive step , that it serves the struggle against terrorism , and that it involves collaboration with the United States , which is a trustworthy country , a partner country , a neighbour , which has the same purpose as ourselves : the fight against terrorism .
This has nothing to do with the delay in receiving the language versions , it is definitely not an excuse , Mr Schulz .
It is not a matter of gaining time , Mr Weber .
As you know , a few weeks ago , or months even , the Swedish Presidency , the Council , suggested sending this version in a single language to Parliament , from the Council , and the Commission realised that this was not possible , that it had to be the actual Commission which would produce the language versions and send them all on .
The Council had good intentions on the part of the Swedish Presidency , but it was not possible either legally or technically .
That is the reason it has arrived now .
I understand that the European Parliament would have liked to have this version earlier .
I agree absolutely .
If I had been an MEP , I would think exactly the same and would have wanted to have these versions earlier .
It did not happen that way for the reason I told you .
It has nothing to do with gaining time , or hiding anything , nor is it an excuse .
Absolutely not .
I think this is an agreement where the European Parliament will have the full capacity to take part , because the Lisbon Treaty has come into force and we have - I think a great majority of us - adopted that treaty , and that will give Parliament the capacity to take part in a sovereign way .
Parliament will be able to , if it wishes , cut short the validity of this provisional agreement .
Parliament will take part in the negotiation of the subsequent long-term agreement .
The EP , together with the Council , of course , will have all the authority to influence the SWIFT Agreement which we believe is very important , which deserves to be debated in this Parliament , thoroughly , seriously and without haste or pressure , to use an expression that you , yourselves , have already used .
What is more , we are absolutely agreed , Mr Verhofstadt and other speakers , that here it is necessary to respect people 's fundamental rights , the right to privacy and European legislation on data protection .
Moreover , now we have another instrument to guarantee these rights , the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , which has just come into force because it is linked to the Lisbon Treaty , and that is fully in force .
One of the rights that it guarantees is the right to privacy and data protection .
Therefore , we have all the conditions to make a good agreement .
As for Mr Verhofstadt 's proposal to send a letter or to immediately reach a Council position on the conditions established by Parliament , I believe that the best thing is that when Parliament has that document , we will be at your disposal to debate it in every sense , with all those conditions and , therefore , to come to a serious , rigorous and unpressured agreement in this respect .
Yes , of course , for the moment , we think it is vital to get this provisional agreement in force and , in any case , Parliament will have all the authority accorded it by the Treaty of Lisbon to ultimately decide whether or not the agreement should go ahead .
This will depend on you .
It will depend on Parliament as a whole .
The debate is closed .
I said earlier that it is not possible to give the floor to others .
If there is a request on a point of order , I can give the floor .
Please proceed .
Mr President , I would just like to understand one thing : if only one or a few language versions are available , then I would like to know the language skills of the Members of the Commission and the Council who signed the agreement and who decided on it on 30 November - so it must be available .
That was not a point of order , but we allowed it because Mrs in ' t Veld was so polite in her request to take the floor .
Please proceed , Minister .
I repeat what I said .
I will check the information given to me by Mrs Harms , I think it was , regarding the document .
I am not sure because I do not have it with me , of course , and I will let her know what happened on this matter .
In any case , I repeat , on 25 January , you will have the agreement and we will be able to discuss it as much as you like .
The Spanish Presidency , the government and the Council are at your disposal to talk for as long as you like , in depth , about this agreement whose future entry into force will depend on the European Parliament .
One exception soon becomes many , and I cannot deny Mr Schulz the floor .
Please proceed , Mr Schulz .
( DE ) Mr President , I apologise for taking the floor once again .
It is a rare event in my life , but we are not at a fun fair here .
Mr López Garrido , the agreement was published in the Official Journal of the European Union on 13 January .
You are not responsible for that , but if you now say to us ' I need first to find out which language versions are available ' then I have to say again that this is not a recreational event for the mutual enjoyment of MEPs and ministers .
This is a legislative chamber in which serious work is required !
I would now like to say something to you - not to the Spanish Presidency , but to the Council - and that is that the way in which the Council has dealt with these matters shows that it has no regard for Parliament whatsoever .
The time has now come for us to say to the Council that these little games are finished .
There is a serious legislative procedure - in Europe , this , of course , involves all documents and all dossiers being available in all languages at the start of the procedure and does not mean that we have to go in search of the documents with a divining rod after the procedure has supposedly finished .
This is not a sound procedure .
I ask you now to tell us which language versions were available when the agreement was published in the Official Journal on 13 January .
That is something that I am now formally requesting to know on behalf of our group .


Please , ladies and gentlemen , after Mr Schulz has spoken , we will give the floor to the Minister for the final response and we will close the debate .
We are going to inform Parliament on everything it has requested : on the language versions , on which ones are available and so on .
Above all , we will do so thoroughly and seriously .
I do not believe that the Council has treated the European Parliament in a humiliating manner , nor has it in any way denied Parliament information .
I am referring to the Swedish Presidency which , at the time , did what it could in order to be able to submit the agreement , but that was not legally possible because some of the language versions had still not been translated .
Now that the Treaty of Lisbon has entered into force , the European Parliament will be able to discuss this matter fully , and the Council is ready to provide Parliament with all the information it requires and to establish a dialogue on the matter .
I do not believe that this constitutes treating the European Parliament badly and , therefore , I do not share the sentiments expressed by Mr Schulz on the issue .
The facts will show this .
A full text will be made available to the European Parliament and Parliament will be able to debate it with the Council for as long and in as much depth as it likes , and the European Parliament will have the final say on the matter .
It is as simple as that .
Therefore , I believe there is no need to be concerned that the Council is withholding information on any subject whatsoever .
The Council believes wholly in the need to respect the Union 's fundamental rights and it believes wholly in the need to respect Parliament , which is the representative of the people of Europe .
The debate is closed .
I will not give the floor to anyone else on this matter .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
What is being referred to as the SWIFT agreement ( Society for Worldwide Interbank Financial Telecommunication ) governs the passing on of data from the global bank network .
On a daily basis , 8 000 monetary institutions from 200 countries communicate with each other via the channels of the society , which is based in Belgium , with data centres in the Netherlands and the US .
According to the Commission , requests for data can only relate to international transfers and use of the service is strictly limited to terrorism investigations by the secret services .
However , both high-ranking politicians and criminal experts doubt that , in the US , the data would be used solely for combating terrorist activities .
Data abuse , violations of civil rights and the passing on of data to third parties are all very real dangers that could result from the SWIFT agreement .
As Members of the European Parliament , we absolutely must not allow the entry into force of this agreement and the associated data transfer to the US , and certainly not without the approval of the European Parliament .
Provisional entry into force of the agreement pending the debate in the European Parliament in February would constitute a huge violation of the fundamental principle of democracy .
Outcome of the Copenhagen Summit on climate change ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the Council and Commission statements on the outcome of the Copenhagen Summit on climate change .
Mr President , honourable Members , I stand in Parliament today in order to share with you my views on the outcome of the Copenhagen Summit and the challenges that arise from it , both for the European Union and for the rotating Presidency that Spain holds for the first half of 2010 .
The European Union Environment Ministers discussed these matters at length last weekend .
I should point out that we broadly agree on our desire to continue moving forward , on three issues in particular : building on the results of the summit , with a view to making them operational as soon as possible ; strengthening their elements within the United Nations ; and working to fulfil our goals to reduce overall emissions .
We have shared goals and strategies .
As a result , our most immediate tasks will be to complete the process of formally announcing our commitment ; to consolidate an action framework comparable to that of other industrialised and emerging nations ; and to make use of all the tools we have available , both within the European Union and in our relationships with third countries .
The December summit - an extremely complicated conference characterised by arduous discussions on procedure - was brought to a conclusion in the so-called Copenhagen Accord .
A large number of Heads of State or Government and leaders of regional groups were personally involved in producing the document that was adopted , which represents the will of countries whose emissions total more than 80 % of those produced globally .
Participants included all the industrialised countries , major emerging economies , and a significant number of especially vulnerable countries .
This should also help us to respond to the many doubts that continue to clog up the formal process which should lead us towards legally binding solutions , within the United Nations framework and preferably in Mexico .
With regard to the content of the Accord , I think it is important to stress that we have clear support for not allowing the temperature to rise by more than two degrees centigrade . This is surely one of its strongest elements with the greatest potential for results : the commitment of all industrialised countries to establish a target for reduction that can be applied right across their economies .
Emerging nations , for their part , will take concrete , verifiable action that will allow them to make a substantial reduction in their emissions growth : financing based on solidarity and aimed at supporting immediate and medium-term action in the fight against climate change ; elements intended to steer new models of governance ; and mechanisms that foster technological development and a reduction in emissions caused by deforestation .
The Copenhagen Summit has shown that we are moving within a new international context , one that requires improvements if we want to provide solutions to global problems .
The decision-making rules in place need to be changed so that they can adapt properly to these new times and necessities .
We do have the tools we need in order to act : a legislative package already in place at Community level ; the very highest commitment to furthering a reduction in emissions , international solidarity and technological innovation and cooperation ; and the correct institutional structure within the Union , which we must use intelligently , taking full advantage of its complementarity .
We will have to combine the leadership of the Environment Council when negotiating and planning climate change policies with greater capacity for external action .
Furthermore , we should link the environmental task ahead with our experts ' opinions on policies relating to the economy and innovation ; we should also improve consistency between our climate goals and our model of development and well-being .
All of this must be done without losing sight of the need - both inside and outside the European Union - to consolidate the role of public opinion and of legislators who are committed to investing in a better future and to protecting public interests .
Let us bring to bear our collective European experience .
Firstly , we have to push for a proper response before 31 January .
The Copenhagen Accord , by bringing together all those who have to reduce their emissions , thus enables a comparison of efforts to be made , a comparison that the European Union has demanded ; yet we are still not sure how strong other countries ' commitments really are .
If they prove to be insufficient , we must continue working to further our collective reductions .
We will also have to bring about conditions which allow those elements that make up the accord to be applied swiftly .
It is vital for the European Union and its Member States to be at the forefront of those countries that keep their promises .
For this reason , we will need to carry out the transfer of funds as soon as possible , planned for the period 2010-2012 .
We want to develop a financial framework that can sustain our solidarity commitments with third countries in the Copenhagen Green Climate Fund and , at the same time , foster improvements in accounting rules and our response in terms of both reductions in emissions caused by deforestation and technological cooperation .
The following elements need to be added to this : our own policies , aimed at fulfilling our emissions reduction targets at both national and Community level ; the boost provided by innovation and intelligent energy use ; the incorporation of adaptation measures for sectoral policies ; and consistent external action .
We want to work closely with the Commission and Parliament on all of this , seeking to establish the world region that stands at the forefront of the fight against climate change , that has the lowest carbon emissions , that is the best prepared to face the challenges presented by climate change and is the most efficient at transforming this into a powerful force for innovation and competitiveness .
Our policy on climate change is one of the key identifying characteristics of the European model .
We have been pioneers when integrating that principle into our proposals for a fairer and more sustainable development , not only economic , but also social and environmental , knowing that we are strengthening international security in the process .
This fact has enabled major players , such as China and the United States , to come together at the same negotiating table and to identify and share decisive elements for cooperation .
The European Union , a staunch defender of the United Nations ' role in resolving global issues , will also have work to do in other areas , both bilateral and multilateral , formal and informal , helping everyone to correctly identify opportunities , listening to our partners , and working on consolidating sectoral responses that are consistent with what is needed to fight climate change .
We must take full advantage of the adoption of the Treaty of Lisbon and the entry into force of the new institutions , systematically incorporating the main messages on the fight against climate change into our relations with third countries .
This is no small task we are facing .
The government of Spain is aware of the magnitude of the challenge and wishes to show here that it is committed to making as much progress as possible on those elements that may facilitate an ambitious , binding agreement in Mexico .
We cannot waste the political opportunity that was created in Copenhagen , nor lower our expectations or those of the international community .
Our credibility is at stake .
We have to stand our ground .
The new , greater powers of the European Parliament , which bring it even closer to the citizens , will enable closer , more fruitful cooperation .
I want to conclude my speech by congratulating everyone on that point and reminding you all that , now more than ever , we need your hard work and support over the vital six-month period that lies ahead .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , let me thank you on behalf of the Commission for the chance to discuss the outcome of the Copenhagen conference on climate change and the follow-up to the Copenhagen Accord .
My colleague , Stavros Dimas , has asked me to apologise on his behalf for not being able to be here himself because he is ill , which is particularly regrettable as this would probably have been his last plenary appearance .
I volunteered to substitute for Stavros in this very important debate .
I want to express our appreciation for the active and supportive role the European Parliament played before the conference and at the conference itself .
The contacts with your delegation throughout the conference proved most useful .
In particular , you have played a crucial role in order to enhance our outreach with key players in other countries and other regions .
I believe we share the view that the result of Copenhagen falls badly short of our goal of an ambitious and legally binding agreement , which would be necessary to limit climate change to below 2 ° C. This is extremely disappointing for all of us who have fought for years and years for concrete policy decisions to reverse climate change .
The reasons for the failure were many and I will come back to them in a moment .
Still , one may also conclude that the Accord is better than no outcome at all , which would have been the worst-case scenario .
On the one hand - to find something positive - the Copenhagen Accord at least recognises the need to limit climate change to below 2 ° C. It also invites the developed countries to list economy-wide emission targets by 31 January 2010 and calls for the developing countries to list mitigation actions by the same date .
Furthermore , the Accord sets the basis for a rather substantial financial package of USD 30 billion for the coming three years and recognises the need for USD 100 billion annually by 2020 .

On the other hand , the Accord has serious weaknesses .
It contains no reference to mid-term or long-term mitigation targets .
The reduction pledges announced so far are not sufficient to stay within the target of 2 ° C. There is unfortunately , in my view , little cause for optimism that we will see improved offers by 31 January - rather the opposite .
Last , but certainly not least , the Accord is not legally binding and , perhaps even more worrying , it does not provide for the conclusion of a legally binding agreement this year , which was one of our key goals .
Looking ahead , the next step will be to ensure that this Accord will at least become operational and will pave the way for a new climate treaty , which must be agreed on urgently in the course of this year .
As a very first step , it will be crucial to ensure that all key parties now endorse the Accord and notify their targets or actions by 31 January .
Adequate financing also needs to be provided .
In this respect , we need to explore ways of setting up a Copenhagen Green Climate Fund .
We must also strengthen alliances with countries and regions who share our vision of a successful outcome in the international climate negotiations .
To conclude , we have huge challenges before us to ensure unity at the European level , to engage strategically with key external partners and to maintain our full commitment to multilateral climate action , but there are many lessons to be learned from COP 15 .
One striking lesson certainly is that we must learn to speak with one voice .
In Copenhagen , China , India , the United States and other major powers each spoke with one voice , while Europe spoke with many different voices .
The same goes for global economic governance and international security .
We are indeed at a crossroads today .
Either we take determined and united action for Europe 's ecological , economic and political revival , or we risk economic stagnation and political irrelevance .
Let us take Copenhagen as an alarming warning of that scenario .
We must do better than that and we can do .
Only by standing united can we succeed , and I look forward to working with you to achieve this objective .
Mr President , first of all , may I ask you to give our regards to Commissioner Dimas and convey the thanks of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for his efforts over recent years .
Naturally , we , too , are disappointed by the results of the climate-change summit , but it is important not to forget that historic steps have indeed been taken with regard to certain elements , for example climate financing , deforestation and the two-degree target ; even though this is imperfect , as you rightly pointed out .
Naturally , we would have preferred something much more ambitious - see our resolution - but these are initial steps on which we must now build .
It is extremely important that we carry out an in-depth analysis of Europe 's contribution to this summit , as Europe was absent at the crucial time .
The summit may have been well prepared by Europe from a content and technical point of view , but politically speaking it was a disaster .
Europe 's political performance was simply poor .
You are right in saying that Europe must speak with one voice , but that is easier said than done .
We really must now make use of the opportunities offered by the new Treaty of Lisbon , too .
Two new women will - we hope - soon be in the front line : Mrs Hedegaard and Mrs Ashton .
They must bring in the rest of the world , paving the road to Mexico with strong climate diplomacy .
Mr President , the PPE Group sees it as a given that we must retain the 30 % target expressed in our November resolution , and must combine this target with not only European but also global ambition .
We must revise our strategy , as it was not endorsed ; a number of the key players did not endorse a global target .
We must revise our strategy , but we must also retain our ambition .
The Copenhagen Summit was a failure .
The gap between the world 's richer and poorer countries has increased , and neither the Swedish Presidency nor the Danish Prime Minister was able to prevent or avoid that .
As a fellow Member said recently , Europe was absent .
After this disappointment , it is important to regain the initiative .
Naturally , this cannot be achieved by refusing to acknowledge that the Copenhagen conference was a failure - as Mrs Hedegaard , the candidate Commissioner for Climate Action , has done .
That only increases the risk of the mistakes being repeated .
How will the Spanish Presidency and the Commission pave the way for a binding climate agreement in Mexico ?
Will you secure financing for the new climate initiatives in developing countries so that it is not just a repackaging of aid funding that is already intended for fighting poverty , among other things ?
Will you propose that our own emissions reductions are stepped up from 20 to 30 per cent ?
That would be regaining the initiative .
Will you eradicate the developing countries ' distrust by noting the value of the Kyoto agreement as a basis for continued work on a global climate agreement ?
Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the circumstances which led to 192 Heads of State or Government going to Copenhagen have not changed , and the failure of Copenhagen clearly must not be a reason to lower our ambitions .
However , we definitely need to change our strategy - we need a new strategy .
This strategy must be firm , dynamic and innovative .
First of all , it must be firm because it is essential that we not only maintain our targets but increase them , going as far as a 30 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions .
We must accelerate our industrial switchover to a green economy based on energy efficiency , clean and efficient processes , renewable energies , and new syntheses between information and environmental technologies , because the battle that started in Copenhagen is also that of industry and the industrial leaders of the 21st century .
We have to have a dynamic strategy without in any way delegitimising the UN process .
We must take initiatives with regard to the United States and China in order to be able to establish a potential basis for an agreement for Mexico .
We must not allow the G2 we saw in operation become a reality but rather , put ourselves at the heart of this process ; this will only be possible if we speak with one voice .
We must be innovative : innovative on the carbon markets by imposing an upper price limit , and innovative in terms of financing methods .
Personally speaking , and without committing my group , I think the issue of a carbon tax at our borders will have to be addressed .
We must then restore confidence with regard to Africa by increasing funding , but not by recycling official aid and renaming it ' carbon ' funds .
The bottom line is that we have to make a considerable effort so that we can maintain our resolve to be the world leaders on climate change .
Mr President , the outcome of the Copenhagen Summit is a disappointment , for the reasons already stated .
For the first time , the United Nations document mentions a two degree warming limit , but the emission limits stated by various countries at Copenhagen are the equivalent of more than a three degree rise in global warming .
The last time it was three degrees warmer than now , the surface of the sea was 10 metres higher .
We have to acknowledge honestly that the EU did not show the sort of leadership it proclaims .
The most important way for us to lead would have been , and still is , to aim for a more stringent emission reduction target of at least 30 % .
Our real target should be a reduction of 40 % , if we were to heed the message of the climate scientists , as we quite rightly should .
If we now stop short at a 20 % reduction in emissions , it will mean that the EU has not meant anything by declaring the two degree warming limit that it has done for more than ten years now .
According to reports commissioned by a large number of governments , including the Dutch Government , a 20 % reduction in emissions is a long way from the world 's most ambitious target .
In the light of the information we have now , a 30 % reduction target will cost less than what was estimated to be the cost of cutting emissions by 20 % two years ago .
Of course , at Copenhagen there were countries that wanted to torpedo the talks .
If the EU had led , it would have made this difficult for them .
This time , the EU made it easy for them by blocking the Kyoto Protocol 's second commitment period , which is extremely important for the developing countries .
It would be constructive to say that we are prepared for Kyoto 's second period on certain conditions , and it would be constructive to undertake to support climate action on the part of the economically less developed countries without recycling development cooperation money under a new heading .
From this meagre outcome , we now need to move on towards a proper climate agreement .
It can only be internationally legitimate if negotiated via the United Nations .
We also need a new form of climate diplomacy .
It is not enough that our experts know their way through the technical jungle .
We need patient diplomatic efforts to overcome the stumbling blocks and also to make the UN negotiating process a more viable one , so that , for example , it adopts rules on voting .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , I hope that I am proved to be wrong , but it looks to me increasingly unlikely that the talks begun and continued at Copenhagen will , in fact , lead to a legally binding treaty committing all of the major emitters in the world to large emission cuts .
In those circumstances , I believe it would be very foolish for those of us in the EU debating these matters to agree to even further emissions reductions .
A figure of 30 % has been mentioned .
Mrs Hassi just mentioned 40 % .
In the absence of a worldwide agreement , I think we would be crazy to agree to further reductions because what we will do is run the risk of saddling our consumers with some of the highest energy bills in the developed world , making European heavy industry and large energy consumers particularly uncompetitive in a worldwide environment .
Already we have seen a lot of industry relocating to outside the EU , simply , of course , transferring emissions from the EU to China , India and elsewhere .
This is a crazy economic policy because it has no net benefit for the environment whatsoever .
In fact , in some respects , it has a net deleterious effect on the environment as those goods are simply re-imported back into the EU , after all .
What we need is a comprehensive worldwide agreement .
I am fully in favour of that .
I hope we will work towards achieving it , but in the absence of one , we should be very wary of further unilateral cuts in Europe .
Mr President , an ambitious , legally-binding treaty is needed urgently .
According to the most up-to-date scientific information , the EU must commit to a 40 % reduction in emissions by 2020 and to an 80-95 % reduction by 2050 , and this kind of pledge cannot be made by depending on other people 's actions .
Everybody must know what real reductions in emissions will be put in place and we must know that the necessary funding will be provided to developing countries to enable them to combat climate change and its consequences .
Clarity is needed .
We all need clarity regarding who exactly will provide this funding , how much each developed country will provide , and how and when it will be provided .
The lack of political will demonstrated in Copenhagen cannot be repeated .
And I also wish Commissioner Dimas every success .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , there was a lot of talk about so-called climate refugees in connection with COP 15 .
People have always fled from natural disasters , poor harvests , drought , floods and famine .
The fact is that climate change and its direct impact on people and the environment are problems that we have no choice but to deal with .
However , I cannot help asking whether we are going the right way about it .
I agree that we need to be more aware of how we use resources in our daily lives and to research new technologies .
We must not forget , however , that in fact , we already have ways of alleviating problems that suddenly arise .
In connection with COP 15 , for example , there was mention of the Cook Islands - an island group in the Pacific .
The problem these islands face is that they are under threat from rising water levels .
A sea wall could protect the islands , and in fact , a sea wall is a perfectly manageable investment - just not for a poor island group .
While we in the West discuss wind power , electric cars , solar energy , biofuels and new ways of sorting waste in the suburbs of Europe , many islands are gradually disappearing .
I would therefore ask whether the Western world should be investing billions in climate technology - the effect of which is highly questionable - while millions of people could be helped using already known , low-cost measures .
Rather than quarrelling over statistics , evidence and research , now is the time we need to be dealing with the impact of climate change at a global level by means of real action .
Mr President , after Copenhagen , let us reassess the whole global warming story .
At Copenhagen , we had the irony of not just ' Climategate II ' , but also the onset of one of the harshest winters in decades .
Since then , we have seen the debunking of the Potsdam sea-level scare ; the Goddard Institute has been caught fiddling the temperature records ; the vanishing Himalayan glaciers have been exposed as a fantasy ; Mr Pachauri has emerged as a climate change profiteer .
The world is cooling .
Global warming is a fraud .
This is not a victimless crime .
Carbon taxes push up fuel prices , killing our old folk as we speak .
The billions wasted researching this non-existent problem are billions that cannot be spent defeating real scourges such as Alzheimer 's , or ending real environmental disasters such as deforestation .
Carbon credit trading makes billions for City sharks at the expense of families in poverty .
The loss of agricultural land to biofuels has already doubled world food prices , so millions are starving while greedy corporations make even fatter profits .
Those pushing the unscientific nonsense of man-made climate change - Shell , Monsanto , the international banks , Bilderberg one-worlders , carbon billionaires and their useful idiot allies on the left - are running the biggest fraud in human history .
They must and will be called to account , as should their collaborators in places such as this .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in Copenhagen , and following the conference , much has been said about amendments to UN regulations .
I suggest that we change the regulations in this House , so that those people in marginal groups , like Mr Griffin , do not speak at the beginning but right at the end , which is their rightful place in this political spectrum , at least in the first round .
Ladies and gentlemen , of course , Copenhagen was disappointing .
Many of our demands and the expectations of citizens were definitely not met .
I would like to add one thing to what has already been said .
We want an international agreement for emissions from aviation and maritime transport .
Unfortunately , Copenhagen brought absolutely no progress on this matter .
It was not even mentioned in the Copenhagen climate agreement .
That is a disappointing outcome , particularly as we know that every year that we lose will , of course , result in us having to raise our efforts even further .
The later we start , the bolder and stronger our efforts will need to be , and with every passing year it will , of course , become more difficult .
It is like a serious illness , the earlier it is treated , the milder the treatment needs to be .
That is why it is a disappointment .
Nevertheless , we should not look at it from a negative , one-sided viewpoint .
This morning , I was asked whether the subject of climate change was now politically dead in the water .
It is not .
It must continue and that is also what the citizens expect from us .
We should look for the positive things that actually happened in Copenhagen .
I will take two small examples , namely the undertaking by two developing countries , the Maldives and Costa Rica , to become climate-neutral in the next ten years .
The whole world - Europe and the rest of the world - can follow their lead .
These are small States , but if we look at a large State like Brazil , for example , what is happening there is also remarkable .
Therefore , we should analyse our mistakes and not be so arrogant as simply to carry on as before .
However , we should not go round in sackcloth and ashes , either , but join with those in the world who want to make progress in protecting the climate .
The game must no longer be industrialised countries against developing countries , but those countries who have understood what it is all about against the rest of the world , where the latter group , it is to be hoped , will increasingly shrink in size .
( DE ) Mr President , Mrs Espinosa , last week I attended the Informal Environment Council meeting in Seville .
It was the first Council configuration under the Spanish Presidency .
You were , of course , unable to attend due to an unfortunate family matter , but your Secretary of State , Teresa Ribera , did a splendid job of representing you .
Throughout the meeting , which was extremely well organised , the commitment of the Spanish Presidency to the matter was evident .
That is all well and good , but the result of this Council meeting was not very satisfactory .
The Council of Ministers was divided , with a complete lack of direction .
There is absolutely no agreement among Member States about what we should do now .
That is not a good sign .
It is your job and your responsibility to find the common denominator among the 27 Member States .
In my opinion , we need to do three things in the European Union following Copenhagen .
The first is that we must regain the leading role in global climate protection .
Secondly , we need to show credibility in the commitments that we have made and , thirdly , we urgently need to gain new partners before we get to Mexico .
With regard to regaining the leading role , I agree with everyone here who said that we should continue to state our promise to reduce carbon emissions by 30 % .
I would like to see us specify this 30 % target to the UN Secretariat in Bonn on 31 January , not the old 20 % target .
If we make ourselves dependent on comparable efforts by others , it will take forever and Mexico will also come to nothing .
In terms of showing credibility , the EUR 7.2 billion must actually be realised before Mexico .
The countries in Africa need to be able to see that the first measures are already in progress .
Finally , with regard to gaining partners , I hope that we will develop climate protection diplomacy and , with the help of the African Union in particular , that we will also find sufficient partners , including in Latin America and Asia , for a global agreement in Mexico .
Mr President , and fellow collaborators , we need to move on from Copenhagen .
The truth is we do not know the way .
We are stumbling around in the dark .
I think we just simply have to explore every opportunity and hope that one or more of them will take us forward .
But I am sure we have to try to maintain our ambitions and keep our leadership , and on this point there is a crucial decision coming up within the next fortnight and I want to know what the Presidency is going to do to get it right .
Forty per cent of our emissions come from the fossil fuels burnt in our power stations .
That is why the development of carbon capture and storage technology is recognised as so important .
That is why the Council three years ago agreed that we should try and build up to 12 demonstration projects by 2015 .
Now , we agreed a year ago a method of financing those projects : to use 300 million in allowances from the emissions trading scheme .
It took three months for that idea to come from Parliament , to get approval by the Council to unlock the door , but 12 months later , we still have not agreed how to choose the projects or use the money .
The Commission has finally put forward a draft decision .
It proposes only eight CCS projects , and the timetable it recommends means that it will be impossible for them all to be built by 2015 .
Commissioner Rehn has got the hot seat , then ; I hope someone will pass him a note between now and the end of the debate so he can explain the lack of ambition in this document .
But it must be agreed : however inadequate , we have got to move forward .
It will be debated at a meeting of the Council 's Climate Change Committee on 2 February , and there is opposition from some Member States who oppose the Commission having the final say over the selection of projects and the use and distribution of the money .
Now this meeting will be the first opportunity since Copenhagen for the European Union to demonstrate whether it is going forward and taking practical steps or going to slip backwards .
It is a crucial test both for the Commission and the Presidency .
So my question to the Minister is : Is the Presidency going to ensure that we get agreement at that meeting , or are you going to drop the ball ?
( NL ) Mr President , let us be quite clear : Copenhagen was a failure .
Indeed , there were three real losers from the summit : the United Nations , the European Union and the climate .
It is of the utmost importance , then , to turn these three losers into victors in 2010 on the way to Mexico .
To achieve this , three things must happen .
The first is that the EU must really speak with one voice , as Commissioner Rehn has already said , but - and I should appreciate a specific answer to this - who is it to be ?
Who will speak on Europe 's behalf in Mexico ?
Secondly , with regard to the United Nations , Europe must prove its leadership in the negotiations , too , which means no longer looking only to the United States and China , and instead looking mainly to the countries sharing our wish for action on the climate , such as the African Union , Mexico , Brazil and South Africa .
We should be widening the group of countries with whom we wish to conclude an agreement .
Thirdly , the climate .
It is true that we agreed on two degrees , but this figure also means something .
The science says that two degrees means rich countries must reduce their CO2 emissions by 40 % .
Therefore , the EU must now promise 30 % .
On 31 January , it will have another chance to prove its leadership by coming forward with 30 % , and I ask that the EU offer that figure .
I would appreciate your response to this proposal , as it represents the only way to show leadership and make 2010 the year of the United Nations , the European Union and the climate .
Mr President , I support the environmental goals for 2020 , but I have some serious doubts about some methods .
The Copenhagen conference was a good example of a bad method .
And what were the lessons ?
The conference was too massive to be productive : a rock concert of 50 000 people is possible ; a meeting , not .
Secondly , Europe was outfoxed by China and India , and the US joined in .
Instead of being a decisive player , the EU was a confused spectator .
What should we do ?
I think we have to reassess the form we used , rather a G20 than an event of Woodstock proportions .
Secondly , we have to stop displaying moral arrogance by telling China and India what to do .
Important barriers to punish both countries would be disastrous .
On the contrary , the EU should re-examine its own stance , which will ultimately undermine our own growth and employment .
Finally , we need serious research on the body of evidence .
' Climategate ' was already a reminder , and the claim that the Himalayan glaciers are retreating now seems to be based on speculation .
Some members of the IPCC now even predict global cooling .
We need objective , impartial scientific research , and not an agenda-driven political activism .
What is true and what is not : at present , we simply do not know , and I think we need to have the facts right , first .
Commissioner , Minister , I hope you will look at these questions with an open mind .
( DE ) Mr President , the United Nations climate conference failed due to the hard-nosed political interests of the industrialised nations .
As a result , the basis for existence of billions of people in developing countries and in the island nations at risk of being submerged is in jeopardy .
There is no agreement on how we are to effectively limit the further warming of the planet .
The EU played the game in the interests of its national undertakings and the profits of the large concerns .
The target of reducing greenhouse gas emissions in the EU Member States by a total of 30 % by 2020 was not brought to the table early enough .
Making better climate protection targets dependent on the prior concessions of other States is playing dice with the future of humanity .
The facts are clear : in 2007 , CO2 emissions per person were 4.6 tonnes in China , in Germany they were 9.7 tonnes and in the US 19.1 tonnes .
We urgently need climate justice for the whole of humanity .
Next year in Mexico City , the industrialised nations and emerging economies must come to a binding agreement with specific and ambitious targets .
Mr President , you can , of course , tell that I am a sceptic because I do not dress like a scarecrow .
I fought my way through the blizzard in Copenhagen , like many of you did .
It is interesting , is it not , that we have had the coldest winter so far on record in London for 30 years ?
It is the same in Poland , Korea and China .
We have had the coldest temperatures in Florida , Arizona , Texas - the first snow in Texas , I think , for a hundred years .
Of course , as Giles Coren of the London Times said , my goodness me , we simply do not get it - of course that is what global warming is all about : we have got to get used to freezing temperatures .
Well , we have seen the Al Gore hockey stick , which is still , I gather , being shown in London state schools - Al Gore , snake oil salesman , crook !
We have seen Professor Jones from the University of East Anglia - crook !
And now - you will not know about this yet because it has been kept out of the public domain - the New Zealand National Climate Database : I have the figures here - all fraudulent .
When are you all going to wake up ?
Scam , scam , scam !
( The speaker agreed to take a blue card question under Rule 149 ( 8 ) )

Mr President , apparently all the science of climate change is nonsense , according to Mr Bloom , because we have had a cold winter .
I wonder if Mr Bloom would like to tell the House the difference between climate and weather .

Climate , Mr Davies , is what we all have to put up with .
( HU ) Minister , I have surprising news for you .
The climate conference in Copenhagen is over .
You talk about targets and illusions as if we were still before the event .
It ended in failure .
No legally binding commitments were signed .
The example of Kyoto shows what voluntarism means .
We are all aware of the value of the United States ' undertakings , but Canada is also worth mentioning .
Canada signed the Kyoto Treaty , and then increased its carbon-dioxide emissions by 26 % without any consequences .
Copenhagen is a clear message about the world we are living in .
The world today is determined by economic fundamentalism .
Whenever the interests of society face the interests of the global economy , the latter always wins .
Of course , behind the global economy there is a small power elite .
In order to stop irreversible climate change , we would need to change another climate .
We need to change the political and moral climate .
Before doing so , as long as people serve the economy and not the other way around , until the eco-social market economy becomes the guiding principle , all similar conferences are condemned to failure .
( DE ) Mr President , if we can learn anything from Copenhagen , then it is a sense of reality .
I still remember the debate we had here in this House before Copenhagen .
Everyone was glowing with optimism , but it came to nothing .
It was an international conference with its own rules , and we can achieve little with good will alone .
So , let us approach the next negotiations in Mexico with the necessary sense of reality .
If we were to assess Copenhagen , we have to say , to be fair , that it was not so bad , because the result can serve as a basis for the negotiations in Mexico and something , at least , was achieved .
The greatest disappointment for us Europeans has to be that we - the EU - were not there when the final document was drawn up .
That must give us pause for thought , because we are always emphasising the fact that we are the ones who want to take a leading role in the global fight against climate change .
Why should this be ?
First of all , probably because , with our 14 % CO2 emissions , we are not among the largest emitters .
The US and China together account for almost half .
However , in Europe , we do not speak with one voice .
The last Environment Council showed very clearly how different the views are there .
Many Member States view the problem very differently to the majority in this House , for example .
However , another reason is surely the fact that we Europeans are not as good as we always claim to be .
If we take these clean development mechanisms , in other words , these joint implementation measures , and the other measures out of the equation and consider only our own measures for reducing CO2 emissions , then we can see that our balance sheet is not as good as we maintain .
Thirdly , we also have to say that other countries and other regions of the world have a different approach to this problem .
Our big goal is a legally binding agreement .
However , China and the US are opting for a different route .
Overall , we need to consider whether we should not be more flexible in our negotiations , because working together to combat the phenomenon of climate change is important , but the methods we employ to achieve this could be quite different .
( DA ) Mr President , the question that I would put to the climate sceptics in this House is this : if nine out of ten doctors told you they were more than ninety percent sure that you were seriously ill , but that they had some medicine that could cure your illness - a medicine with no side effects - would you take the medicine ?
Of course you would .
That is how the world should have reacted in Copenhagen .
That is how the world should of course react when more than ninety percent of leading researchers in the field say that global warming is real and that it is man-made .
The EU should therefore demonstrate leadership .
Obviously , we can criticise the US .
Obviously , we can criticise China for not having had the political will required in Copenhagen .
In this House , however , we must look nearer home - we must be critical of the lack of initiative shown by the EU .
The EU could have done two things , and it should do two things before the conference in Mexico .
Firstly , we should take the lead as regards committing ourselves to reduction targets .
That means moving from the 20 per cent reductions promised by 2020 to 30 per cent .
Secondly , we should name the amounts we are willing to contribute to financing long-term adjustment to the climate changes that we know are coming .
Finally , it is obvious that we will also have more of an impact if we speak with one voice , because we will then be able to negotiate more rationally and clearly than we were able to in Copenhagen . Mr Callanan of the European Conservatives and Reformists said : It would be crazy to raise our ambitions in the current state .
No , Mr Callanan , it would be crazy not to raise our ambitions !
It would be crazy to raise our ambitions in the current state .
No , Mr Callanan , it would be crazy not to raise our ambitions !
( SV ) The Copenhagen Summit was , without doubt , a great disappointment , but the important thing now is to look to the future .
That is what we liberals are doing , and I hope that we can do so together in Europe .
We need a strategy and we need a ' post-Copenhagen agenda ' .
An important tool for achieving this is continued investment in the emissions trading system .
The EU should immediately open negotiations with the US to integrate the emerging American system with the European system .
A transatlantic market for carbon emissions could be the start of a global market .
Mr Rehn gave an extremely good introductory address .
He is quite right in his conclusion .
The EU must speak with one voice in these negotiations .
However , it must be borne in mind that under the Treaty of Lisbon , the European Parliament can now influence how these decisions are taken .
Parliament has to be involved in the preparatory work , since a final agreement requires our endorsement .
Within Europe , we must , at the same time , continue to strengthen our own carbon market and stop giving away trading rights for free .
We need to invest in new technology and thirdly , we need to set a price floor for carbon dioxide .
The climate targets can be reached through the mechanisms of the market , not through more bureaucracy .
If we now put the Copenhagen conference behind us , make a new start and put all our efforts into future measures , then the first thing we need to focus on is EU 2020 .
The measures are included there and we need to have well-honed proposals as regards energy efficiency and how we invest in new technology .
We need a climate jobs strategy .
Finally , I would like to say that clearly , we need a 30 per cent reduction in carbon emissions if we want to win not just the battle for the climate , but also the battle for the market .
( FR ) Mr President , Mrs Espinosa , I have been very surprised at the self-satisfaction you show with regard to EU action in the climate field .
It is true that Europe has done more and better work in the last 10 years than most of the other countries in the world , but there was clearly a failure of European leadership in Copenhagen .
In Copenhagen , we also saw Europe become simply the combination of the personal communication strategies of the European Heads of State or Government , and I should like to specifically mention Mr Sarkozy , Mrs Merkel and Mr Brown in this connection .
Under these circumstances , it is clearly easy to knock the UN process .
It is true that the UN system is complicated , and that a G20 , where the agreements are meaningless but there are opportunities for major publicity stunts , is much simpler .
This means that this coming year , Europe must do more and better work .
We currently have a 20 % target .
However , 20 % actually means doing less in the next 10 years than we have done in the past 10 years ; it means reducing Europe 's climate effort .
This is not only absurd for the climate , when the scientists are telling us that we have to reach a 40 % target , but it is also absurd for our economy and jobs .
Therefore , Mrs Espinosa , please do not reduce Europe 's climate ambition to the lowest common denominator , to the objectives voiced by President Barroso , who does not want to budge from the 20 % figure , or to those voiced by Italy and Poland , which will soon deny the existence of climate change .
Reread Parliament 's resolution and immediately opt for an unconditional 30 % .
( PL ) Mr President , we have to accept the fact that no one , with the exception of several European states , wants to pay for restrictions on CO2 emissions , or to cut back on their energy use .
It is even worse than this .
Some developing countries , using irritating anti-colonial rhetoric , want to get rich on this , while at the same time being the biggest emitters of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere .
African countries , China and India want to keep their exemptions not to submit to the international system of monitoring emissions and , at the same time , receive billions of euros for clean technologies .
This is a position we cannot justify to our taxpayers .
After the Copenhagen conference , we must get it into our heads that Europe cannot bear these costs on its own .
Firstly , because acting on our own , we will slow down the growth of our economy even more , and strike at the prosperity of our citizens .
Secondly , by acting on our own , we will not change anything connected with emissions , because we have already managed to limit our own emissions .
( FR ) Mr President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , although Copenhagen was a failure , the mobilisation of non-governmental actors was exceptional and revealed that there is true international support for climate justice .
From now on , it will be a given that the continuing negotiation process will have to take into account , as a matter of priority , the interests of the small vulnerable island states and of Africa .
It will also be crucial to ensure that the USD 100 billion announced in Copenhagen is indeed in addition to the commitments made in the area of official development assistance .
Finally , we must bear in mind the fact that we have very little time in which to act before the consequences of climate change become irreversible .
The year 2010 represents our last chance if we want to ensure real success in Mexico City .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , do not say that we did not warn you about this .
The resolution on COP 15 passed by this Parliament was all smoke and no fire .
We asked for too much and we have achieved nothing .
Those are not the words of the Lega Nord but of Ivo de Boer , secretary of the UN climate change conference . It has not really been a disaster , even if the agreement is merely a letter of intent .
The text which prevented COP 15 from drawing a complete blank , agreed at the end of a marathon of negotiations of a truly unprecedented duration and intensity , contains very little substance .
The Copenhagen Accord , agreed by US President Obama , Brazilian President Lula , Chinese Premier Wen Jiabao , Indian Prime Minister Singh and South African President Zuma , and imposed on all the remaining countries , has not even been formally adopted .
Following its rejection by eight countries , which prevented its adoption , the Accord was merely taken note of by the plenary of the 192 participating states .
Ladies and gentlemen , the global warming story is a waste of time .
Since December , newspapers and television news programmes have been reporting that Europe is in the grip of freezing cold weather .
Let us avoid useless and costly speculation about the climate .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the only concrete result of the climate summit in Copenhagen was the limiting of global warming to two degrees Celsius .
The measures needed for this , however , have remained a mystery . This minimal compromise is disappointing for us , particularly since it is now up to each individual State to decide whether or not to accept the agreement on climate protection goals .
Time really is running out .
It is up to us to now decide what happens next .
We should promote sustainable , climate-protecting development , which allows us to use the resources of our planet in a responsible way , for us and for future generations .
The EU and its Member States should develop their world-leading role in green technologies .
Then we will at least have made a start .
( FR ) Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , nobody could have failed to notice that Copenhagen was a wasted opportunity .
However - and , yes , I am echoing your words here , Commissioner - this summit still had two virtues .
The first was that it mobilised many more Heads of State or Government than the Kyoto Summit did .
The second is that it enabled emerging countries to benefit from financial commitments aimed specifically at helping them to combat global warming .
So what should Europe do now ?
Of course , it should continue its excellent work to reduce greenhouse gas emissions , because the truth is that Europe has already been extremely virtuous .
With regard to the Kyoto target , which was an 8 % reduction , European companies have achieved a reduction of just under 13 % .
The latter have therefore shown themselves to be extremely virtuous and very committed to the protection of the environment .
However , this fight and this virtuous attitude absolutely must not be situated in a context of unfair competition .
As I told you at the hearings , Mr Rehn , all this can be situated only in a context of completely fair competition .
Indeed , we must consider implementing a carbon tax at the borders of the European Union , because we cannot abandon our businesses and thus our jobs to completely unfair competition , to the advantage of countries that show no respect for , or do not apply the same standards regarding , environmental protection and greenhouse gas reduction .
I therefore think it is absolutely essential - and I echo my fellow Member Mrs Lepage here - that , at some time in the future , we give thought to implementing a carbon tax at the borders of the European Union .
Secondly , I was rather delighted to learn at the hearings that Commissioner Tajani has not ruled out the undertaking of an impact study on the possibility of imposing this carbon tax at the borders of the European Union .
Therefore , little by little , I think that we are going to win this battle , because it is important to protect our European companies and jobs .
( EL ) Mr President , Mrs Espinosa , we would certainly have preferred today 's debate to be held under different circumstances , where we would be called upon to evaluate a global , legally binding agreement and to decide , as the European Union , on what to do next .
Unfortunately , the results from Copenhagen were well below par in the circumstances .
That is the first main reason we are expressing our disappointment .
The second reason we are expressing our disappointment and which particularly concerns us as the European Parliament is the poor figure cut by the European Union at the Copenhagen Summit .
While one would have expected that , at the first global summit following the entry into force of the Lisbon Treaty , the European Union would have spearheaded an effort to achieve a new , ambitious , substantial , global agreement on combating climate change , we and the European citizens witnessed a show of fragmentation , with some European leaders playing their own game and the European Union playing the role of sidekick and spectator .
This is not the role we would wish for or the role which befits us .
So what needs to be done ?
We call on the European Commission and the Council to show that it is up to the job and to safeguard a leading role for Europe in this new endeavour .
May I remind you that it is not merely a question of restricting the repercussions of climate change .
It is a much broader challenge ; the challenge of changing to a new development model , a green development model which will be Europe 's answer to the need to create new jobs , to support the competitiveness of the European economy and to consolidate the leading role of the European Union in the new order .
The outcome of Copenhagen was deeply disappointing , but we must now move forward .
The EU needs to commit itself now to a 30 % cut in emissions for three reasons .
The first is simply that a 30 % cut requires barely more effort now than the original 20 % cut , simply because of the fall in economic activity due to the recession .
Secondly , to rein back now would be to lose the momentum which has been built up in the new green industries .
We cannot ' half-commit ' to investment in renewable energy sources and low-carbon transport .
There is massive infrastructure which needs to be put in place , whether it is a North Sea supergrid or , on a smaller scale , plug-in charging points for electric cars .
Hundreds and thousands of new jobs are at stake , potentially 70 000 jobs relating to offshore wind in the UK alone , but these jobs , which are so necessary for economic recovery , will only be realised if there is a clear roadmap towards a zero-carbon Europe by 2050 .
Investment has to have certainty , and we need to be aware that Europe is in danger of losing its place as leader on renewable technology .
Both the US and China are growing their renewables industries very rapidly .
If we hesitate now , those new green jobs will move to other continents .
Finally , we need that 30 % cut because most of the extra commitment can easily be realised by increased energy efficiency .
Not to do more on energy efficiency would , in any case , be crazy .
Energy efficiency means economic efficiency .
It means lower energy bills , not higher ones , and it improves energy security .
So , whatever figures are put on the table by the other parties on 31 January - and maybe we will be pleasantly surprised - the EU must commit now to a 30 % cut .
( CS ) When reviewing the Copenhagen Summit and its results , one should employ common sense and look through the prism of the multitude of available environmental and economic data confirming that there is no such thing as global warming , and if it does exist , it is totally beyond human control , being caused purely by natural forces .
By the way , we learnt last week that a significant portion of the environmental data used by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change was either knowingly falsified or misinterpreted .
Seen in this light , it is good to see that the Copenhagen Summit has failed .
I do hope that this failure will , first of all , bring a departure from the aggressive so-called ' green ' politics .
Secondly , politics will get back to genuine topics that really concern people in today 's economic recession .
Thirdly , it will prevent the waste of taxpayers ' money on controversial green projects .
Fourthly , it will create space for a matter-of-fact debate on the rational , efficient and cheaper provision of energy , and we will see the renaissance of nuclear energy .
Ladies and gentlemen , when I meet my constituents , they shake their heads with incredulity over the topics we discuss here , failing as we do to deal with their real problems .
( PT ) Mr President , despite its urgency , what we saw in Copenhagen was several steps backwards .
Copenhagen did indeed mobilise more heads of state than Kyoto , but it also created more divisions and , as a result , it turned into a scenario of ' every man for himself ' , where every state can set out their goals and , moreover , do so on a voluntary basis .
We should note that we have a target reduction of 2 degree Celsius and goals for funding without any explanation whatsoever .
These cannot be seen as a consolation .
However , I believe that we have to act with an eye to the future , and this means moving from words to actions .
The European Union always wants to be a leader , and always has . However , when we arrived in Copenhagen , it faltered , failing to define or defend the goals that it had stated here , and which it said that it would never give up .
My question here , then , is whether in the future we will not act more fairly , whether we will continue to allow a situation where the poorest people go on paying the heaviest price due to our weakness and the decisions of some people over others .
( FI ) Mr President , the Copenhagen climate summit was a complete flop .
I voted against the resolution here in December .
I was right , like 92 others here .
The European Union very arrogantly endeavoured to offer the entire world its own solution .
A few days before it began , emissions trading fraud worth EUR 5 billion was exposed .
This must have been embarrassing just before the meeting was due to start , with the EU offering a way out and facing abuses of funds worth EUR 5 billion .
This was shameful , and is the EU now at all worried that these abuses will be investigated ?
If we are to impose restrictions on emissions , let us introduce a specific emissions system , as we have with cars .
It works , although there is never a case for winding down our steel , metal or wood processing industries , in Finland or in the EU countries .
That is to no avail : workers and employees should not be made to suffer .
( Applause )

( SL ) I , too , am disappointed with the outcome of the Copenhagen conference , but let us stop bemoaning the poor results and let us instead think where we go from here , so that we do not meet with further disappointment .
Telling ourselves ' Let us build upon the work we have done because we just need to make some changes ' is not enough .
The first question I wish to ask myself in this respect is what COP conferences are in the first place ?
Are they real conferences or just a display for the public ?
They are both , of course .
However , we need to ensure that experts can get on with their jobs and that the public is informed , not only about the informal events which take place on the fringes of conferences , but also about the actual work we are doing .
Europe should , therefore , reconsider the organisational aspects of such conferences .
My second question is : What is the role of world leaders at such conferences ?
Do they come to these conferences in order to pursue their domestic political campaigns or do they come to help participants reach a compromise ?
I think we also need to reconsider the working methods of such conferences and the roles of the world leaders who attend them .
My third question concerns the leading role of the European Union .
Yes , we have taken many good measures to ensure that Europe can maintain its leading role in developing environmentally friendly technologies , but we have lost our leading role in the negotiating process .
In my opinion , we should not settle for playing merely a coordinating role in the negotiating process , because we have to be an active negotiator ourselves .
That is why we should not lay all our cards on the table before negotiations begin and trumpet the goals we are after .
We should also be trying to bring ourselves closer to third countries , not distance ourselves from them .
The final point I wish to make is that we must include in our international meetings the issue of climate change as a matter of urgency and here , of course , I expect close cooperation by both of the commissioners in charge of these two areas .
( ES ) Today , at the start of 2010 , we are not where we would have hoped to be in the fight against climate change .
We are not there because right now , we should be at the stage of moving towards the adoption of legislative changes brought about by an agreement reached in Copenhagen .
We are not at that stage , and we should be sorry .
We should regret the fact that , in Copenhagen , ambitions were lowered in the fight against climate change , that a binding agreement was not signed and that the procedure lacked transparency .
Consequently , we do not have the sufficient legal base or means to cater for people 's needs , especially in developing countries .
However , nor are we at the stage we were at before Copenhagen , because in Copenhagen , we did reach a targeted agreement with the United States , China , India , South Africa and Brazil , to which other countries later signed up , such as Russia , Australia , Norway , Sweden and Spain .
We should not forget that , together , those countries are responsible for three-quarters of carbon dioxide emissions ; nor should we forget that many of those countries were previously outside the Kyoto Protocol .
Therefore , the step we have taken is not enough , but it is significant .
We should take advantage of that significant step in order to push forward from within the European Union .
The European Union has been the driving force for all the progress that has been made .
However , that progress will not continue unless the European Union keeps pushing .
With a view to Germany and Mexico , we have to work to reach binding agreements and to obtain resources that can help developing countries to mitigate their emissions , to adapt and to update their technology .
We have to do this for reasons of efficiency , fairness and because we are in need of more partners .
I am sure that the Spanish Presidency will work towards that end .

Mr President , I have good news for the House : in common with many scientists , I personally have concluded that there is no climate crisis !
Global sea levels are not rising significantly and , as the IPCC has been forced to admit , Himalayan glaciers are not in rapid retreat .
The small increase in mean global temperatures over the last hundred years is entirely consistent with well-established , long-term , natural climate changes .
Copenhagen showed that many nations , especially China and India , are simply not prepared to sacrifice economic performance to solve an entirely speculative problem .
In Britain , a majority of voters no longer believe in man-made climate change and they will not pay for futile and pointless attempts at mitigation .
The recent leaked CRU memos show that even the high priests of climate alarmism are in despair at the failure of nature to follow their forecasts , so they are falsifying the figures to sustain their fantasy .
We must now demand a full public inquiry into the suspect data before we spend another penny on mitigation .
( PT ) Mr President , the United States and the European Union , the first and second largest emitters in the world per capita respectively , have a definite and unavoidable responsibility for the failure of Copenhagen , which no amount of passing the buck can diminish .
Among other aspects mentioned here , the summit failed as regards funding for the so-called ' adaptation ' for developing countries , due to the insufficient number of those who made commitments .
At the same time , the burdens on these countries continue to be hypocritically ignored .
These include their enormous foreign debt , an amount that is truly astronomical when compared with the level of funding announced , and which severely limits any real possibility of sustainable economic and social development .
The summit foundered on the serious discussion of the perverse results of the market-based instruments and the flexible mechanisms of the Kyoto Protocol .
Among other problems , the summit failed to address the causes of climate change beyond its effects .
This is an irrational way of approaching economic and social issues , and it precludes any solution for this or any other problems that humanity ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in this Copenhagen agreement , a two percent goal was accepted by 180 member countries , but it is still not legally binding .
Not much came of all of the plans that we made here .
It all went wrong in Copenhagen .
It could also be called a defeat .
It is important to describe the situation accurately in order to have the opportunity to think carefully about why this happened , so that we can then make some progress on this matter .
I am slightly shocked by some of the speeches I have heard here .
People are saying ' we need to fight harder ' , ' let us continue to do what we have been doing ' , ' we need a higher percentage ' , ' more money ' , ' the problem was simply not enough unity in Europe ' - I think these statements are too casual , too superficial in their analysis of the situation .
Simply carrying on and marching forward is not the solution .
These were not the reasons for this outcome .
Have we actually considered and discussed with one another all of the essential issues in a fair and objective way ?
How have we dealt with the questions of fellow Members , whether justified or not , who said ' we have questions about issues that we are critical of , climate-sceptical questions ' ?
How did we respond in the Committee on Climate Change when fellow Members said ' we also want to hear the other point of view - the opposing position of some scientists ' ?
What opportunity did we actually have to present that ?
Moreover , regardless of which position we take , we need to discuss calmly how we should deal with the recent information that fellow Members have also just mentioned that the IPCC made a mistake with regard to the melting of glaciers ?
A second set of questions also needs answers .
Are we using the right instruments to tackle this ?
There are always new timetables , more percentages , new regulations and stipulations .
This is a rather bureaucratic approach .
Is Mrs Ek not right to emphasise so strongly that technology , innovation and market mechanisms are the way forward here ?
Other states are taking different approaches , but it is not the case that they are doing nothing .
Perhaps a bit more openness and a bit more reflection will give us a chance to be more effective in this matter .
This is what I would like to see , rather than the method of ' shut your eyes and advance ' .
Mr President , I do not want to depict a doom scenario , as has been done here .
I do not want to depict a doom scenario for the future , nor do I want to look back in anger about the failure of Copenhagen - although I am angry .
Therefore , the resolution is to do far better in the future , the next opportunity being Mexico this year .
Firstly , do not walk alone next time .
In Copenhagen , we looked back and we stood alone in our ambitions .
We must be able to convince others to be as ambitious as we are .
How can we claim to be in the driver 's seat if we fail to convince others of our ambitions and of the destination ?
Secondly , no one size fits all .
As sometimes was proudly said during the run-up to the climate summit , there is no plan ' B ' . Well , we certainly know it : there is nothing right now .
We have nothing .
So we had better have a plan ' B ' next time .
Last , but not least , how can we win in diversity if our slogan is , I mean , unity .
We had better unite next time , and that means one voice .
We need a univocal mandate .
Europe really needs one voice .
So , President-in-Office , are you willing to commit yourselves to obtaining an exclusive - and not a shared - mandate ?
It would be an exclusive competence for the European Union in climate policy and climate agreements .
( PL ) Mr President , the climate , and nature itself , which is all around us , belong to all people , including future generations , and that is why we must feel responsible for their protection .
During the recent climate summit , world leaders did not manage to come to an understanding on a common strategy or instruments to help reach this objective .
Paradoxically , I do not think this is bad news , in view of the disturbing information which is coming from , among others , Great Britain and the United States , about an attempt at manipulation by certain lobbies , using scientific data to achieve a specific result .
We need a reliable diagnosis of the situation .
Therefore , I appeal for the appointment of an independent , international expert group , which will compile a thorough report stating whether human activity really does affect climate change and if data has been falsified .
When establishing a common strategy for protecting the climate , EU politicians should also take into account the economic disproportions between the countries of Western and Eastern Europe .
In view of the crisis , the measures which have been proposed could lead to the ruin of many economies .
Mr President , Minister , the Copenhagen conference ended with a result that was a long way from what was expected .
The countries took note of a document whose objectives were unclear and not binding .
Copenhagen stood for much more than a climate summit .
There was a new correlation between prominent players on the world stage and the proper role of multilateralism in the UN system .
The growing influence of the emerging countries was evident .
Copenhagen showed that we need to rethink the role of Europe on the world stage .
We will need to make the most of the possibilities offered by the Treaty of Lisbon in order to prepare the way for the next COP .
We need to be ambitious , united with one voice and forging strategic alliances .
The result of Copenhagen forms a foundation for us to build on with further work .
The EU should try to ensure that the next stages in the negotiations will further develop the Copenhagen Agreement , with a view to reaching a legally binding agreement by the end of this year .
It should also contribute to the implementation of provisions for giving funding to developing countries , and with regard to forests , technology transfer and adaptation measures .
Internally , Europe has a big task ahead : it needs to implement the energy and climate package , to invest in clean technologies , scientific research and energy efficiency , to invest in a new industrial policy based on innovation and the efficiency of natural resources , to promote policies on low-carbon cities and sustainable transport and mobility .
This is the only way that we can lead , but real leadership is based on providing a good example .
( HU ) Mr President , Copenhagen showed us that the EU failed to find partners for its far-reaching ideas .
In the future , the EU must not give up its targets , the commitment of three times 20 % but , at the same time , it should reconsider its negotiating position and mandate , because we cannot pursue an ostrich policy .
The lessons from Copenhagen should be learnt .
That mandate was not successful .
We failed to understand the commitment of China and other developing countries .
We failed to understand the room Mr Obama had to manoeuvre and we were unable to speak with a common voice .
As part of the debate of the Spanish Presidency , the President , Mr Verhofstadt , rightly stated that Europe had no common voice .
We cannot pursue an ostrich policy .
After Copenhagen , we cannot behave and we cannot do politics the same way as we did before Copenhagen .
The EU should reposition itself and set a new mandate by the time of the negotiating round in Mexico .
First of all , we should investigate how to achieve the 2o C target , which is the result of Copenhagen .
During the next period , European policy should be aimed at establishing a flexible position in order to achieve success . Thank you for your attention .
( NL ) Mr President , Mrs Espinosa , this morning , the Nationale Voorleesontbijt ( national reading-aloud breakfast ) was held in Dutch schools .
In my constituency , in Noordwijk aan Zee , which lies just behind the North Sea dunes in an area that will be first in the firing line if the sea level rises , the schoolchildren were told a story entitled ' A meeting ' , about snowmen deliberating how to keep the warmth at bay .
They talk and talk until they have all melted .
To be frank , on a bad day , this debate does remind me a little of that .
It is true that Copenhagen was not a success .
Now we could continue to point to other countries or individual sectors ; these one-liners have occasionally cropped up in the present debate , too .
Yet it strikes me as a better idea to look ahead to what Europe can , and , more importantly , must do in order to shoulder its responsibility and ensure that an international agreement is still reached .
Hence , in my opinion , the option of a 30 % reduction must be kept expressly on the table .
In addition , Europe must look at ways of promoting new technologies , including with European funds , for example , by promoting the construction of CO2-neutral greenhouses that are also capable of producing energy , instead of us always viewing agriculture as a problem .
Moreover , we must base our approach on science , knowledge and skills and not on emotions , however much we all care about this debate .
Finally , as many of my fellow Members have already said , we must speak with one voice .
There should be only one seat for Europe in Mexico rather than the eight that were apparently needed in Copenhagen .
President-in-Office , how do you plan to achieve this together with the Commissioners with responsibility in this field ?
Mr President , the hope generated by years of preparation descended into despondency and despair as it became increasingly clear that the deal we had come to agree in Copenhagen was slipping from our grasp as each day passed .
We must be concerned about how easy it was for the US , China and others to circumvent the UN structures , sideline the EU and agree an arrangement which fell far short of global expectations .
One thing is clear .
The UN climate talks system needs life-saving surgery before Mexico at the end of this year .
As it stands , President Obama is a prisoner of his political system , for he needs 67 votes in the Senate .
China refuses all measures which would be binding and open to international scrutiny .
The irony of the situation is that , the longer the US , China and others frustrate , delay and prevaricate on a deal , the tougher the targets for reduction will , of necessity , become .
Let us look at solutions .
The EU and this Parliament need to examine honestly how it approaches such matters in the future .
Europe must be much more assertive in standing up for itself and , in doing so , should continue to set ambitious targets involving targets and emissions reductions of 30 % .
This is an economic race to lead the world into the 21st century based on green jobs and sustainable living .
Europe must win that race regardless of what our friends do or do not do .

( ES ) I would like to welcome Mrs Espinosa ; I am very pleased that she is here .
I am most concerned by the change in attitude , and the fact that our analysis of Copenhagen may well lead to a change in attitude .
Firstly , I think that one of our problems is a lack of humility and realism , as my colleagues have already said .
Above all , however , I am concerned that , when we have been to other countries , we have found that they do not talk about climate change but rather global change .
The context in which we will be moving in Mexico , and the context in which we have been moving , is that of a growing population , a food shortage , a need for more agriculture , and limited land and water resources ; therefore , any decision we take on climate change must be considered within that context .
Of course , we must also remember that many countries have a right to develop .
We thus need to take a systemic view , something that is lacking in our analysis of climate change .
Climate change cannot be resolved on the issue of emissions alone .
A sectoral , quantitative vision does not lead anywhere .
What is more , we have to attach greater importance to science .
In particular , I ask the Commission that those teams who tampered with data be checked and have their funding withdrawn , if the European Union is indeed supporting them , because this will discredit us forever .
How are we going to coordinate on this matter ?
That is another very important question .
How is the European Union going to organise itself in order to reach an agreement ?
We should have already started working on that this morning .

Finally , the issue that concerns me : adaptation is carried out in the territory concerned , and we have to begin that process , once again , with a new , strategic vision of the territory ; this includes productivity , strategic reforestation , regions , areas and districts devoted to agro-energy and , of course , water and biodiversity .
We are lacking that vision .
On this point , I think we need to think about the option of Structural Funds for new strategic plans in all regions in order to be able to carry out this adaptation ; and decision makers should be invited to begin that strategic revision of the territory because we do not have responsibility for that area and it will be very difficult to work on it from Europe .
( NL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as has been said many times already , of course , the summit was a failure .
We are miles away from our objectives .
Over the next few months , we shall have to see if things can still be put right .
I believe , however - as others have also said before - that there is still a great deal we can put right ourselves , even without an international agreement under the auspices of the United Nations .
I am thinking in particular of what we can do to achieve a more sustainable transport system .
A priority objective was to reduce aviation emissions by 10 % by 2020 working through the International Civil Aviation Organisation ( ICAO ) , and maritime transport emissions by 20 % through the International Maritime Organisation ( IMO ) .
Thus , I should like to ask the Council and the Commission to continue negotiations within these organisations and to step up the pressure by starting to prepare unilateral measures already if an agreement cannot be reached in a relatively short period of time .
In the meanwhile , of course , there is a great deal of homework we can be doing ourselves .
With regard to intra-European transport , I heard Commissioner-designate Hedegaard advocate an ambitious climate and transport package during the hearings .
Commissioner-designate Kallas seemed rather less clear , but I would remind the Commission that transport accounts for 25 % of CO2 emissions and , as such , requires urgent action .
It is complicated , it is difficult and it requires a combination of measures , but I call on you to continue working on it and thus to make an important contribution to a more sustainable policy .
( FR ) Mr President , Minister , ladies and gentlemen , we no longer need to demonstrate the importance of the issue of climate change .
Its short , medium and long-term impacts are undeniable , although the results from the JESC have made the front page of a certain national newspaper and will undoubtedly strengthen the sceptics ' position .
The Copenhagen conference appeared to the world to be a unique opportunity for world leaders to bear witness to , act on and correct the effects of this process of climate change .
The European Union was a key player at this forum , not only on account of the bold legislation we have passed to limit the impact of our activities on climate , but also because Europe represents a union of countries which can really make a difference .
The outcome of the Copenhagen conference has obviously left a feeling of dissatisfaction , but I refuse to call it a failure .
The world , including even one of the most reluctant countries , China , has agreed on the issue of limiting the increase in temperature to two degrees .
Brazil has just passed a law aimed at reducing greenhouse gas emissions by around 39 % by 2020 , in line with its undertakings .
Many other countries also showed great ambition with regard to greenhouse gas emissions reduction targets .
I am thinking here of Japan and Norway .
I must also highlight the very positive point that was the consensus achieved on the urgent need for a mechanism for reducing emissions from deforestation .
A specific and unanimous text was produced on the implementation of the so-called REDD + mechanism to reduce deforestation and enable CO2 to be stored naturally .
Although far from a binding agreement , but clearly along the lines of a political agreement , the outcome of Copenhagen should lead us to question why it was such a disappointment .
I attended the Copenhagen conference , as did a number of my fellow Members , with this desire to participate , to help and to see a Europe of negotiation and of leadership take action .
I was hugely disappointed because Europe , and particularly Parliament , clearly did not play the role that it deserved to in the negotiations .
To make its presence felt , Europe must be seen to be stronger in this area .
The meeting of our environment ministers in Seville went nowhere , and our leaders were seen to be unsure and hesitant , and we are still divided over our targets .
I hope that Mrs Hedegaard , armed with her proposals and the undertakings she gave before the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , will be able to restore the ambitions of the European Union .
( NL ) I concur with what Mrs de Lange said on behalf of our delegation from the Dutch Christian Democratic Appeal ( CDA ) in this debate .
I , too , am disappointed that the legal agreement failed to materialise , and I should like to put a question to the President-in-Office .
What are the implications of the lack of such an agreement for our legislative framework , namely the package we have laid down for CO2 trading , among other things ?
What will be the impact on that system ?
Can you tell us that ?
I should like to point out , chiefly in my role as coordinator of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) for regional policy , that our objectives must be retained in full .
Also , Europe should not question the efforts of citizens , towns and cities , regions and enterprises that have committed themselves to the package of implementing programmes .
The climate issue is not just hype , and I also note that , fortunately , it is enshrined in the EU 2020 strategy of the new Commission .
I would also point out that we have now turned the EU 's own instruments and resources towards climate-related priorities : 30 % of regional funds have been channelled to the climate and to energy-related projects , which is double the figure for the previous period .
This particular priority creates scope to continue with the innovation and new green technology that will help give us the edge at a global level .
This also goes for expenditure under the European Economic Recovery Plan .
I believe that this sets a positive trend , including for the financing beyond 2013 .
I do indeed note great commitment in regions , towns and cities to continue working on this .
It would send the wrong message - in the desperation that may be perceptible in a number of speeches here - to diminish this ambition .
I share your hope that , in Mexico - our second chance - we shall do better .
( HU ) Mr President , we should not embellish things .
Copenhagen was a failure .
I do not want to focus on this , however , but suggest that instead of criticising others , we would do better to mind our own business .
We have to admit that one of the reasons behind the failure was the lack of a common European position in Copenhagen , either in terms of CO2 quotas or funding .
I agree with those who say that it is the prerequisite of successful negotiations to have a common EU position .
That is true .
What do we need in order to achieve this ?
It is necessary that the Commission and all Member States of the European Union adhere to both the letter and the spirit of the Kyoto Treaty .
Hungary , Poland , Romania , Bulgaria , the Baltic States , Slovakia and the Czech Republic fulfilled their commitments beyond the level determined in Kyoto .
Therefore , they can sell their CO2 quotas .
I think it is dishonourable , unfair and inappropriate on behalf of the Commission and the other European Union Member States to deprive these countries of this opportunity .
In Copenhagen , Poland and Hungary suggested a compromise .
The point of it was to retain the possibility of selling the quotas beyond 2012 , but its volume per year should be limited , and the money received should be spent on green investments .
We suggested a compromise for the sake of a common European position .
Now it is up to the Commission and the EU-15 , especially because without Hungary , Poland , Romania , and the other countries , the EU-15 could not state to have delivered on their commitments , since instead of the 8 % undertaken , only 5.5 % would have been achieved . Thank you for your attention .
( FR ) Mr President , the negotiations have highlighted the failure of the EU 's strategy , which was aimed at making others follow in its wake by being the most virtuous .
The reality is that there was a gulf between the rhetoric of an EU wishing to be the world leader in the fight against climate change and its capacity to get others on board in the final negotiations .
Not only did nobody come on board but , by putting all its cards on the table far too early , failure was inevitable .
In fact , the EU was virtually inaudible during the final negotiations .
So what are we to do now ?
We must , above all , implement the principle of reciprocity in our exchanges with third countries .
Europe can no longer accept a situation in which certain imported products do not satisfy environmental requirements .
The situation brought about by the failure in Copenhagen therefore creates uncertainty as to the future international operational rules in the area of carbon emissions reduction , which is particularly harmful for those companies of ours that are required to make major investments .
This lack of visibility could also have a detrimental impact on the CO2 market , the rise in power and smooth running of which require a clear and stable framework .
At the same time , the United States and China are investing massively in green technologies to create the green jobs of tomorrow .
Europe must not miss the innovation train .
It must support a real European industrial policy because that is the real challenge of the fight against climate change .
These new clean technologies are available ; it is up to us to accelerate their use in our policies for the benefit of everybody , and especially of developing countries .
That is the challenge that must be taken up by the EU .
It has the means to successfully undertake this revolution , but let us be more pragmatic as we approach the next deadlines so that , a year from now in Mexico City , we can turn the agreement concluded in Copenhagen into something legally binding .
( PL ) Mr President , Mrs Espinosa , Commissioner , the Spanish Presidency has decided to prepare an evaluation of the Copenhagen climate conference , while we are saying here , according to many speakers , that it ended in a fiasco .
However , a fiasco does not have to be a disaster - sometimes you have to draw good conclusions from a fiasco and see what really caused it .
Current European Union strategy for negotiation on climate protection needs to be evaluated , because preparations are under way for the next summit , to be held in Mexico in December this year .
I have a question : should we increase the reduction objective , since the current objective was not achieved in these negotiations ?
We have to find partners for the present objective , and for an increased objective we do not have any partners at all .
It needs to be pointed out that without the United States , China and India , and this has also been said many times in this Chamber during this debate , there will be no success with the objectives set by the European Union at the Copenhagen Summit .
It will be similar in Mexico , too .
We must evaluate the declaration of the other parties , maintaining , above all , the forum of the climate conference as the main forum for negotiation of an understanding , irrespective of the critical evaluations as to whether the UN forum is appropriate , good , working properly , etc .
We want a green economy , which makes rational use of the environment and which develops new sources of energy and new technologies to generate energy and to save it .
At the same time , we know that the cheapest energy is energy which has not been exhausted , and so we need to be rational .
By the way - and this is my last sentence - reductions in carbon dioxide emissions and other greenhouse gases is not achieved by the use of expensive technologies .
Very often , our own resources , such as forests and soil , can also be an excellent place for absorption , and this is biological absorption and , hence , effective absorption .
Unlike this morning , when we were in such a rush , we now have a few minutes at our disposal ; so , breaking with the usual rule , we are going to try to give the floor to all those who have asked to speak under the catch-the-eye procedure .
I would , however , ask all of you to keep your speech under one minute .
We will cut your speeches off after one minute , because 13 people are on the list .
I want everyone to have a chance to speak , but for Mrs Espinosa and Commissioner Rehn to be able to respond , you must all speak for just one minute .
( RO ) In line with expectations , the Copenhagen Summit did not end with any concrete results .
However , we have a clear view on the phenomenon of global warming and the need to take action .
The European Union must continue its efforts at foreign policy level , especially discussions with the United States and China .
Positive results should be achieved .
We have commissioners for both foreign policy and climate change .
Until then , the actions which the European Union has taken so far , even those taken unilaterally , must be continued .
I hope that at the informal meeting in Seville in January , environment ministers will deal with the outcome of Copenhagen pragmatically and consider climate change in the context of the future Action Plan for Energy Efficiency for 2010-2014 .
In addition , the third package of measures for the internal energy market must be coordinated with the Copenhagen Agreement in order to achieve energy security , promote renewable energy , and capture and store carbon dioxide .
Mr President , a question to the President-in-Office , and maybe to the Commission as well , about this deadline of 31 January .
What is happening about the pledges inside the EU ?
I assumed the EU would make one pledge , but I am hearing that in Coreper , they are discussing several pledges .
What exactly is happening ?
Secondly , we talk about one voice for Europe , but is it not part of the problem that the EU went to Copenhagen with a mandate and there was no flexibility for the negotiating team to negotiate ?
That is part of the problem .
That is why the EU is cut out of the final negotiations .
Why talk to a negotiator who cannot move at all and has no flexibility ?
How are we going to resolve this ?
I am told that the same thing happens at the WTO .
It is a big problem for the EU .
Finally , I hope , Commissioner Rehn , that you will pass on our best wishes to Commissioner Dimas .
I am sorry he is not here for the final session .
We would have liked to thank him for the excellent work he has done over many years , and I hope we will see him next week in the Environment Committee to pass on our thanks .
( NL ) Mr President , unfortunately , the giants - the United States , China , India , Brazil - were not joined by a European giant in Copenhagen .
Worse still , 28 European dwarfs sat at the table : 27 Member States and one powerless Commission .
This is how not to do things .
If Europe fails to speak with one voice , it is powerless and cannot fulfil its potential role .
This is a pity not only for Europe but also , in particular , for the results of this kind of conference .
This morning , President Barroso , Treaty of Lisbon in hand , said it is the Commission that speaks on behalf of the European Union in environmental matters .
Let him put his money where his mouth is .
My question to the Commission is : instead of fine words about one voice , are you prepared to lay claim to that role and , if need be , to push the Council aside ?
Mr President , whilst the big conference at Copenhagen was under way last month - complete with politicians , NGOs and activists - there was another climate conference going on in the same city , where most of the speakers were scientists , and I believe that I was the only MEP present .
These scientists , one by one , demolished the so-called facts about man-made global warming , with scientific argument as opposed to alarmist sound bite .
We heard about the technical failures of Al Gore 's hockey stick graph and the unreliability of weather station data after the fall of the Berlin Wall .
We were advised on the scientific shortcomings of the computer models that are reluctant to predict cold weather , and the probability of the opposite relationship between carbon dioxide and global temperatures to the one that we are being brainwashed with .
We were shown satellite photographs of the rapid increase in Arctic ice over the last three years , and we were briefed on the increase in the numbers of polar bears .
Mr President , the earlier references to the so-called evidence about Himalayan glaciers need to be elaborated on .
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change said in 2007 that they would disappear by the year 2035 .
The Sunday Times has recently discovered that the report was ultimately based on an interview given to the New Scientist by an Indian scientist , Mr Hasnain in 1999 .
Mr Hasnain has subsequently said that this was based on personal estimates and did not mention the year and did not carry out any formal research .
If our conclusions on the hypothesis of climate change are to be based on evidence , then that evidence must be irreproachable .
It must not be manufactured and it must not be invented .
( RO ) Unlike other regions in the world , the European Union understands and assumes a pioneering role in the battle against climate change .
At the same time , the large number of participants at the meeting in Copenhagen fills me with hope that the action of such a large number of allies will ultimately have a chance of success .
Although the summit 's conclusions were not what was expected , I believe that our involvement at different levels will lead to the desired results .
We must promote more investment programmes in our states , both in renewable energy and in areas with direct implications for climate change .
I am referring here to both small projects , such as those involving technical assistance for local energy sources , and large projects with regional coverage , such as the selective management and recycling of waste or the restoration and extension of water and drainage networks and systems .
( FR ) Mr President , Minister , on 11 November , Václav Havel said to us , ' Europe is the homeland of our homelands ' .
However , after Copenhagen , our European compatriots are being very hard .
There is a real lack of confidence and , therefore , faced with this crisis of confidence and to enable this confidence to be restored , I should like to put a two-part question to you .
Firstly : during the six months of your Presidency , do you wish to bring back to the negotiating table the introduction of a Tobin-type carbon tax on financial transactions ?
It seems to me that this tax would enable this confidence to be restored , not only amongst our compatriots , but also amongst all the individuals throughout the world who have also lost confidence .
Secondly : do you wish to bring back to the table a more binding list for carbon quotas and carbon leakage ?
Mr President , just as one swallow does not make a summer , neither does one cold winter disprove theories of climate change and global warming .
Indeed , for more and more people , the evidence is overwhelming because both the scientific evidence and the visual evidence prove that there is climate change .
People have described the Copenhagen conference as a flop and a failure .
I think it could be more accurately described as a little step in the right direction : one small step in the right direction .
But the challenge now is , in Mexico , to turn that small step into a giant leap for mankind .
For us in the European Union , in particular , it is a major challenge , to show that the new institutions and the new positions created in the Lisbon Treaty are effective .
If we are marginalised , as happened in Copenhagen ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) Few subjects have met with such general agreement in the European Parliament and in society and it is a shame to dash the hopes of the society that supports us , which trusted in Copenhagen .
I do not believe the summit was a failure , and I certainly do not believe something that people who cannot tell the difference between climate and weather are saying : the fact that it has snowed in the north is to be expected , but it is not normal for it to snow in Seville and for it to be four degrees Celsius in Cuba , which effectively confirms that climate change is having an effect .
I do not believe that any of these issues should make us lower our guard .
Now , more than ever , we must maintain our position , Minister .
In other words , during these six months , you must push even harder , persuade the Council of the need for an increasingly uniform and united position .
You must inspire the Commission to ensure that we speak with one voice so that , when we go to Mexico , Mr Obama cannot turn round and say , ' I am going to meet the Chinese and then tell the Europeans about it , ' because that is the root of the frustration experienced by the European Union .
Minister , we must maintain our leadership for the sake of the climate , for the sake of the European Union and for the sake of all humanity .
You are aware that you can submit your speeches in writing and they will appear in the verbatim record of the House .
If you speak very quickly , though , the problem is that the interpreters cannot follow what you are saying and you will be the only ones to hear the speeches , or at least those of you that understand the language in which they are spoken .
It is therefore a good idea to speak slowly so that your speech can be interpreted and , as I said , use the option of delivering your speech in writing so that it will appear in the verbatim record .
( PL ) Mr President , it should be admitted that the tactic the European Union has used till now , including at the Copenhagen Summit , was wrong .
It was a tactic of showing all our cards and believing that if we adopted ambitious goals , others would join in .
The haggling , which also took place here in Parliament , about whether to limit emissions by 40 % or 50 % , was wrong .
It is somewhat reminiscent of negotiations during the Cold War , when some political groups believed that unilateral disarmament would induce the Soviet Union to disarm , too .
We need to change this tactic and be firm in talks with the world 's powerful countries - China , the United States - and even threaten the imposition of what our fellow Members from France are talking about , a carbon tax at the European Union 's borders .
Our businesses must be competitive in a world market .
We should also remember new technologies , including technologies ( ... ) .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FR ) Mr President , everybody is agreed in acknowledging that the Copenhagen Summit ended in a double failure .
Indeed , not only was the summit a damp squib , resulting in a non-binding agreement that was not signed by every country , but we also have to come to terms with our own defeat , because it was the key role played by the two most polluting countries on the planet , China and the United States , which was placed under the spotlight through the negotiations in Copenhagen .
This G2 led the negotiations without the Europeans or developing countries really having a say in matters .
Agriculture was therefore hardly touched upon .
Yet this sector is one of the most fundamental elements in the fight against climate change .
European agriculture is currently preparing to switch over to more sustainable production models , with more responsible water management and models that are less energy-intensive and less dependent on chemicals , because it realises that biodiversity and the preservation of ecosystems are the very keys to a reduction in environmental pollution .
So , please , when are we going to acknowledge that agriculture ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( PL ) Mr President , the Copenhagen Summit showed another way of looking at the question of climate change .
The real problem was not about limiting greenhouse gas emissions , but about proposing effective mechanisms which support their reduction .
So far , the European Community has been the leader in the field of reducing CO2 emissions , and is still setting standards for achieving this worldwide .
Therefore , within the framework of the European Union , it is worth proposing a sustainable approach which would make possible the financing of appropriate measures of our own , first of all , within the EU .
The money would come from an EU fund established jointly by all Member States , with contributions being based proportionally on each country 's per capita GDP .
In this way , we would achieve equal contributions from each Member State , without unnecessary complications .
Priority would be given to financing measures which would contribute to a real reduction in emissions at the lowest cost .
( PL ) Mr President , in relation to the critical remarks of scientists concerning the reliability of the IPCC 's conclusions and the revelation of falsification of data , and this undoubtedly influenced the outcome of the Copenhagen conference , I asked the Commission about the possibility of conducting research to verify the disputed findings .
In his answer , Mr Dimas said : ' the IPCC assessment is the expression of a consensus reached by thousands of scientists . '
I ask , therefore , are results in science decided by consensus , and are scientific conclusions the result of voting ?
Concerning Climategate , the Commissioner said : ' the European Commission 's position is that it does not affect the obvious and justified conclusions contained in the IPCC report . '
I ask , therefore , what kind of conclusions come from falsified data ?
I think we need impartial research to verify the effects of CO2 .
Without scientific credibility , another disaster will be waiting for us in Mexico .
Mr President , the next steps from Copenhagen should improve the position and negotiation abilities of the United Nations .
We should facilitate the UN to start negotiating on the high-level segment with the Heads of State and then to continue drafting in detail with civil servants in the way it is done in the G8 or G20 .
The EU has the interest and capability to push this kind of change through in the UN system .
Secondly , my wish and hope for the Council and for the new Commission is that now with the new Lisbon Treaty , the core issue in our foreign policy would be dealt with by the trio of the President of the Commission , the High Representative and the Climate Change Commissioner and allow for negotiation on the basis of a single negotiated text .
( PT ) It has been said here already , and it is true , that Copenhagen was a disappointment , as not a single politically binding agreement ended up being approved .
Now , however , we need to look forwards , and prepare ourselves politically for the conference in Mexico - the European Union has already prepared itself in technical terms .
The European Union needs to reclaim the role of leader and make itself heard with one voice .
The Treaty of Lisbon will help with this , letting Europe assert itself and speak with a united voice and the authority of someone who has done their homework .
We are also counting on the Spanish Presidency for when we arrive at the meeting in Bonn ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
We have concluded this session .
It has been exceptionally long , but at least we have been able to allow a significant number of Members to speak .
The large number of Members present also reveals the House 's interest in the topic we are dealing with .
Now we have reached the final part of the debate and firstly , we will give the floor to Mrs Espinosa so that she can reply .
Mrs Espinosa will understand and the House will understand that I am delighted to offer her the floor , due to the friendship , warmth and admiration I feel for her .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank all of you for your contributions , which will undoubtedly help us to improve .
I am sorry I cannot respond to all of you personally , from the first contribution by Mrs Wortmann-Kool to the last one by Mr Grzyb , and also the 15 additional speeches we have heard .
Allow me , however , to say a few more words following my opening speech .
Several goals of great importance lie before us in the field of climate change : to consolidate support and an appropriate level of commitment around the Copenhagen agreement and to strengthen each of its components , by developing and detailing their content and speeding up their implementation .
The Copenhagen Summit revealed the new international scenario that surrounds us .
Within this scenario , we need further improvements , where new goals and expectations are voiced by very different players and where the rules for the adoption of decisions must be changed to adapt them effectively to new timeframes and needs .
Within this context , the European Union must consider the best way to demonstrate its leadership in the field of climate policy on the international scene .
We must not lose sight of our aims because that would weaken our credibility and our position , which has been challenged in recent years .
No one knows better than the European Union how hard it is to build this collective leadership .
Similarly no one is more aware than Parliament of the advantages and the satisfaction of a result that improves things for all of us .
On a global scale , we can only move forward if the way forward is based on mutual trust and the public interest .
Some have defined Copenhagen as a perfect storm with a bittersweet result .
I prefer to take something from it that I feel to be very valuable : the fact that it has provided us with a great potential that we will be able to draw on in the coming months .
Ladies and gentlemen , you can rest assured that we can say loud and clear that the European Union was not the problem in Copenhagen .
Moving on to the speeches , several of you mentioned solidarity with third countries , emission reductions , deforestation , and more efficient and more sustainable industry , and many of you spoke of leadership and unity .
At this stage , it is our duty to push for the immediate application of the Copenhagen Accord .
It is also our duty to push for full integration of the accord in the ordinary procedure of the United Nations and also to lay firm foundations for a significant advance in Mexico .
The role of regional and sectoral alliances will be fundamental there , and the European Union must strengthen them and extend them .
We must stand shoulder to shoulder in our work , facing the future .
We must learn and move forward .
We must not succumb to complaining .
In looking to the future and thinking of what we must leave for future generations , Parliament can do a lot .
All of us together , the Member States , the Environment Council , the Commission , Parliament and of course the Presidency : we all have a role to play .
Instead of supplanting one another , we must act together and pool our best efforts to defend our common future , without forgetting that environment , development , competitiveness and innovation are common goals that must proceed hand-in-hand .
I take note of your contributions and assure you that you will always have the Spanish Government , which will hold the rotating Presidency of the European Union until 30 June , working with you to achieve a more sustainable future for all of us .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , first of all , let me thank you for a very substantive and responsible debate .
I will certainly pass your best wishes to my colleague , Stavros Dimas , for his recovery so that he might join you in the committee shortly .
I took note of your points and I will try to respond to some of your concerns and policy positions on the basis of the briefings I have asked for during this debate .
I think we can interpret your basic messages so that , even though the Copenhagen Accord does not reflect our level of ambition , there is still a certain European fingerprint on it .
In other words , the Copenhagen Accord contains references to the level of ambition needed to address climate change for the post-2012 climate agreement and it sets the basis for a financial package and invites serious commitments on emissions reductions .
On our own behalf , concerning our commitments , Coreper is meeting at this moment , and the Commission and the Member States want to make a single submission that is clear .
The details are now under discussion , and I am confident that we will be ready before the deadline of 31 January .
This is in response to Mrs McAvan , and this should also create a sound basis for the single negotiating text that Mrs Pietikäinen was calling for .
At the same time , we see the Accord as a stepping stone for future major leaps in Mexico in future international climate negotiations .
Mrs Hassi and many others have called for the EU 's leadership .
I agree , and the Commission is determined to ensure that the EU maintains its leadership position over the coming months and transforms this Accord into the ambitious and legally binding treaty that we all want to see .
I count on your support for this goal .
Unfortunately - as has been rightly said in this debate - some of our important negotiating partners , such as China and the United States , have not been able or willing to commit themselves as closely as the European Union has done , which , of course , had a detrimental impact on the negotiations .
It is clear to everyone that China , in particular , did not want to commit itself to seriously meaningful objectives .
It is my personal view that the new Commission will have to define an overall China strategy for the European Union to better pursue and achieve our common interests with the view of climate policy , trade tensions and exchange-rate policy .
It is not acceptable that China 's currency-dumping is risking the economic recovery in Europe .
In the same way , we would expect China to make a serious commitment in the field of climate change policy .
But let us also recall that our leadership starts at home .
We need to make every effort to fulfil our Kyoto commitments as we are approaching the finishing line .
We also need to ensure that new ambitious policies and measures are put forward that will lead us to the 20 % - or even 30 % - reduction goal that we have set for ourselves .
In order to achieve that , we need to invest in innovation and research in resource efficient , environmental and energy technologies , which will be at the heart of the new EU 2020 strategy we are currently preparing .
I agree with Mrs Dati and Mrs Grossetête , as well as Mrs Ek , that this implies that the EU 2020 will have to be a climate industry and a jobs strategy - and thus at the heart of the economic revival of the European Union .
I would also still like to respond to Mr Davies , concerning his very concrete question .
I have checked and I can inform you that the use of the EUR 300 million allowances for carbon capture and storage should be decided on 2 February in the respective comitology committee .
I can reassure you that we want to support 12 demo plants .
Eight plants will be supported in the first round and the rest in the second round .
To conclude , it is our duty for future generations to continue to lead by example and reach a legally binding agreement by the end of this year , ensuring a better and sustainable future for all .
After this speech by the Commissioner , to whom we wish the best of luck , secure in the knowledge that he will do an excellent job , as he has done in the past , we close the debate .
Voting will take place during the first part-session in February , in other words during February I.
' Politics is the ability to foretell what is going to happen tomorrow , next week , next month and next year .
And to have the ability afterwards to explain why it didn 't happen , ' said Winston Churchill .
In the light of the Copenhagen conference , we are all good politicians .
The conference got under way with a great deal of political optimism for a new climate agreement , but the negotiations demonstrated that optimism and respect for the environment are more European than global values .
The fact that the outcome of the Copenhagen conference marked a disappointment , in that our expectations and those of our citizens were not met , should motivate us and make us determined to get more involved and show greater unity at the next summit in the autumn in Mexico .
Europe must learn to be a player and an active negotiator , and to speak with a single voice .
in writing . - ( NL ) Mr President , following the Copenhagen fiasco , we could sit on the sidelines pitifully weeping and wailing , but that would be a waste of energy .
Let us continue to put our own house in order .
Europe is the only continent to have specific , ambitious legislation for reducing CO2 emissions .
This must be implemented in the coming months and years .
We must not forget that this also has a direct impact on other superpowers , not least China .
All the consumer products China wishes to sell in Europe in the near future will have to comply with the strictest European environmental standards .
This obliges Chinese manufacturers , too , to change course .
' Hopenhagen ' may have largely failed , but we must set to work again , as next year will see new opportunities , first in Bonn and then in Mexico .
In the meantime , Copenhagen has undoubtedly made sure everyone is alert , greatly heightening our environmental awareness .
That is not enough , but what makes me optimistic is the realisation that investing in the climate is also good for our own pockets , for the economy and thus also for employment .
The environment summit in Copenhagen has been described by many as a resounding failure as its outcome was a vague agreement without any clear assumptions and deadlines .
However , if we look more closely at what happened in the Danish capital , we can see that the foundations were laid here for a new global climate order which we are going to achieve , but after years and years of hard work and negotiations .
This was the first time that 115 Heads of State or Government met to discuss climate change .
This is an important sign .
The fact that the summit took place under the aegis of the UN highlights that even the developing and poorly industrialised countries realise that they need to play an active role in cutting greenhouse gas emissions .
The importance of bilateral discussions between powerful industrialised states and developing states has grown , especially in light of the next summit on environmental issues in Mexico .
The EU has all the data available to play an important role in bilateral discussions with states such as China , India or Brazil .
The time has come when no effort will seem too great when we are talking about the future of the planet we all share together .
For the last month , ' failure ' has been the word most used to describe the Copenhagen Summit .
The summit 's unsatisfactory outcome is due to both the reticence shown by the large industrialised countries and the system 's complicated rules based on the UN 's consensus .
Furthermore , the European Union 's inability to assume the role of catalyst for the global efforts to restrict the effects of climate change should be examined .
By announcing unilaterally a year before this conference its intention to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 20 % by 2020 , the EU had the moral upper hand to provide a fillip to the negotiations in Copenhagen .
However , we did not know how to make our voice heard in a meeting dominated by the positions of the US and emerging countries .
A more restricted format of discussions is required so that we can hope for negotiations ending in success .
The ministerial meetings in Bonn and Mexico City in June and December must be used as effectively as possible to leave the way open for adopting a new treaty .
Member States must coordinate their actions so that we speak with a single voice on the global stage .
The fiasco of the climate summit has exposed Europe 's weakness and the naivety of its political elite .
It has shown that we are only one of many players on the world stage .
Why did the proposals concerning CO2 emissions turn out to be unacceptable ?
It was because they threaten the interests of many developing countries , do not take account of competition based on the military economy worldwide , unfairly distribute the right to use the common good , which is the Earth , and are based on the not very credible hypothesis put forward by the IPCC on the harmfulness of CO2 , while , as it turns out , the so-called ' proofs ' have been manipulated ( Climategate ) .
Science must not be politically controlled , but should take account of all circumstances and answer every possible question .
Has anyone asked , for example , what would happen if there were not enough CO2 in the atmosphere ?
We should be glad about the warm period in the contemporary history of our planet and that , at the moment , we have around 370-380 ppm CO2 in the atmosphere .
In physics and chemistry we know Le Chatelier 's principle of equilibrium , which predicts development of the ideal conditions for photosynthesis .
The Earth is becoming greener , a fact which has been confirmed many times , and this guarantees greater harvests and better conditions for development .
Let it continue this way , although , unfortunately , there are many signs that , in the next two decades , the world will get cooler .
Conclusion : the European Union should immediately review its restrictive climate and energy package , because it reduces the competitiveness of the EU economy .
The current liberal trade regulations encourage higher carbon dioxide emissions .
By introducing emissions trading , supporting renewable sources of energy and through investment aimed at improving energy efficiency , developed nations are making considerable efforts to curb their carbon dioxide emissions .
These measures result in additional costs for businesses .
What is more , energy consumption is increasingly taxed in these countries .
Meanwhile , many developing countries do nothing to reduce their emission of greenhouse gases .
They even constantly increase their carbon dioxide emissions .
Instead of giving the largest industrial users incentives to embrace energy efficiency , they provide them with electricity at subsidised rates .
Many say that nowadays , the most important comparative advantage of these countries is no longer cheap labour but cheap energy .
This is why new international trade regulations need to be put in place that prevent trade from leading to further carbon dioxide emissions .
We need not only ' fair ' but also ' green ' trade .
To this end , we need to ensure that if a country fails to fulfil its commitments made in climate change agreements , there are effective legal sanctions in place .
The Copenhagen conference on climate change was disappointing .
There were no legally binding commitments determining the future framework of international climate protection .
The situation is aggravated by the fact that despite its intention , the EU was unable to significantly influence the final outcome of the negotiations .
The failure of the conference does not justify idleness .
We have to get used to the idea of emphasising regional solutions until an international treaty is drawn up that is legally binding for every player .
Accordingly , the European Union should work on polishing up its internal regulations on climate protection .
The regulations of the Union should be made more efficient without causing competitive disadvantage for European industries .
However , the EU 's climate policy should not disadvantage new Member States either , as was the case with the internal EU burden-sharing agreement recently .
When it comes to climate protection , solutions that have many additional effects on top of decreasing emissions should be preferred .
Thus , the development of urban transport improves the quality of life , the investments in improving energy efficiency create jobs , and the amounts spent on Research and Development improve competitiveness at the same time .
These points of view should also be reflected in the budget for the next seven years .
Europe cannot afford to only be a spectator at international negotiations on climate protection .
It should continue to take the initiative even if , instead of ground-breaking changes , climate politics will now be characterised by small , incremental steps .
Mr President , it was with some dismay that I heard these complaints of a poor outcome at Copenhagen .
I can only say that it is time the EU woke up to reality .
We have to stop deceiving ourselves in imagining that the EU has been in a position of leadership or that it could take on such a role .
Let us be honest : our ineffective and expensive strategy is tempting no one .
I am also going to say this to the future Commissioner responsible for climate change .
The Copenhagen Summit has come and gone , but why is Mrs Hedegaard still trying to have us believe that the EU is the leader on climate policy and the one to show the way in the world ?
It has not played that role for a long time .
' Follow me , I 'm right behind you , ' is the paradoxical slogan the EU has developed for itself .
It is with this sort of self-deception that the EU continues with its wretched climate policy that is destroying jobs in the cleanest industries .
Those who followed the climate debate at all had known for a long time that an international agreement based on the EU 's formula would not be achieved .
The United States of America , China and Japan have chosen a route that has rejected the UNled model , with its negotiated emission ceilings and timetables .
They are investing directly in reducing carbon intensity and in new technology which , in time , will also be seen as the logical way to cut emissions .
That method , however , will not expose the economy and jobs to bureaucracy , unfair competition or unforeseen price fluctuations .
In Europe , we will be exposed if the EU continues to follow a different path , remaining alone and worsening the plight of companies .
It is a sorry state of affairs that no one benefits from this , the people least of all .
The environment will not benefit either if the cleanest industries in the world have sanctions imposed on them in emissions trading , sanctions that are not imposed on the rest .
It is time for the EU to review its policy and end this fantasising .
The European Union must remain involved in the international negotiations for adopting a post-Kyoto agreement .
It is clear that , in order to sign a new global post-Kyoto agreement , the EU 's negotiating strategy needs to be evaluated and prepared thoroughly with a view to continuing the negotiations in 2010 .
Although it cannot be considered a success and is far from what the European Union wanted , the Copenhagen conclusions mark a further step towards signing a legally binding , global post-Kyoto agreement .
The EU 's efforts in the immediate future must focus on diplomatic efforts aimed at obtaining commitments from all the relevant global partners , especially the US , China and India , so that the global objective of restricting the rise in temperature to two degrees Celsius , compared to the pre-industrial level , can be achieved .
We must be aware that the EU 's commitment to raise the level of emission reductions by 30 % by 2020 is conditional on comparable or proportional commitments being assumed by third countries .
We can take stock of the climate change conference one month on from it .
The Copenhagen Agreement was negotiated and signed with great effort , being just short of a total failure .
The compromise accepted with great difficulty was only that of ' to take note ' .
Although the EU has assumed specific , ambitious objectives , they have not led to similar actions from the other partners .
However , it should be emphasised that all the major economic and political powers in the world met to debate and assume responsibility for combating climate change .
The objective was recognised of maintaining the global warming gradient at 2 ° C and agreeing to financial support of USD 30 billion during the 2010-2012 period ( fast-start financing ) and USD 100 billion by 2020 .
These sums are intended to fund the measures for reducing and adapting to the effects of climate change for the least developed and most vulnerable countries .
I believe that the future Commission , especially if there is going to be a commissioner responsible for climate change and action , must evaluate very closely all the reduction proposals - commitments made by the countries which are party to the United Nations Convention - and also prepare the negotiations in the same way so that a legally binding agreement is signed at COP 16 in Mexico in 2010 .
in writing . - Most of us have rightly expressed disappointment at the outcome of the Copenhagen Summit and the failure to reach a legally binding agreement .
Some progress has been made , however .
For example , the creation of the Copenhagen Green Climate Fund will provide financing for poorer countries to adapt to climate change and to develop clean energy , and the formal acceptance by emerging economies that they have coresponsibility makes a concrete commitment from these countries more likely in the near future .
The EU must continue to play a leading role in the absence of a legally binding agreement .
The Commissioner-designate for climate action has expressed commitment to an international agreement on the protection of tropical forests , the inclusion of road transport and shipping in the ETS , and the linking of EU and US cap-and-trade systems , which would represent a crucial step in international cooperation for global emission reductions .
We should continue to develop and implement our own climate legislation as other countries work towards theirs .
Our work with international organisations and partner countries in the coming months will increase the chances of more meaningful progress at the next conference in Mexico .
The problem of climate warming is one of the main issues troubling the modern world .
Recently , in Copenhagen , a climate summit devoted to this issue was held .
Meanwhile , we discovered that the contents of several thousand documents and e-mails had found their way onto the Internet from the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia , one of the world 's most prestigious institutions dealing with climate warming and the effect of human activity on this process .
The material included correspondence between scientists from various countries , whose research has had a key influence on the position of the European Union and the UN on climate change .
The leaked information shows that research results may have been manipulated and , as a result , unreliable information on the greenhouse effect and climate change may have been issued .
The countries of the EU , and so our societies , are bearing substantial costs related to the emission of greenhouse gases , while in Copenhagen , attempts were made to make developed countries , including the EU , accept an even greater financial burden related to global warming , in order to help , in this way , developing countries .
Every doubt which exists on this matter should be clarified in detail , not even because we want to convince those who doubt the legitimacy of measures to limit gas emissions , but because European taxpayers are bearing and are going to bear huge costs related to this , and they must be sure these measures are based on sound reasons .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is Question Time ( B7-0002 / 2010 ) .
I welcome the Minister to this first Question Time with the Spanish Presidency .
The following questions are addressed to the Council .
Question 1 will not be taken as the subject to which it refers already appears in the agenda for this part-session .
Subject : Credit crunch / Loans for business
In December , the German Minister for the Economy said that Germany faced a new credit crunch if banks did not lend more , especially to small and medium-sized enterprises .
This is a problem that could become prevalent across the EU .
What specific action is the Council taking to ensure that banks make loans available to business so that enterprises can sustain themselves , creating employment and growth , and contribute to the economic recovery ?
The problem of ensuring that companies have sufficient access to capital and also the actions taken by Member States to that end have been a matter of concern to the Council for some time , as you are aware .
In January last year , the Council observed that the Member States had acted forcefully and decisively to free up the credit markets , amongst other things .
In spring , the European Council stated the importance of continuing to apply economic recovery measures and called on the Commission and the Council to evaluate the efficacy of the measures adopted and to report back to the European Council in June .
The June European Council did , in fact , evaluate the efficacy of the measures adopted by the Member States to support the financial sector and the situation with regard to the stability and operation of financial markets .
These results were fed back , in the form of a report , to the European Council itself .
So the report was passed from the Council , in other words the Council of Ministers , to the European Council .
The report was positive , indicating the existence of recapitalisation guarantees and mechanisms within Member States and concluded that Member States had played a crucial role in halting the downward spiral .
I would remind you that the whole financial system was in danger of meltdown at the end of 2008 .
There were therefore positive repercussions in allowing banks access to global finance , in turn , bolstering the flow of credit to the real economy .
The Council appreciated that the measures adopted by the States had been significant in keeping credit channels open .
At the moment , the banking sector is even now under a certain amount of pressure with regard to recapitalisation and the Council therefore called on the Member States to individually recapitalise or restore their balance sheets in order to reduce uncertainty and make it easier to give credit .
By last month - December - the Council could see that Member States had applied a wide range of support measures with the aim of re-establishing financial stability .
It underscored , however , that their recovery was still somewhat fragile and called on the Committee of European Banking Supervisors to provide regular information on the amount of capital available for additional borrowing .
We now have a series of measures in place : monitoring by the Council , on the one hand , and guidance from the European Council , on the other .
The result has been an improvement , with the European Central Bank understandably acting to ensure bank liquidity , first and foremost , and access to loans by companies .
Madam President , can I say to the Minister that it is my experience that some banks - by no means all banks , but some banks , perhaps even a lot of banks - behaved irresponsibly during the financial market growth and some banks - perhaps , again , not all banks , but many banks - are continuing to behave irresponsibly in the time of the budding weeks and months of recovery .
I am aware , for example , of one particular company in Dublin , very well run , where the man is meticulous in meeting his commitments and the bank is far from helping him .
It has taken the opportunity to reduce his overdraft and put him under pressure in his business - a business that is viable , a business that will survive this recession .
Please , Minister , take these banks in hand , tell them we are giving them taxpayers ' money and we expect them to take the public interest into account , not just the interests of their shareholders - some of them very wealthy shareholders .
What I must tell you is that I believe that the Council and the European institutions are doing a good job .
I believe that they have done a good job and that a vast contribution has been made to preventing a collapse in the availability of liquidity throughout the economy .
Ecofin has been following and continues to follow the measures which have been adopted by the Member States .
It is doing this is a systematic manner .
For example , Ecofin is currently tasked with observing how guarantees granted to banks are made available , whether or not there are restrictions set for companies in the financial sector and how credit finance is being carried out by the European Central Bank .
I would simply like to say that on 7 December 2009 , Mr Trichet , the President of the European Central Bank himself said that there are no restrictions to supply for banks to borrow money from the European Central Bank .
There are no restrictions to supply .
If there are banks which do not make use of this , that is a matter for each of these financial bodies ; however , there are no forms of restriction as far as the European Union or the European Central Bank are concerned .
In any case , the Council , together with the European Parliament , is , of course , more than happy to examine the present directives to be debated in relation to financial supervision systems or any other initiative which the Commission may put forward in this regard .
( FR ) Madam President , one of the priorities of the Council Presidency is to increase the influence of the EU on the international stage and , more specifically , in Latin America .
However , what kind of influence are we talking about ?
The current concept of international relations affords little space to democracy and human rights .
Would the Council wish to use free trade agreements to support regimes which constantly violate human rights in Latin America ?
I would like to cite the example of Peru , where acts of violence committed in Bagua are a terrible illustration of the way in which the government collaborates with multinationals by confiscating land from the indigenous populations for financial purposes .
Already , almost 70 % of the land is in the hands of multinationals and mining companies .
Another notorious example is that of Colombia , which is the most dangerous country for trade unionists , given the hundreds of people assassinated there .
My question is as follows : do you intend to put the issue of human rights once again at the core of EU foreign policy in Latin America ?
I am very sorry but your question does not appear to be related at all to the last question .
I am not sure whether or not you have participated in Question Time before , but you are allowed a supplementary question that relates to the main question .
I am sorry , but I have to rule your question completely out of order .
I suggest that you look at the Rules .
As far as I am aware , there were no supplementary questions at the time I closed the last question .
I am therefore going to continue unless there is another question relating to the credit crunch / loans for business .
Mr Zemke , if that is what your question is about , then you have 30 seconds .
( PL ) Yes , that is precisely what my question is about .
We know perfectly well that the situation is very different in different Member States .
In relation to this , if we are talking about help for business , I would like to ask a question about the situation in Greece , because the crisis in that country today is worse than anywhere else - are any special measures foreseen in relation to this ?
I believe there is a later question which deals with exactly the same issue .
I would ask the Member to remain until I answer on this and I will therefore respond to this as well as to the question which is on the agenda on exactly the same point .
I am referring to question number 9 on the list I have , or number 8 on the current one , from Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou : the Economic Situation in Greece .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( ES ) I am referring to question No 9 on the list I have , or No 8 on the current one , from Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou : the Economic Situation in Greece .
Subject : EU integration of Kosovo
What steps is the Council planning in order to fulfil the European Parliament 's wish to see Kosovo included in EU programmes , pre-accession strategies and the Thessaloniki Process irrespective of the status question ?
The Council has always reiterated the prospect of the Western Balkans joining Europe .
This has undoubtedly been as part of foreign policy , in this case , Neighbourhood Policy , and even the enlargement policy of the European Union .
Hence , recently , the Council meeting in December 2009 confirmed the need to respect certain fair conditions , in the context of the stabilisation and association process for the Balkans .
With respect to Kosovo , the Council has already observed that , in this case , the Member States were deciding in accordance with national practice and international law .
As you are aware , the Kosovo unilateral declaration of independence is currently subject to court proceedings in the International Court of Justice .
In any case , however , the Council has always taken Kosovo into account in its political relations with the Balkans and there has been a consensus between Member States and governments in this respect , for example , in terms of the liberalisation of visas , which Kosovo should benefit from , as the Council has always understood .
In addition , the Commission 's Communication regarding the means to reinforce Kosovo 's political and socio-economic development has been welcomed .
The Council invited the Commission to take the necessary measures to support Kosovo 's progress towards the European Union in accordance with the European perspective on the region , to which I previously referred .
The Council encouraged the Commission , and this was done with a consensus , of course , to initiate Kosovo 's participation in the European Union 's programmes , incorporating Kosovo into economic and fiscal supervision , setting in motion the second component of pre-accession help and reinforcing the stabilisation and association process dialogue .
These conclusions were endorsed by the last European Council on 10 and 11 December 2009 .
( DE ) President-in-Office , I have two further specific questions .
Firstly , do you believe that , during the Spanish Presidency , we will succeed in making headway with regard to visa arrangements for Kosovo , so that Kosovo will not remain a prison within a free Balkans region ?
Secondly , what will you do over time to try to get the Member States that do not currently do so to recognise Kosovo ?
However , as I said , the primary point is the visa arrangements .
I referred to the visa system earlier .
The Council has always expressed its wish that Kosovo should also benefit from the visa system and from a possible liberalisation of visas throughout the region .
As you know , the Commission is working on the details of this .
Firstly , with respect to visa facilitation and then even visa liberalisation , so that it can present a proposal to the Council .
Of course , certain requirements still need to be fulfilled regarding this and , in this respect , the Commission is working with the countries affected .
It is , in this case , working with Kosovo and is informing the Council on a regular basis .
The idea of liberalisation of visas that may extend to areas neighbouring the European Union is an idea certainly shared by the Council and the Spanish Presidency and I believe that it is one of the political orientations that we must clearly encourage in Europe in the next few months , in terms of mobility , a capacity to communicate and to move around not only in the European Union but in all areas on the edges of the European Union .
I believe it is a stance that will clearly benefit both sides : the European Union , which grants these visas , and these countries , which must naturally also do so on the basis of reciprocity .
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , in all the initiatives that the Council is taking in respect of Kosovo , will the views of Serbia and the information it provides also be adequately taken into account ?
Irrespective of the territorial issue with regard to Kosovo , Serbia is , of course , a key State in connection with the integration of the Western Balkans into the EU , and one which we should involve in all steps that we take .

( EL ) Madam President , Mr López Garrido , I appreciate the stance being taken by your country , Spain , which has not recognised the independence of Kosovo , and your recent decision to withdraw Spanish troops which have served in Kosovo to date .
As we are in a period of economic crisis , I shall ask you the following prosaic question : how much did it cost Spain to keep troops there ?
Can you comment on the stand being taken by my country , Greece , which has the same force in Kosovo and , as we all know , has economic problems ?
Is it right to keep troops in Kosovo ?
With respect to the first question on Serbia , of course Serbia is the strongest country in the Western Balkans , which we must always truly take into account in any policy , in this instance , the policy on the European perspective , which is the European Union policy regarding the Western Balkans .
Of course , there is a recent agreement , which you will be aware of , on the liberalisation of visas for Serbia and recently also , as a further consequence of the deadlock in the interim association agreement with Serbia being broken , Serbia has made a formal application for accession to the European Union .
Provided this happens , we are in favour of applying Community regulations , of the Commission investigating this , of giving a technical opinion and duly deciding whether it is realistically possible to commence negotiations regarding accession through the fulfilment of the Copenhagen criteria .
Thus , of course , Serbia is a country which carries obvious weight in the region and which has a European perspective , in our opinion .
The majority of the Council , which is currently unanimous , was in favour of unblocking the interim agreement and it has heartily positioned itself in association with Serbia
As for Kosovo , you asked me about a matter , honourable Member , which relates to domestic policy and to internal decisions by the Spanish Government .
You know that , in this case , I am representing the Council , not one particular country but the Council , and therefore , in this case , regardless of whether I had specific data here , which I can hardly have in relation to the figure to which you refer , I feel that in this case , it is not possible for me to speak on behalf of one country because I am speaking on behalf of the European Council , a body of the European Union , which represents 27 countries .
Subject : Devastation of the tropical rainforests
In view of the outcome of the world discussions on climate change in the December Copenhagen meeting , would the Council agree that , while European agriculture is a contributory factor in the production of CO2 emissions , the devastation of the tropical rainforests in the Amazon basin more than outweighs the negative effects of European agricultural production in terms of CO2 emissions ?

The Council very much agrees with you , Mr Higgins , that agriculture and deforestation are factors which affect the emission of CO2 into the atmosphere .
It is difficult to know which of these two factors has a greater effect .
This is a scientific debate rather than a political one .
However , in any case , action must be taken in both areas at the same time and this has always been the case .
When dealing with sustainable agriculture , we have always made progress in both areas .
This has even led to the modification of the European Union 's rural development policy .
As part of the revision of the CAP reform , it is being taken into consideration for tackling challenges such as mitigation and adaptation to climate change and , as you are aware , within European policy development , common agricultural policy is considered to be an important factor to be taken into account in relation to a broader policy of tackling climate change .
In 2008 , the Council backed proposals by the Commission on deforestation and the Commission proposed that the loss of forest areas , which are continually disappearing at an extensive rate , be halted by 2030 at the latest , and that mass tropical deforestation be reduced by at least 50 % by 2020 compared to current levels .
We therefore need to help promote sustainable forest management .
Dealing with deforestation , the destruction of the forests , clearly forms part of the Spanish Presidency 's objectives and we understand that it is necessary to apply some of the instruments which the European Union has at its disposal , for example , the Non-Legally Binding Instrument , on all types of forest , and the European Union 's action plan on Forest Law Enforcement , Governance and Trade which , for example , stipulates the creation of a legal framework to prevent the importing of illegally felled wood .
The European Union 's position was along these lines and , despite the varying degrees of disappointment arising from the failure to fulfil some of the Copenhagen objectives , certain technical matters concerning the importance of tropical deforestation , which must be dealt with in developing countries as a key factor in preventing CO2 emissions , were clarified .
In addition , it must be said that the conference adopted a decision regarding measures to reduce deforestation and the destruction of forests , boosting support for the improvement of the capacities of developing countries .
I would like to wish the Spanish Presidency well .
I think you are off to a very good start this week .
So , ¡ viva España !
Can I just say in relation to the question itself that trees provide a carbon sink in that they absorb CO2 emissions .
The tragedy as regards the Amazon basin , 60 % of which is in Brazil , is that the ruthless destruction of the beautiful Amazon forest is obvious : for example , 4.1 million km2 have been destroyed so far .
It removes the carbon sink ; it destroys a way of life , by virtue of the fact that the Amazon Red Indians are being wiped out ; thirdly , from the point of view of agricultural production , we know that the standards of production in no way meet EU standards of compliance .
At the end of the day , is there anything we can really do , or are we just talking ?

Mr Higgins , I would like to tell you that we very much agree with your reflections and also that the truth is that , in terms of biodiversity , the Spanish Presidency 's objective is to intensify conservation and sustainable use , that is to say , to have an advanced , profound vision in the context of biodiversity .
It will be one of the focal points , one of the priorities of our Presidency .
I appreciate the assessment you have made on the fine start to our Presidency and , furthermore , I also must tell you that the Commission has an idea to present a Green Paper at the start of this year on forest protection .
This could be a very important initiative and work will be carried out on this front to respond to the phenomena that destroy these areas .
You have mentioned some of these elements and there are others , for example , damage caused by forest fires .
There are many other elements to consider , but it is certain that this will be an important time to battle against the destruction of our trees , that this focus fits in very well with the biodiversity strategy and that this will be , without a doubt , one of the key elements of action taken by the European Union this year .
I bring good cheer because one of the few successful outcomes of the Copenhagen conference was broad agreement on a mechanism that will enable developed countries to contribute financially to prevent the destruction of tropical rain forests .
So , would the Minister agree that one of the objectives of the Spanish Presidency should be to give this agreement substance and to secure a good indication from Europe about how much we are prepared to commit to prevent the destruction of rain forests ?
( DE ) Mr President-in-Office , as we all know , certificates were introduced in order to achieve a reduction in CO2 emissions , and this is what my question is about .
Not so long ago , it came to light that there were underhand dealings and abuses of the system associated with emissions trading .
To what extent have the accusations been investigated , or are they being investigated , and are there any changes planned in this regard ?
I agree with the first speech .
I believe that this is in line with what we have said .
We must tackle tropical deforestation in developing countries .
That is an essential factor in improving developing countries ' capacities , including for their own benefit , and it must be done with the participation of indigenous peoples , of the local population and the establishment of national forestry control systems .
Thus , I believe that there has been significant progress made in Copenhagen in this regard and it cannot be denied that the European Union is maintaining a position of vanguard and of leadership in this respect and in other respects relating to the fight against climate change The criticism which could be made of the European Union in relation to Copenhagen is that it has been streets ahead of what was achieved there .
The European Union wants to tackle this issue much more profoundly and so , this naturally takes account of the issues you raise , which are closely linked to action by the European Union in relation to the fight against climate change .
The specific case mentioned is , of course , within the realms of what is put into practice , the implementation of measures to combat climate change .
Part of that is naturally preventing actions from being denatured by abuse of individual instruments and it is part of the difficulty that can arise from this measure or from any others and , of course , it forms part of the obligations that we must all monitor carefully .
Subject : European-level action on combating Alzheimer 's disease
It is estimated that 8.6 million people in Europe suffer from neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer 's and with Europe 's ageing population , the numbers suffering will continue to rise .
Can the Council give further details on the recently announced Joint Programming Initiative on combating these illnesses ?
How does the Council envisage coordinated European action alleviating the burden on patients , their families and their carers ?
The Council attaches the greatest importance to Alzheimer 's disease and to neurodegenerative diseases in general .
Control of this disease must be an essential objective for the European Union , also bearing in mind that the incidence of this disease is increasing at an exponential rate with age and that it doubles every 5 years from 75 years of age .
Eurostat predicts that the number of people affected at the age of 65 years or over will double in the European Union between 1995 and 2050
There are two aspects to the question that you have asked , Mr Aylward .
On the one hand , a pilot programme of joint planning , which the Council has already embarked upon , is required for neurodegenerative diseases and Alzheimer 's disease in particular .
This is set out in the Spanish Presidency 's programme with which you are familiar .
And , on that basis , the Commission tabled a proposal , as you know , which was adopted , in the Conclusions of the Council in December 2009 .
In addition , the Council has taken the resolution of this House , of the European Parliament , into account on this pilot initiative On the other hand , with respect to the coordination of Europe 's action , the Council is also in agreement with this line that we must clearly cooperate on a European level to combat this disease and other similar diseases , above all , because we must lighten the load suffered by patients and their families .
It is calculated that for each person suffering from this disease , there are three family members affected , given that the burden falls on them to provide care .
It is therefore important that there is cooperation on a European level in this respect .
In the joint report on social protection and inclusion which was adopted by the Council in 2008 , Member States made a commitment to increase access to high quality services balancing out public and private competences and formal and informal care The Member States have felt that the provision of services in a residential or a community setting is better or preferable to institutional care , although it is true that these high quality services continue to be a challenge for many Member States
What the Council and the European Union have done is put forward these guidelines regarding this disease .
As you have rightly said , it is estimated that by 2050 , the number of people with dementia will have doubled in Europe .
As a result , it is vital that Member State governments address the specific needs of people with dementia and provide essential support for carers .
At present , however , many European Union countries do not have plans in place to develop national strategies for dementia ; so my question is : How will the Council specifically support Member States to make dementia a public health priority ?
What we are planning to do under the Spanish Presidency is to encourage a directive , which we consider crucial , on advanced therapies and assistance in the case of chronic and non-transmissible diseases .
This is something which has to be tackled at the highest level and therefore should also go hand in hand with the promotion of patients ' quality and security improvement initiatives and the work conducted by the high-level Public Health Group .
Therefore , we need to provide assistance - as the European Union often does not have the necessary powers to be able to do this - by guiding , coordinating , cooperating , producing a synergy between Member States ' actions with respect to these neurodegenerative diseases , particularly Alzheimer 's disease , and also by helping indirectly
It is true that Member States are responsible for providing the most direct assistance to families , for example , and even to non-governmental organisations , although within the EU Public Health Programme , it is possible to gain access to specific funds on behalf of non-governmental organisations in fact , which is also an interesting , albeit indirect way of being able to help those affected and their families who are very directly affected by Alzheimer 's and other degenerative diseases and , in this sense , are very dependent .
I wish to thank the Council for the reply .
Can I ask the Council what its attitude is in relation to the tube-feeding of patients with Alzheimer 's , which is a widespread practice in the United Kingdom and Ireland ?
I do not know about the rest of Europe .
What we are talking about is feeding a tube into the abdomen .
The Council spoke about guidelines .
Guidelines and standards are very important , but the justification for this particular procedure is that it gives the patient sufficient nourishment in order to ensure that , even though they have dementia - they have refused food and so on - that they will actually live , but to me , there is something very bizarre about it .
What is your attitude to it , and are you going to set down standards ?
( RO ) Bearing in mind that neuro-degenerative diseases affect a huge number of people and , unfortunately , some countries have inadequate facilities for diagnosing and treating these diseases , I would like to ask you whether you are in favour of setting up European treatment centres which , based on a growing number of patients , may encourage research in the field in order to discover solutions for preventing and treating these diseases .
These two issues which have been raised by two Members obviously require a scientific opinion , so to speak .
I believe that , in that respect , there are groups and initiatives within the European Union which are the appropriate forum to work on the suggestions and observations which you have raised .
For example , the pilot programme for combating neuro-degenerative conditions and , in particular , Alzheimer 's disease , on which the Commission submitted a proposal for a Council recommendation , which is currently under way .
On the other hand , as you know , I have previously mentioned the existence of a high-level group for joint planning in connection with these conditions which , in this case , are chronic and not contagious .
This group is carrying out close monitoring of this pilot initiative so as to define and specify certain matters and , therefore , to enable much more specific decision making , such as you raised in your interventions .
I think that is the right place to deal with this matter .
Up until now , this high-level group has agreed on an approach and a strategic research programme .
There are 24 countries taking part and , at the moment , they are establishing their management structures and deciding upon their plan of action .
The next meeting of this group will occur in this term of the Spanish Presidency , and I think that from thereon , they will be able to tackle questions such as those that you have raised in a very specific , direct and immediate way .
I think that is the place and the forum .
That is what it is there for .
That is what this high-level group was set up for : to work and prepare subsequent decisions .
I can understand that Mr Higgins will probably not be happy , but I think it is a difficult issue and one that probably deserves a question of its own at some point .
Subject : Corporate social responsibility ( CSR )
At the ' Protect , Respect , Remedy ' conference in Stockholm on 10 and 11 November 2009 , the current Presidency and the future Spanish Presidency called on the European Union and the Member States to take the lead in CSR .
In March 2007 , Parliament asked for a mechanism to be put in place to make it easier for victims of corporate abuse to bring damages claims against companies in European courts . It also asked that the responsibility of company directors be extended to include the duty to minimise the negative impact of their activities on the environment and human rights and that clear reporting standards be implemented at an international level .
In its statement , the Council underlined the progress made , but also recommended working within a common framework , explicitly mentioning the State 's responsibility to protect and ensure that human rights be respected by the corporate world and penalties imposed in the event of violations .
What binding legal instruments does the Council propose to ensure that companies respect the principles of due diligence and reporting and are punished in the event of violations of human or environmental rights within their area of responsibility ?
I must refer to the conference on the social responsibility of businesses which took place in Stockholm on 10 and 11 November 2009 .
The Swedish Presidency , which organised the conference , and the then future and now current Spanish Presidency came to the conclusion that on this aspect , the European Union should take the global lead , and should serve as an example on the important subject which Mr Désir raises with this question .
This subject is the social responsibility of businesses in terms of creating markets , fighting corruption , protecting the environment , and defending human dignity and human rights in the work place , especially given that the European Union is the largest economy in the world and the greatest contributor to development cooperation .
Europe plays host to many multinational businesses .
It is a very suitable place to take on this leadership .
Essentially , social responsibility has three components - protect , respect and remedy .
The state should protect , and this means legislation , rules for development as regards violations of human rights , especially on the part of businesses .
There is a responsibility in business to respect those human rights and there is a responsibility for all parties involved to guarantee access to adequate remedy , with the aim of protecting and improving those human rights .
I wish to point out that we now have another instrument available , which is the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the citizens of Europe , which is legally binding and which means that , for the first time , including at a European level , there is that protection in respect of the matters to which the idea of social responsibility refers .
It is necessary for all interested parties to participate .
It is necessary to continue dialogue with non-Member States , with civil society , with the unions , with businesses , including small and medium-sized businesses , to bring about that concept , that trio that we mentioned : protect , respect and remedy .
The Spanish Presidency will continue to promote it .
In particular , on 25-26 March , it will host a conference in Palma de Mallorca , which will deal with the question of institutionalising the social responsibility of businesses , from the point of view of its relationship with social dialogue .
The conference will study the possibility of including this framework in the list of instruments that the EU and its Member States will be able to use to accomplish their activities , including in the context of a matter alluded to this morning in the presentation of the Spanish Presidency 's programme , which is the EU 2020 Strategy .
There , too , the aim of social responsibility must have a presence .
( FR ) Thank you , Minister , for your reply .
I congratulate you on your initiative to hold this conference in Palma de Mallorca in March , as it will follow on from the conference held in Stockholm .
The problem is that we have to contend with multinational companies ; as you said , Europe has to take the lead in corporate social responsibility , but it also has to take the lead as regards the conduct of European companies located outside Europe .
The problem is that these subsidiaries are separate legal entities .
Are you prepared to envisage a legal instrument by which parent companies would be obliged to assume responsibility for the conduct of their subsidiaries located in other parts of the world when they fail to meet their obligations in relation to the environment or to respect for human or workers ' rights ?
Because , if this obligation is not imposed , European companies will slip through the net of this corporate social responsibility that Europe wishes to promote due to the conduct of their subsidiaries located elsewhere in the world .
I think that the European Union needs to facilitate best practice across Europe , and that this will produce the legislative proposals which can improve this situation .
We need to take into account that part of social responsibility , which we will call the legally binding part , which , above all , has to do with respecting human rights .
There is also a voluntary part made up of optional practices .
It is therefore important for forums to be created at European level and beyond to deal with these matters .
Some of them are already operating .
In fact , for example , the high-level group of the Member States meets every six months to share experiences relating to social responsibility .
I also believe that in this context of an economic crisis , it is even more important to work along these lines and to work towards competitiveness and environmental protection , connecting it with social inclusion .
This is particularly the case in 2010 , which is the Year for Combating Poverty and Social Exclusion .
I think that this should be the starting point , and that it is in that context , in something that is still , to a certain extent , pioneering , where these forums should be shaped , where everyone concerned should take part in a dialogue which should give rise to the subsequent measures .
I think , however , that we should tackle this stage of the dialogue , which is absolutely fundamental , via joint action which , so far , has been practically unprecedented .
( HU ) I would like to welcome the suggestion of the Minister for highlighting best practices .
We are all aware that the EU has a significantly ageing population , and companies have a responsibility for maintaining the health of people who go on long-term disability .
Does the Council plan on putting pressure on companies to use the expertise of retired people in society ?
That is , allowing them to remain active and not to stop after retirement .
( DE ) President-in-Office , the issue you mentioned has occupied us for a very long time .
Much of what has been said could have been said 10 or 15 years ago .
I have some specific questions in this regard .
Do you agree that , in order to properly implement and make visible the adoption of corporate social responsibility , sanctions as well as incentives would be necessary ?
Do you think that a system of naming and shaming could be introduced by the European Union ?
When we consider how often products are labelled , could you also envisage a clear reference being placed on companies ' products with regard to whether they comply with these basic rules of corporate social responsibility or whether they contravene them ?
We are used to so many other types of labelling .
Why not use this method with regard to social matters , too ?
I agree with the first speech , in that I believe that it is the basis for what I called the European Union 's dialogue with non-Member States , civil society , unions , enterprises and all interested parties , and , of course , the participation of the people to which you refer , honourable Member , is absolutely essential .
I believe that the time has come to discuss this and also what you referred to , but I think that it should be as part of an overall , comprehensive approach to a question that is going to be tackled , probably for the first time , or almost the first time in the high-level group that I referred to and in the conference to be held in March .
That is where I believe the discussions should take place and it is the best way to achieve our objectives .
Sometimes it is better to take the path of incentives , other times it is better to take the path of sanctions .
The path of sanctions is not always the best one . I think that this requires an integrated study , because I think that we need an integrated vision and a series of measures , not successive individual measures , but ultimately , an integrated vision of the whole problem , and of the issue that it represents , which is a great opportunity : social responsibility .
Subject : EU financial supervision
The President of the ECB , Jean-Claude Trichet , said to the European Parliament 's Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs on Monday 7 December 2009 , with regard to the topic of EU financial supervision and agreement by EU finance ministers , ' that is not necessarily the best solution ' , because there are , for example , no provisions for the planned EU authorities to have direct powers to issue instructions .
How will the Council ensure that transnational banks , insurance companies , financial service providers , investment funds and hedge funds do not evade effective supervision because national competences continue to be fragmented ?

Mr Martin , clearly , I think the EU is tackling proper supervision of the financial system at European level , and surely , in this case , we have needed to extricate ourselves from a severe crisis .
It is carrying this out from two essential dimensions which are laid down in the financial supervision directives , the six directives which the Commission set out last year and which , at the moment , will require agreement between the Council and this Parliament .
We intend to get this agreement completed during the Spanish Presidency .
Therefore , we will mainly be discussing it with this House .
On the one hand , there is what is known as macroprudential supervision , through the European Systemic Risk Board , which seeks to prevent serious crises , to guarantee financial stability and to reduce disruptions to the financial system .
And , on the other , there is what is known as microprudential supervision , which I think is what Mr Martin was basically referring to in his question .
These are the three European authorities on banking , insurance and the stock market .
The aim of this supervision is more in-depth supervision , forgive the repetition , and reducing disturbances in individual financial entities , therefore protecting the clients of such entities .
The Council , as I have said , approved a common position in this regard , once and for all .
Firstly , last year in October , the Council gave political affirmation , and political confidence to that macrosupervision , and , in December , to microsupervision and the whole legislative package .
This is something , as I was saying , that is subject to the ordinary legislative procedure and , therefore , to what Parliament agrees with the Council .
These three committees should be up and running .
We would like the Directives to be adopted , even , if possible , in the first semester of the Spanish Presidency , but in any case , up and running by the end of 2010 .
This is the Council 's objective .
Consequently , we expect fruitful cooperation with the European Parliament so that we can bring this important step forward to a conclusion , which I believe is historic and is in line with the approaches which have emerged from outside Europe , from the G20 , as the United States is preparing a similar regulation .
We believe this is one of the challenges that we must face in order to avoid another crisis such as this one , which originated in the financial system , through a lack of regulation and through the irresponsibility , as the Member previously said , of certain leaders within the financial system .
( DE ) Thank you for your statements , Mr López Garrido .
You mentioned the macrosupervision area of the European Systemic Risk Board .
You are surely aware that there is already a great deal of criticism in this regard , firstly with regard to the size of the Board , because it has , once again , been put together according to a typical European Proporz system .
Do you see a risk here , too , like many others do , that it will not be possible for this Board to work efficiently ?
The second problem with regard to this European Systemic Risk Board is its lack of independence .
Do you think that you could go a step further during the Spanish Presidency and attempt to ensure that it has a greater degree of independence and make any appropriate improvements with regard to the size of the Board , because it will hardly be possible for it to work in any meaningful way on this basis ?
I believe that there is a proposal made by the Commission .
There has been an agreement , an agreement was finally reached , a consensus in the Council , which was not easy .
The Swedish Presidency and the Commission had to work hard to obtain this agreement in the Ecofin Council , and here it is .
Now it is here in the European Parliament and it is the Parliament that has to take this approach , as you and others point out .
This is the place to achieve that agreement between the two spheres .
There is a consensus at Council level and we will see if we can achieve consensus with the European Parliament .
I think that these matters you have raised are , like others , perfectly arguable and debatable , and I am sure we will come to an agreement , because it is absolutely necessary , between the two legislative bodies of the Union : the Council and the European Parliament .
As part of the proposed financial supervision , would the Spanish Presidency consider making recommendations as regards best practice to cap the salaries of the CEOs of the major banks , and also to limit the grotesque bonus culture that has fuelled much of the difficulties and landed us in the mire we are now in ?

( EL ) Madam President , Mr López Garrido , I want to link the question of financial supervision by the European Union to speculative action by mutual funds , including funds domiciled in the European Union , in the City of London .
Articles report that fund managers are betting on a fall in the euro , Greek Government and other bonds and on debt and deficit , thereby exacerbating borrowing .
Are you therefore in a position to tell me what specific measures can be taken to protect the economies of the Member States of the European Union from speculative attacks by high-risk mutual funds , including funds domiciled in the European Union ?
Yes , I think it is perfectly possible to debate good practice in relation to financial entities .
We are opening a debate which is centred around these financial supervision systems and I believe this is the perfect place to work along those lines and to be able to contribute some of the elements to which you have referred , Mr Kelly , even as part of the directives .
I also think that there is room for the proposal made by the second speaker within these directives , which you will be able to debate in this Chamber , for example , in relation to the regulation of hedge funds , which is within the supervision requirements which have been discussed , or something which the current President of the Council of the Union mentioned here this morning , the eradication of tax havens .
All this , these ideas which have been raised , have their place , and will fit perfectly into the debate which will take place in this Chamber over the next few months on reform , as the European Council called it at the time , a complete and actual reform of the supervision of the financial system .
A thorough and important reform , therefore , in which all the issues and debates that you have brought up will have a place .
Subject : Economic situation in Greece and role of the euro area
The message emerging from the recent summit meeting regarding the serious economic problems besetting Greece and the question of support for countries finding themselves in such a situation were contradictory .
While Chancellor Merkel was at pains to stress the shared responsibility of all euro area countries for the fate of one of it members , Mr Reinfeldt took the view that Greece 's problems were home-grown and must be resolved from within .
What is the Presidency 's position regarding solidarity between Member States , particularly within the euro area , where one of them is faced with the prospect of insolvency ?
Is it in favour of European Central Bank loans and guarantees for Member State governments in order to curb speculative profiteering and prevent public debt from spiralling into a vicious circle as a consequence of downgraded credit ratings ?
Does it believe that , aside from the punitive remedies prescribed under the Stability and Growth Pact , more effective preventive checks are needed , coupled with measures to shore up employment and growth in debt-laden countries , before their economic situation worsens drastically ?
In the treaties of the European Union , there is a clear division of competences .
The economic policies of the Member States are of common interest to the Union but , at the same time , the national budgets are the competence of each Member State .
Given that there is a single currency in 16 countries of the Union and , at the same time , a view to extending that , as the idea of monetary union is something which appears in the Maastricht Treaty as the most all-inclusive objective possible , there is , of course , observance of the rules of the Member States with regard to their budgets , because this affects the economy and the monetary system as a whole .
Therefore , it is necessary to avoid excessive public deficits , which is something essential to the functioning of economic and monetary union , and out of the two , the one which has developed most , it must be acknowledged , monetary union , not so much economic union .
Hence , the Stability Pact and hence , in Maastricht in its time , today Article 123 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union forbids deficits or the granting of credit to cover those deficits by the European Central Bank and the central banks of the Member States whose currency is the euro .
It also says in the treaty that neither the Union nor the Member States will assume or respond to the obligations of the central government or other public authorities of another Member State .
Therefore , each Member state must underwrite its debt commitment and the Council has stated that all Member States must do this , and remains confident that Greece and the other Member States will make the necessary decisions to correct their economic imbalance in order to conserve the strength of their national economic and financial environment .
It must be remembered that an excessive deficit procedure anticipates supervision of economic policies in justified cases .
The Council is going to debate the case of Greece , we hope , in February .
It is probable that then , whilst dependant on the Commission 's right of initiative , recommendations will be adopted and , therefore , strategies set out , in such a way that the European Union can express its interest and its involvement in difficult situations or circumstances which certain Member States may experience .
( EL ) Madam President , Mr López Garrido , you have reminded us of the articles of the treaty that deal with the excessive deficit procedure .
Parliament knows these articles .
However , I have a feeling that you could give me more information about what Mr Zapatero meant when he spoke of solidarity in the euro area , about solidarity in countries with particular financial problems .
Is there perhaps a possibility of debating better financial coordination between the centre and regions as far as subsidies are concerned ?
Is there perhaps a possibility of better fiscal coordination in order to avoid the fiscal and social dumping which is already burdening the European Union and has particular consequences on certain countries ?
Can you tell me more about what you said earlier in connection with what Mr Zapatero meant by solidarity ?
The European Union is a region of the world where solidarity is practised very visibly .
For example , in the case of Greece , or my country Spain , we have experienced great solidarity on the part of the European Union , through European funds and through the Structural Funds , which are essential elements of European solidarity policy which will continue .
They have no comparison anywhere else in the world .
This has enabled marked progress in many countries , something which benefits the countries as a whole , whilst opening up markets .
At the same time , there has been the transfer of certain amounts towards the modernisation of a region .
This is a very clear example of solidarity .
These are funds which , naturally , have to be used correctly and which are monitored by the European Union , as is perfectly logical .
Hence , there is solidarity .
Another form of solidarity is that which we can take very clearly from the treaty .
You referred particularly to the treaty .
The treaty establishes the obligation of Member States to coordinate their economic policies , their social policies and their employment policies .
Article 5 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union sets it out clearly and there , also , the solidarity of the European Union is expressed : in the joint discussion and joint adoption of objectives with a view to a coordinated economic policy .
Many of the current problems in various European countries as a consequence of the crisis would not have been so intense if there had been economic union much earlier , because economic union stopped .
Monetary union moved forward , but economic union stopped and those synergies of coordination of economic policies in the European Union did not emerge , which , in short , is what should happen .
This is what the treaty ultimately proposes
The Europe 2020 strategy , the objectives which we must agree on regarding investment in education , the specialisation and division of labour , and on the fight against climate change , are also elements to agree on and for solidarity .
There , too , solidarity is expressed very clearly in a continent , in a European Union which must always be as united as possible .
However , of course , that does not prevent the treaty , quite logically , from also demanding responsibility from the Member States on their level of debt or on the credit that they take on .
That , of course , is the responsibility of each State .
However , there is a whole context of a market-place , social policies , structural policies , regional policies and , in the future , I hope , coordination of economic , social and employment policies , which is , undoubtedly , a context of solidarity .
That is the most suitable , most in-depth and far-reaching form of a policy of solidarity in the Union .
( PL ) I would still like to ask a question , because you did say , Minister , that the very serious situation in Greece would be raised at the meeting of the Commission in February this year .
It is true that the crisis in Greece is very serious , but we all well know that it may , unfortunately , spread .
I would like to ask this : apart from the forum of the Commission , should you not start a more substantive discussion with the European Central Bank ?
I think it , too , is an important body , which should be more active here , concerning the situation in Greece .
I believe that each body has its own area of work .
This is one of the most important characteristics of the structure of European economic and monetary union and , furthermore , that which gives it credibility .
It is true that the Council will discuss the case of Greece , logically enough as it is one of the Member States of the Union and , obviously , what happens in another European country affects us all .
We are affected by what happens in countries outside Europe , not to mention in a place where there is a single market and a single currency for 16 countries .
It is logical that it is debated within the limits set out in the treaty and , furthermore , that it is done based on the budgetary and economic strategy considered to be appropriate to the current circumstances , and which , in this case , is recommended to Greece , from which it will , no doubt , benefit .
The European Central Bank has it own duties in the treaty , duties with regard to financial stability and price stability , from an independent position .
The independence of the European Central Bank is an essential principle of the European Union which affords gives great credibility to our economic and financial system , and our common currency , the euro .
That criterion of independence should be respected , because it is a fundamental element of the economic and monetary union that we adopted several years ago in the European Union .
Minister , thank you very much for your participation in this first Question Time with your Presidency .
Questions which have not been answered for lack of time will receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.15 and resumed at 21.00 )

Composition of committees : see Minutes
Democratisation in Turkey ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on democratisation in Turkey .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have pleasure in addressing this Chamber regarding a matter of extreme importance for the European Union , which is the matter of relations with Turkey and , more specifically , the democratisation of Turkey , which seems to be the main objective of the debate , a matter directly related to the Union , not just indirectly , but also directly , bearing in mind that Turkey is a candidate country .
It has the status of a candidate country that has been negotiating for several years to join the European Union and , as is known , among the political requirements of Copenhagen , we require that a country that wishes to join the Union has stable political institutions and guarantees democracy , the rule of law , human rights and respect for minorities .
Therefore , Turkey must fulfil these requirements .
There are several chapters open for possible negotiation .
Some are open , others are not yet open , other negotiations are stalled , and it is plain that Turkey is of great strategic importance to the Union .
Firstly , because it is a country which has a European perspective and , furthermore , because it is a large country of growing strategic importance from the point of view of energy supply and it is a country with unquestionable economic and also , of course , political relevance .
Turkey , by the way , is part of NATO and , therefore , in that respect , for some of the countries of the European Union , Turkey is also an associate in the sphere of that military alliance .
It must be said that Turkey has experienced positive changes .
The European perspective has given Turkey particular motivation to follow a path , in a positive sense , towards democratising changes and democratic consolidation .
The current Turkish Government has even launched what it calls the ' democratic initiative ' as a response to the need for a series of institutional changes to the Turkish political system en route to its democratisation .
In relation to the European Union , its interest has even been demonstrated within the government , with the appointment of Minister Bağış , to whom I have spoken many times , specifically responsible for negotiation with the European Union , which is his portfolio .
Hence , we can see how , on the one hand , Turkey has launched reforms , incentivised , no doubt , by the European perspective , but , on the other , inadequacies still clearly persist in the specific area on which this debate is focused , the area of democracy and respect for fundamental liberties .
We still consider as insufficient the levels of protection and the guarantee of certain freedoms , such as freedom of expression , of the press , of religion , or the rights of unions , the rights of minority groups , the rights of women and children , the fight against discrimination and equality between men and women .
This has led us to propose to Turkey , as part of this process , a series of constitutional reforms , without which it would be difficult to move forward in any of those areas .
Therefore , as established in the framework for negotiations with Turkey , the European Union wishes to move forward along these lines and , what is more , will direct Turkey when necessary and when it considers that a certain type of measure is not moving in that direction or could make progress difficult .
This actually happened on the occasion of the decision adopted on 11 December by the Turkish Constitutional Court to dissolve the DTP ( Demokratik Toplum Partisi ) and to prevent a number of its democratically elected representatives from carrying out any political activity .
The Presidency of the Council expressed its concern about that decision adopted by the Court at the time and there has clearly been a voice from the European Union sharply pointing out its concern at that decision .
Furthermore , that voice is encouraging the necessary reforms in Turkish legislation to adapt the regulation on political parties to certain recommendations formulated by the Venice Commission of the Council of Europe and the relevant regulations of the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms which , by the way , has been signed and ratified by the Turkish State and submitted to the jurisdiction , in this case , of the Strasbourg Court .
Hence I conclude , Madam President . The Presidency of the Council will continue giving much importance to this matter .
Every aspect of the reform process currently taking place in Turkey will be closely followed and , in any case , within a framework which we consider to be positive , which is a framework of negotiation and association for membership .
We think this is a strategic framework that we must continue with , and the intention of the current Spanish Presidency of the Council is that new avenues of negotiation should continue to open up and therefore , as happened last year with Turkey , we would be able to go into depth in those negotiations .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I welcome this very important debate on Turkish democratisation .
I remind us all that the Turkish EU accession process remains of strategic importance for the European Union .
Democratic reforms and the democratic transformation of Turkey reinforce stability and security in Turkey and in the wider neighbourhood of the EU and Turkey .
Progress in Turkey inspires reformers and acts as a catalyst for democracy and human rights in the whole region .
Of course , progress is not always straightforward with positive developments .
We also see developments that give reason for concern , and when this is the case , we raise these issues in a very serious manner with the Turkish authorities and we use those instruments that we have , thanks to the conditionality of the EU accession perspective .
When a society like Turkey experiences fundamental political changes , it is rarely the case that there is always full clarity or a direction amidst events .
The democratic opening of Turkey in relation to the Kurdish population is an example of such a development .
In the summer of 2009 , the Turkish Government launched this democratic opening aimed at raising democratic and living standards for all Turkish citizens .
This important initiative addresses the Kurdish issue through dialogue and within the framework of Turkish democratic institutions .
A number of landmark reforms have been carried out to date .
Some of these were next to impossible only a few years ago : think of the Kurdish-language TV programmes , which are now broadcast by private and public broadcasters .
They are a telling example of such welcome changes and transformation .
But the recent setbacks in the democratic opening are , indeed , reason for serious concern .
We regret the decision of the Constitutional Court of Turkey in December to close the Democratic Society Party ( DTP ) .
Following the closure of the DTP , several party members - including elected mayors - were arrested in the context of an anti-terror investigation .
Simultaneously , PKK terrorist attacks continue unabated in the south-east and put the lives of Turkish soldiers at risk .
The tense political climate has also been fuelled by celebrations in the wake of the return of PKK members and sympathisers from northern Iraq .
Nationalist circles in Turkey have seized this opportunity to attack the government on its policies and on the democratic opening itself .
Following this backlash against the democratic opening , I welcome last week 's announcement by the Turkish Government to carry the democratic opening further .
The democratic transformation of Turkey is a forceful testimony of the continued soft power of the EC accession perspective when used fairly and firmly and with vigour and consistency .
It is not an easy process but one in which the journey is at least as important as the destination .
Let us keep it alive and make it work for the joint benefit of the EU and Turkey .
Madam President , Commissioner Rehn , I realise that this debate on Turkey , on enlargement , may be the last time I speak to you .
In any case , I should like to thank you for the information you have always been willing to provide in discussions with us , with me .
My very warm thanks to you .
President-in-Office of the Council , Mr López Garrido , ladies and gentlemen , today 's debate is not about opening chapters .
It is about democratisation - certain aspects of democratisation , in particular - as the progress report on Turkey and Parliament 's vision are on the agenda for the next part-session in Strasbourg .
I agree with Commissioner Rehn that it is terribly important that Turkey move towards democracy .
I should like to congratulate Turkey emphatically on all the efforts it has already made in this field , including with regard to the Kurdish issue .
After all , who would have thought 10 years ago , five years ago even , that there would now be television programmes in Kurdish ?
When , in mid-2009 , Turkey launched what it called the ' democratic opening ' initiative , this produced an unprecedented debate - not only a debate in the parliament , but also an unprecedented debate in the media .
At that time , I hoped that debate would produce very tangible , firmly rooted rights for all Turkish citizens at long last .
In October , I congratulated all my Turkish counterparts on daring to hold that debate in spite of public opposition .
I have called on them to follow the debate with very specific measures to flesh out this opening .
Following all the positive energy that had been put into this , however , Turkey 's dark side then reared its head again , as the ruling of the Turkish Constitutional Court brought renewed terrorist attacks .
There was a wave of arrests of Democratic Society Party ( DTP ) members , and the threat of arrest still hangs over members of the Turkish Parliament .
This also threatens to put an end to this opening and I have a nasty feeling about this .
Whilst I regret the decision of the Constitutional Court , I understand that the same Court is calling for the implementation of the recommendations of the Venice Commission .
This House has always condemned violence and terrorism , and has argued in favour of political solutions .
After all , only dialogue within Turkish society and legally guaranteed sustainable rights can bring peace , security and prosperity for Turkish citizens , and will also be of great benefit to us .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Madam President , the announcement of the democratic opening last year gave hope of a genuine breakthrough in securing respect for Kurdish linguistic , cultural and human rights in Turkey and closing the door on the years of terrorism and violence .
Yet tonight Parliament joins Council and Commission in expressing our deep concern that what is closed instead with December 's Constitutional Court decision is the political party which commands the majority of the vote in the country 's Kurdish majority areas , and is what the country 's human rights association calls the ' natural negotiator ' on behalf of the Kurdish people .
Two years ago , I personally attended , as an observer , the party 's congress with some 20 000 people , and saw and heard for myself their legitimacy in the eyes of their own supporters .
I acknowledge that the closure of political parties was opposed by the Turkish Prime Minister in his statement in the wake of the decision , and today 's Turkish press reports the governing party 's announced intention to prevent further unwarranted closures by bringing the constitution into line with Article 11 of the European Convention on Human Rights .
These promises must be realised .
But it is difficult for any of us to reconcile Turkey 's call for guerrillas to come down from the mountains with the fact that other members of the same community who have chosen the path of democracy are then shown lined up in handcuffs and marched into jail .
Between 700 and 1 000 of the party 's members are reported to be imprisoned , many for simply speaking their own language in public .
In this European Parliament , we should particularly regret the jailing of nine of the party 's elected mayors and the banning of two of its MPs .
In our Parliament , as in theirs , the reason that we have parliamentary immunity is so that we , as representatives of the people , can speak out without fear .
The fear that we have to combat , for those of us intent on seeing Turkey join the European Union , is the misplaced fear amongst some of the majority population that , in a multi-ethnic country , what we call minority rights are a threat to the unity of the state .
In modern Europe , quite simply , they are not .
So , finally , a party whose Turkish name translates as the ' Democratic Society Party ' is gone , but its aim of a democratic society in a modern Turkey must not be lost .
Madam President , first of all , I should like to join Mrs Oomen-Ruijten in offering warm thanks to Commissioner Rehn for all his efforts over recent years .
I also welcome the new zest that has been introduced by the Spanish Presidency when it comes to the negotiations with Turkey .
Ladies and gentlemen , I , too , regret the ruling of the Turkish Constitutional Court .
Clearly , this is a step backwards , but let us hope that it is only one backward step and that it will be followed by several steps forward , as we must also recognise that the current Turkish Government has made clear efforts to set democratisation in motion and also to give the Kurds their rightful place in society and in the political system .
I would point out , though , that if we want to support this process of democratisation , development and reform in Turkey , we need to make an unambiguous commitment to Turkey 's full membership .
I believe that we need to give the Turkish people , too - not just the Turkish political class - a shot in the arm , and that we should not waver , discuss interim solutions or move the goalposts during the game .
We must make an unambiguous commitment .
This also goes for all the Turkish political parties , and so I wish to call on them to bury the hatchet in this regard and make concerted efforts towards reform .
On a recent visit to the country as a member of the EU-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee , I noticed enormous progress within civil society .
After all , Turkey is more than just the politicians and negotiators ; it is also the people .
I see that the Turkish people are indeed taking up the challenge and are working hard to reform their own society .
We must give this our wholehearted support .
Therefore , I would urge the strengthening of the pillar that was agreed back then : not only the negotiations , but also the investment in getting to know each other .
That was explicitly the second strand .
I hope that this House will also make an unambiguous commitment to supporting the accession process .
Madam President , Commissioner Rehn , thank you for remaining with us at this late hour to discuss democratisation in Turkey , a subject on which you have done a great deal of work , for which I thank you .
I believe that there were very many of us who , when the government announced its democratic initiative , its democratic opening-up , recognised just how bold a step this was and , at the same time , believed that this huge ambition represented a long road ahead , a road that would probably be full of pitfalls ; the pitfalls appeared fairly quickly .
The first act , as you said , was the dissolution of the DTP , but I also note that , alongside the ban on the DTP , the ban on engaging in political activity , which affects several elected members of its party , also eliminates the figures who were most heavily involved in the democratic and political dialogue to resolve the Kurdish issue .
This leaves a question mark hanging over this decision .
Next , there is also this wave of arrests which , today , are genuinely removing political leaders and therefore also the spokesmen on this Kurdish issue .
Yet the Kurdish issue is central to the democratisation process in Turkey !
Primarily because it is systemic , because it represents many years of suffering , violence , conflict and war , the tragic scars of which are still in evidence today ; and these scars are also economic , social , cultural and political .
This Kurdish issue is also placing a huge strain on the democratisation process .
It is placing a strain on freedom of expression , on freedom of the press , on the rights of citizens and on the fight against torture .
And when I see today how anti-terrorism legislation is being used as a cover for political reprisals , I say that now really is the time when we have to support the government and expect it to take another extremely ambitious initiative to emerge from this situation because , as we know , not all the established groups in Turkey are interested in a democratic settlement of the Kurdish issue .
We are well aware of this fact , as we have been since the beginning .
Therefore , Turkey now needs our support , our unfailing support in this process of democratisation .
My fellow Member , Mrs in ' t Veld , is right to say that this unfailing support must include the renewal of that promise of membership once the democratisation process has been completed ; it is absolutely crucial to say this .
Next , the government will eventually have to produce reforms , which will inevitably have to lead to a new draft constitution .
Immediate reforms will obviously relate to legislation on political parties .
They will also relate to electoral reform - as a matter of extreme urgency - and to the independence of the judicial system .
These fundamental pillars for a democratic state in Turkey must now be courageously and determinedly promoted by the Turkish Government .
Moreover , this government must also implement initiatives to encourage consensus and reconciliation , because polarisation of society and of the political forces in Turkey would have a disastrous effect on the search for the consensus needed for the adoption of a new constitution , which we are all hoping for .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Madam President , Turkey 's political system is sufficiently mature now to be considered a pluralist democracy .
Political debate is robust and voters have a genuine choice .
Moreover , Turkey is a member of the Council of Europe , which , of course , binds its government to common standards of democracy , human rights and the rule of law .
Evidently , a stable and permanent democracy is a precondition for eventual membership of the EU .
There are now , however , perhaps two areas of concern .
The first is Turkey 's history of military intervention in the political process .
While the army is undoubtedly an important guarantor of secularism and stability , any attempt to undermine an elected government would scupper Turkey 's EU ambitions for good .
The second concern is the dominance of the AKP in the political landscape , which leads some observers to fear the gradual development of a de facto one-party state .
Provided that happens democratically , we cannot object , even if some have expressed concerns about the relatively high threshold for parliamentary representation at 10 % in Turkey , which of course squeezes smaller parties out of the parliamentary process .
However , the AKP 's mildly Islamist leanings also give rise to concern in the views of some , and the party 's popularity tends to indicate a fundamental paradigm shift in the nature of Turkish society .
Until now , the secular Kemalist tradition has served Turkey 's Euro-Atlantic leanings very well , but its gradual decline due to demographic changes would tend to indicate that those who believe in the power of Ataturk 's vision have rather taken it too much for granted .
For the good of Turkish society , democracy needs to be pluralist , secular and built on a bed-rock of respect for human rights , including those of its Kurdish minorities .
One concern in addition , of course , is Turkey 's membership of the Organisation of the Islamic Conference ( OIC ) , where such common Western values as we all share in the European Union are not evident because the OIC cites Sharia law as a basis for human rights in the Islamic world .
This , in my view , will also generate some serious conflicts of interest were Turkey one day to join the European Union .
Madam President , as a Cypriot MEP , when I talk of Turkey , I always feel obliged to express our support for the accession of this country , subject - of course - to the stated preconditions and extensive democratisation .
How can we assist with the democratisation of Turkey ?
That is a big question .
I claim that this can be achieved by telling Turkey the truth .
Yes , Turkey is making progress .
Much of it is noteworthy .
We should tell it as much .
Turkey has turned into a graveyard for political parties .
Thirteen parties have been buried by Supreme Court judgments .
Recently , the DTP was banned ; 200 party members , nine mayors , six formers mayors and two former party leaders are in jail .
Is there a trend towards democratisation in such a state because there is television in the Kurdish language ?
We are Turkey 's neighbours and we call on you to learn from our experiences as neighbours , not from our weak points .
Turkey will be democratised if we talk to it clearly and strictly .

Mr Minister , I welcome the restrained and - if I may say so - wise analyses both by Mr López Garrido and by Commissioner Olli Rehn , whom I congratulate and wish every success in his new office .
There is no doubt that Turkey is a large Muslim country of huge strategic importance .
I have no wish to repeat the views of other members which I agree with .
However , the analysis of the information relating to this country gives me the impression that there are numerous centres of power which are unable to act jointly and contradict each other .
Thus , while the Erdoğan government is trying to present itself as moderate , the armed forces of the countries appear to be aggressive both towards Greece , constantly violating Greek airspace , and constantly harassing Frontex .
At the same time , it was noted recently that the judiciary in this country has shown a clear repeated tendency towards the abolition of the government along the same lines as events two or three years ago with Erbakan .
Finally , the Turkish Government appears unable at the moment to safeguard in the country the popular sovereignty which characterises a democracy and is planning a new type of Ottoman commonwealth , as illustrated by the views expressed by Mr Davutoglou and repeated on his recent visit to Lebanon by Mr Erdoğan .

I also find strange the moves by the Turkish Government in terms of its overtures to Iran and its nuclear programme , which conflict with the views of the international community , especially the European Union and the USA .
Moreover , in contravention of the Ankara roadmap and international agreements , Turkey is allowing and , perhaps , encouraging the movement of illegal immigrants through its territory to the countries of the European Union and is not complying with its obligations to grant docking and landing rights to Cypriot ships and aircraft .
At the same time , the primate of the Orthodox Church , Patriarch Bartholomaios , the uncontested spiritual leader of hundreds of millions of Orthodox Christians , has personally entered the fight and frankly and clearly outlined the situation of the Patriarchate , complaining of violations of religious freedoms and minority rights .
I therefore consider that Turkey has a long way to go to accession to the European Union .
( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , in line with the comments made by some of my fellow Members , I believe that the democratisation process in Turkey is an essential journey that will enable that country to move closer to the European Union and that our coexistence within the European Union must be based on inalienable principles and values , and that their recognition is a prerequisite for the entry of any state .
This also applies to Turkey , which must implement those reforms that are necessary to guarantee democracy , the rule of law , and the protection of human rights and the rights of minorities .
In particular , cultural , religious and political pluralism are the foundations of a democratic society , but recognising them is a difficult process which is intertwined with historical , ethnic and religious considerations .
The events surrounding the Turkish Constitutional Court 's ban on the Democratic Society Party , a party close to the Kurdish minority , are one example of this .
It follows that the banning of parties and the removal of elected representatives from office are always very serious events because they violate individual freedoms and democratic principles .
The democratisation process in Turkey undoubtedly depends on the solution of the Kurdish issue .
The European Union must make a strong political commitment with the political authorities of the countries involved and must carry out joint action with the United Nations .
Democracy cannot exist without pluralism , as the European Court of Human Rights in Strasbourg has repeated on many occasions .
I therefore hope that the Turkish political system may swiftly develop in line with these principles .
If Turkey succeeds in doing this , then its entry into Europe can only represent a great opportunity for us .
( ES ) It seems to me that one can say quite forcefully that , since membership negotiations began with Turkey , on the basis of a unanimous agreement of the Council , the process as a whole merits a positive assessment .
It has helped the democratisation and modernisation process in Turkey .
However , it is also obvious that there are a multitude of problems , there are forward and backward steps , there is bad news from time to time - the recent ban on the Kurdish party , the DTP , is an example - and that we have a long road of enormous complexity ahead of us .
Here , in this Parliament , we are used to saying what others should do .
I think that it would be a good idea for us to state also , with a view to future negotiations with Turkey , what our majority stance is .
I think that this is reflected in the report by Ria Oomen-Ruijten , which has a large majority and is in favour of not establishing a criterion of two weights and two measures in the process of negotiation , of being firm and clear in our intentions and not giving out contradictory messages , because this could really nurture a vicious circle in which European reluctance , ambiguities , and contradictions could provide fodder for reactionaries or those who are against Turkey 's membership of Europe , nationalist groups or suchlike who are against integration into Europe .
In this sense , I would like to declare my satisfaction at the interventions of both the Council and the Commission .
Let us play it by ear .
We do not know what the outcome will be , but we must be true to our word : pacta sunt servanda .
We have a process of negotiation for Turkey 's membership of the European Union and we must be clear and precise and also , of course , circumspect in that will .
Madam President , many of the reforms we constantly call for in Turkey come together in the saga of the repeated closure of Kurdish political parties , of which that of the DTP last month is only the latest .
The continued failure to reform the constitution , the Law on Political Parties and the judiciary , as well as the continued involvement of the military in politics , all influence the context in which Kurdish democratic political representation is repeatedly sabotaged .
These closures also sabotage the democratic opening launched last year by the Erdoğan government , which was , rightly , widely welcomed .
The only way to get a durable settlement to the Kurdish question in Turkey is through a political solution , and that is the best way to combat the PKK .
Commissioner Rehn talked about several mayors and DTP politicians being arrested , but my information is that about 1 200 activists are in prison , including members of the BDP party , which has succeeded the DTP .
I am not clear at all how the government intends to strengthen its democratic opening in this context .
Who is calling the shots on these arrests ?
I have heard it said - I think it was by Richard Howitt - that Prime Minister Erdoğan did condemn the DTP closure , although I confess I missed that development .
A cynic might say that , electorally , it suits the AKP party rather well to have the DTP closed , as they are electoral rivals in the south-east .
I agree with those like Mrs in ' t Veld and Mrs Flautre that a solid and reliable assurance to Turkey that it will join the EU , if it meets the Copenhagen criteria , is the best leverage we have for democratisation in Turkey - though they owe it to themselves , too .
Turkey is an important country that has many great assets .
It needs and deserves democracy .
Finally , I add my own thanks to Commissioner Rehn for all he has done for enlargement in the last five years , not only concerning Turkey but - also close to my heart - the Western Balkans .
I look forward to welcoming him soon in his new portfolio .
Madam President , I join those who said that a democratic opening has enabled the kind of progress we have not seen in some years and generated development where , some years ago , we thought this would be impossible .
I also join those who said that it is very important that those democratic openings and reforms go on and are reinforced .
I would also add that we have to look at how reforms are actually implemented - not just written down on paper in law , but how they are implemented in the field .
Since we apparently all agree that it is very good that there are reforms , we also need to support those reforms .
This does not work if we just demand reforms but then say there is still no chance for Turkey to have a fair accession process .
If we want to have reforms , we need to show that introducing reforms will actually lead to some success and will lead to a fair accession process , with the aim of this accession process being accession by its nature .
In this regard , it is highly regrettable that , at the very moment that he took over the Presidency , Mr Zapatero watered down considerably his earlier commitment to a fair accession process .
Since we as the EU have made this commitment , I think we have to stick to it : we have to be reliable in our foreign policy .
So I would like to know if the representative of the Presidency could clarify here how , if Zapatero still sticks to his commitment , you will also try to implement this in the Council with other members who are rather sceptical .
( CS ) I am speaking from the position of someone who supports Turkey 's membership of the European Union as a fully-fledged member , and not as a substitute or a kind of privileged partner ; and I would like to add a few critical words levelled at our own ranks .
We perceive Turkey from the position of an organisation which has promised that country full membership of the European Union but which , at the same time , is unable to guarantee that if it does meet all the conditions we are demanding from it , it will really achieve full membership .
The position of the European Parliament in this matter is clear .
The institution has expressed its clear-cut approval ; the stance of the European Commission is also clear and , in this respect , I can only join in praising Commissioner Rehn for his objectivity and for the great job he has done in this cause over the past five years .
The position of the European Council is not that clear , because there are still governments of some Member States that simply refuse to make it quite clear that as long as Turkey meets all the conditions we require of it , it can become a fully-fledged member of the European Union .
In this case , we are involved in double dealing and becoming untrustworthy ; and we can hardly ask for something from someone to whom we are unable to guarantee that we will meet our own promises .
Secondly , Turkish democracy is simply quite specific in its own right .
While we justifiably urge that country to bring its standards closer to European standards , while we justifiably call , for example , for the role of its army to be limited , we should also realise what this is going to mean and what impact this is going to have on the structure of Turkish society and on the entire nature of Turkish democracy .
I am afraid that our mechanical evaluation of the criteria for democratisation could eventually do more harm than good , and I would advocate more sensitivity , more responsiveness , and more empathy for Turkey in this matter .
( DA ) Commissioner Rehn , in my headphones , you were translated as saying that the journey is just as important as the destination .
I have to say that I completely disagree with that .
Only that part of the journey that leads towards a democratic Turkey can be supported .
In contrast , we must speak out against any part of the journey that leads in the wrong direction .
Words must also be accompanied by action .
I would like to know how long the Commission will accept part of the EU 's accession support to Turkey being used to reward the political allies of the governing party while ethnic and religious minorities are discriminated against , as a recent investigation has shown .
The EU should do something about it !
I was at the DTP 's headquarters on 29 December when the police came to arrest Ahmet Türk - but where was the Commission and where was the Council ?
Will the Commission and the Council undertake to attend legal proceedings and stand up for human rights ?
Finally , a question concerning the mayor of Diyarbakir , Mr Baydemir , who the Turkish authorities have prevented from coming to this Parliament : is a protest going to be lodged with Turkey about this ?
Madam President , Turkey holds elections but is not a democracy in the accepted Western sense .
Political parties can be banned ; there is corruption in the legal system ; there are abuses of human rights ; freedom of speech and association do not exist in the same way that they do in countries like Britain or most other European states .
There is continuing persecution of a tiny Christian minority , which is - sadly - a growing feature of most Islamic countries .
The reforms of Kemal Ataturk in the 1920s were to be applauded , as they sought to leave behind the antiquities of the Ottoman Empire and the worst of the Dark Age Islamic practices and to take Turkey forward into the 20th century .
Even those achievements are now under threat as the worldwide ideological Islamic fundamentalist movement gains power , funded as it is by countries such as Saudi Arabia - courtesy of Western oil revenues - and ably assisted by the supine surrender of western civilisation .
This debate , of course , is just another small step on the road to allowing Turkey to join the European Union .
Turkish entry to the European Union is enthusiastically supported by the British Conservative , Labour and Liberal Democratic parties .
They look forward to welcoming the hundreds of thousands , or even millions , of Turkish immigrants who will come to Britain if Turkey joins the EU .
And just imagine if Turkey joins the European Union and uses such common legal procedures as the European Arrest Warrant .
British voters should imagine their potential free trip on the Turkish Midnight Express courtesy of the Lib Dems , Labour and Tories , and vote accordingly .
Sadly , Turkey wants to join the European Union because they will have their hands out in the hope of having them filled with lots of European taxpayers ' money in subsidies , and they see the opportunity of offloading millions of their poor and unemployed excess population by exporting them to Western countries like Britain , where they will either work for low wages or go on the benefits system .
This is hardly a positive vision for a proud nation .
I wish the Turks well and hope they achieve real democracy in time , but I also hope they will take the advice of the UK Independence Party not to join the European Union but to preserve their freedom and independence .
Madam President , I wish to start by welcoming the statements by the Commission and the Council and to thank , congratulate and salute Commissioner Olli Rehn for his personal commitment to the membership of Turkey in the European Union .
EU-Turkey relations go back a long way and are mutually beneficial .
Like other candidate countries , of course , Turkey also has to comply with the principles of democracy , freedom and human rights and to adopt its legislative system to the acquis communautaire .
I would like to join my colleagues who have welcomed the progress made by Turkey so far , but also to recognise that a number of hindrances remain on Turkey 's road to accession : freedom of expression and the rights of the Kurdish minority , described by colleagues , are examples .
I wish also to express my concern in relation to the decision by the Turkish Constitutional Court to close the Democratic Society Party and to ban a number of its democratically elected representatives , but this should not be a reason to delay the accession negotiations with Turkey .
The European perspective is a driving force for democratic reforms .
The lack of our commitment would send a negative signal to the Turkish people .
Our uncertainty has a cost .
It could undermine the democratic process under way .
EU policy should never be driven by fear .
We Europeans should support the reforms .
They will take time , they will be complex and there will be setbacks , but we should never waver on the Copenhagen criteria .
We should never waver on our commitment to Turkey 's membership .
There has to be a clear light at the end of the tunnel .
That is why I call on Turkey to continue its process of democratic reforms .
I think we should pledge to support them on this path .
( EL ) Mr President , we supported the accession prospects of Turkey , in the hope that it would contribute primarily to comprehensive democratic reform .
The results several years later are , unfortunately , very poor .
Reforms have ground to a halt and those implemented are basically dead letter .
Even progress in resolving the Kurdish question , which generated a great deal of hope , appears to have stopped .
In order to accede to the Union , Turkey must demonstrate its real respect for human rights , minority rights , religious freedoms and political parties and their democratically elected representatives .
The European Parliament has welcomed the democratic opening announced by the Turkish Government .
However , repression of freedom of expression and the arrests of thousands of citizens and dozens of political representatives are unacceptable and destroy the credibility of any statements about continuing reforms .
Moreover , the main component of democracy is the complete division between the political and military authority .
We cannot have a candidate country in which the army , even after so many years , is not subject to full political control .
Turkey 's European prospects are and must be our commitment , provided that it undertakes to promote the principles and objects of the Union in practice .
( NL ) Madam President , Turkey must be treated fairly .
This means that the European Union must also take an honest look in the mirror .
The Copenhagen criteria , with which everyone is familiar , are the important things here .
These must be met .
The accession process is an open-ended process , which was also stated when we opened accession negotiations .
This means that the criteria are key ; they will determine whether Turkey can proceed to accession .
Democracy is vital , of course .
This means that the EU must also make every effort to support democratisation in Turkey .
It is very strange , then , to note that the pre-accession programme , the programme for pre-accession aid , is being poorly implemented .
The Court of Auditors of the European Union has stated very clearly that too many priorities have been laid down , which means no priorities , and has pointed in particular to the aid for democratisation .
I should like to hear the Commission 's opinion on the Court of Auditors ' criticism , and what it will do to ensure that pre-accession aid is properly organised .
Madam President , I am not exactly sure why we are having this debate at this particular time .
Perhaps it is because it is three years since the death of Hrant Dink , and there are still serious questions still to be answered in relation to that crime .
I met Dink after the trial of Orhan Pamuk .
Dink 's death was , of course , a great tragedy , and as a friend of Turkey , I did not hesitate to point out the damage to Turkey 's standing of restricting freedom of expression and being oversensitive about criticisms of the Turkish State .
But , of course , it is in Turkey 's interest to strengthen every aspect of her democracy .
I also support the idea of Turkey as a secular and united country that , for over 80 years , has looked to the West .
I recognise the need for a strong Turkish army , and I recognise also the key geostrategic importance of Turkey .
It is for these reasons that I believe we should be very supportive of Turkey and not seek constantly to find ways of criticising her and sniping at her .
Of course , banning political parties is generally a bad idea , although there are exceptions to that rule .
We all recognise that terrorist organisations have political fronts and it is a fine judgment whether more damage is done by leaving a front alone or closing it down .
Of course , the PKK has its political fronts .
I will just say a word about the PKK , because it continues with its terrorist activities .
What is clear is that the PKK continues not only as a terrorist organisation but also with its criminal networks , which extend beyond Turkey throughout Europe .
The PKK is like a mafia , with a structure carrying out criminal activity , raising funds and bolstering support .
It is involved in every aspect of organised crime : tax evasion , counterfeiting money , trafficking of human beings - and the narcotics trade , of course , is one of its key sources of funding .
It just seems to me that we ought to be concentrating on doing more to overcome problems such as that in our own countries and helping the Turks in that way , rather than constantly sniping at them and criticising them .
( DE ) Madam President , I would like once again to point out that the Kurdish Democratic Society Party ban means that a total of 27 Kurdish parties have been banned by the Turkish Government in recent years .
Since the ban - we have only just heard about this - more than a thousand people have been arrested .
I think that , in a country in which parties are routinely banned , it is no longer possible to talk of democracy .
The prohibition of 27 Kurdish parties almost constitutes an attempt to be included in the Guinness Book of Records .
It is not only about the minorities in Turkey - and this is something that I would also like to mention again at this point .
There is currently a strike being held by tobacco workers at the firm Tekel that is very intense and is now escalating .
Several thousand workers went on hunger strike today in order to enforce their rights .
They feel they have been severely oppressed by the Turkish Government and the Turkish authorities .
This aspect must be taken into account , because the protection of the rights of workers and trade unions is an integral part of democracy .
The trade unions , but also the minorities , in Turkey are awaiting a clear and unambiguous opinion from this House .
( FI ) Madam President , Commissioner Rehn , you held a very challenging portfolio in the previous Commission , and this new role of yours cannot be very easy either .
Turkey 's democratic development has recently suffered setbacks , and the Kurdish position is not the only worrying factor .
The status of children and women needs improving , especially in rural areas .
Turkey has been slow over the years to protect the rights of religious minorities , such as the Alawites and Christians .
The position of the Patriarchate has already been mentioned here .
Orthodox believers have suffered discrimination and there are probably now only around 3 000 of them in Turkey .
It is a totally incomprehensible law that says that Orthodox priests , bishops and patriarchs must be Turkish citizens .
A patriarch is the head of a worldwide church , so he , of course , may be elected from any member church .
Similarly , there must be a guarantee of the protection of church property , and property that has been seized illegally must be returned .
A list of names has been compiled here in this House with a position in writing adopted in favour of opening the clerical Seminary of Halki .
The last person to appeal to have the Halki Seminary opened was President Barack Obama .
If Turkey were to safeguard the human rights of the Christian minority in this way , it would set an excellent example to the other Muslim nations , encouraging them too to guarantee exactly the same rights for Christians as Christian countries do for their Muslim minorities .
Commissioner , we often ask here whether Turkey is ready to join the EU .
I believe that the EU should honestly ask itself whether it is actually ready to accept Turkey as a member .
You also said that the journey is as important as the destination .
We have to remember that Turkey 's democratic development is not as important for the EU as it is for Turkey 's own citizens .
That is why it is worth continuing on this journey , even if we do not agree on the destination .
( NL ) Madam President , the Turkish Government has launched the democratic initiative to democratise the country and improve Kurdish cultural rights .
This was a courageous step forward .
Banning political parties is a large step back , however .
A democratic state based on the rule of law must always allow discussion to take place democratically , with all citizens able to make their voices heard .
The ban on the Democratic Society Party ( DTP ) is not conducive to the success of this democratic initiative .
Eighteen months ago , the governing Justice and Development Party ( AKP ) narrowly escaped the same fate .
I expect Turkey to amend its constitution as soon as possible in compliance with the criteria drawn up by the Venice Commission , to preclude the banning of political parties .
All parties must be involved in this ; after all , the same fate could befall them .
In addition , a party system that results in better representation of the Turkish population must be introduced .
This can be done by drastically reducing the 10 % electoral threshold .
The use of party bans as a stake in a political game must be prevented .
Turkey will have to work towards this , with Europe 's support , immediately and without delay .
It remains for me to thank Commissioner Rehn for his tremendous cooperation .
I wish him every success with his new portfolio .
( SV ) Enlargement has enabled the EU to bolster basic values such as democracy and human rights on our continent and put the conditions in place for the rule of law based on independent courts and legal authorities with a functioning market democracy - a stable and peaceful Europe .
This development must continue .
That is why Turkey should be welcomed into the EU fold .
Far too many in Parliament and among EU governments are trying to wriggle out of the promises given to Turkey as a candidate country .
That is dishonourable and creates uncertainty not just in Turkey , but also in other candidate countries .
Naturally , Turkey cannot join the EU until all the criteria are met .
The EU must set strict criteria but , at the same time , support the country so that it can in fact meet these criteria .
As has been mentioned , some progress has been made in Turkey ; regrettably , however , the situation is far from unambiguous .
There are still major shortcomings .
The decision by the Constitutional Court to ban the largest Kurdish party is , of course , quite unacceptable and also blocks membership .
May I also take up another matter connected with Turkish membership .
I believe that my fellow Member from Denmark has already touched upon this .
Last week , Radio Sweden reported on an audit that had revealed major shortcomings in how EU funds are used in Turkey .
The money is not getting to those who need it most .
There has also been criticism of poor follow-up and the fact that the rural population - minorities such as Kurds and Assyrians - are not sharing in the EU 's aid .
Women have also been treated unfairly .
The rules for applying for project funding are complex and difficult to understand .
My fellow Member , Mr Färm , and I have asked Mr Rehn to get to the bottom of this during his final days as Commissioner for Enlargement .
We expect a rapid response .
Finally , I would like to thank Mr Rehn for his excellent work as Commissioner for Enlargement and wish him good luck in his new post .
( NL ) Madam President , the democratic opening announced by the Turkish Government has degenerated into a democratic negation .
The ban on the Democratic Society Party ( DTP ) has destroyed , and thus negated , the Kurdish people 's freedom of expression , of association and of political participation for the umpteenth time .
The lack of democracy , the prominent role of both army and police , the very high electoral threshold of 10 % , the failure to reform both the constitution and the law on political parties , the persecution and imprisonment of Kurdish politicians and militants ; all the signs are that Ankara is clearly unable to deal with minority rights in a mature way .
Every time Turkey opens a door to democratisation , it slams another door shut .
It makes me wonder whether this can still be called a democratic opening .
I should like the Commissioner to give his opinion on this , and to tell us whether he is prepared to work with the Turkish Government to draw up a specific timetable for carrying out a number of crucial reforms in accordance with European standards .

( EL ) Mr President , Mr López Garrido , Commissioner , your statements this evening have given me the impression that you are happy to gloss over the fact that the most recent decision by the Turkish Constitutional Court to put the pro-Kurdish party outside the law was taken a few hours before the decisions by the General Affairs Council and the decision by the summit , which essentially give the green light for Turkey to head straight for Europe , at a time when it is a country which violates human and democratic rights , fails to comply with international law and refuses to recognise the Republic of Cyprus .
Have you not come to the conclusion that , instead of bringing Turkey to its senses , this constant indulgence is making it bolder ?
It is a fact that the Turkish constitution creates political destabilisation , does not guarantee religious and political freedoms and provides an alibi for interventions by the state .
The question is : what measures will you take to protect the rights of Kurdish citizens ?
And , even more importantly : are we , at long last , going to demand fundamental constitutional reform to provide an institutional framework which will guarantee these freedoms and make the Turkish State respect all rights which are the criteria for a country to proceed along the road towards accession ?
( PL ) Madam President , the promise of membership in the European Union was , for a long time , a driving force for democratic change in Turkey .
However , after 2005 , Turkish support for accession to the Union fell from 70 % to barely 42 % .
In this situation , therefore , the further democratisation of Turkey does , indeed , require better cooperation with the European Union .
Much has been achieved in Turkey - my fellow Members have spoken about this here - and that deserves our recognition , but there are still areas which we should examine with particular care .
There is the question , which has already been mentioned , of freedom of the press and the question of the freedom of electronic media .
The OSCE reports , for example , that Turkey is blocking 3 700 Internet sites .
Another important matter is the ability of women to participate in public life .
The Turkish constitution bans women in traditional headscarves from entering university , while such scarves are worn by as many as 70 % of women .
This battle between secularism and democracy is a real challenge in Turkey .
I would also like to mention the Kurds , and namely to recognise them as a national minority .
The solutions proposed by the Turkish Government are not satisfactory .
It is true they have started to recognise the Kurds ' language , but the Turkish constitution still contains Article 42 , which bans the teaching of Kurdish as a mother tongue in educational establishments .
It is important to develop cooperation continuously , both with the parliament and the government , but also to support non-governmental organisations , social initiatives and local government partnerships in Turkey .
We must increase cooperation between institutions , but we should remember that , especially when we speak about the development of democracy , it is actually relations between ordinary citizens which change the world .
Madam President , regrettably I share the views of others that the action by the Constitutional Court to ban the DTP can only be viewed as a regressive step in Turkey 's democratisation efforts , despite the very strong progress that is being made with recent democratic initiatives .
The law banning the DTP has been used - as has been said - since 1982 to ban some 27 parties but , of course , political parties are an expression of the will of the people .
They are the lifeblood of any democracy , and it is time that legal reforms were introduced to end the banning of political parties .
On the other hand , all political parties and candidates seeking elected office in democracies must respect the basic principles of democracy and the rule of law , and must commit to pursuing political objectives through exclusively peaceful means .
Growing up in Northern Ireland , I saw too many people maimed and murdered in the pursuit of political goals .
In a democracy , politics must be conducted through the ballot box , not with bullets and bombs .
So , like others , I appeal to the Turkish Prime Minister and government to ensure the rule of democracy is established , to reform the constitution , and to ensure that this action does not derail Turkey 's progress towards EU membership , which I , and my political party and government , are proud to support .
( EL ) Mr President , the conflict between supporters of the integration of Turkey and those favouring a special relationship between Turkey and the European Union illustrates the imperialist infighting within the European Union and the competition with the USA and other major powers .
The progress reports on Turkey presented to the European Parliament are the result of the balances between these forces .
They have nothing to do with the savage exploitation , repression and persecution suffered by workers in Turkey .
Trade unionists are prosecuted and sentenced in sham trials .
Political assassinations and violence by the prosecuting authorities continue .
Political parties are being abolished purely and simply because they express the wishes of the Kurdish population .
Elected representatives are being persecuted and jailed en masse .
Turkey continues to deny fundamental rights to Kurds and other minorities .
It is illegally occupying 40 % of the Republic of Cyprus and scuppering every solution to the problem .
It is threatening Greece with casus belli and putting forward territorial claims .
Despite all this , the European Union congratulates Turkey because that is what is required by NATO and the European multinationals investing in the Nabucco pipeline and their economic and geostrategic ambitions for this country and the Middle East in general .
( PL ) Madam President , I support membership of the European Union for Turkey , but would like to condemn the decision made in December by the Turkish Constitutional Court to ban the DTP .
The decision was justified by the party 's alleged links with the terrorist PKK organisation .
I know we are living in days when security is paramount ; however , citizens ' freedoms should not suffer because of this .
As we know , the party has been representing Kurdish interests in the Turkish Parliament since 2007 .
Although it did this in a symbolic way with 20 members , it has , in recent years , been an important testimony to the process of regulating the Kurdish question which has begun in Turkey .
The presence of the DTP in parliament did not constitute a danger in any way , but it was one of the conditions necessary for political stability .
However , I do not think we should talk about destabilisation , because the conflict with the Kurds is an old one , and at no stage has it really ever shaken Turkey .
I did not think this would happen now , and do not suppose it will happen .
The government has made many good gestures in the past , and it is hard to speak of an anti-Kurdish campaign .
Nevertheless , the Turko-Kurdish peace process has suffered a severe set back .
The ban on the activities of the party is a typical political ploy .
The judgment not only sets back Turko-Kurdish relations by many years , but is also a step backwards for the entire process of democratisation .
( ES ) I would also like to elaborate on the contradictory situation in which we find ourselves today , continually supporting the process of Turkey 's membership , because we need Turkey in the European Union for many reasons .
Today we find ourselves in a contradictory situation , since , only a few weeks ago , the European Parliament was showing support for and satisfaction at the steps achieved with regard to the relationship between Turkey and the Kurdish community and now we find that we are surprised at the ban on the main Kurdish party in Turkey , which , of course , raises serious questions once more .
In that sense , I would , of course , urge this Parliament and the European Union , and I would ask the Commission , to resume or revive still further their efforts to revisit the areas required for membership where we have seen steps forward , in aspects relative , for example , to the need for consensus between political parties and that , of course , this should lead to a call to the Turkish Government to satisfactorily resolve the situation that the Kurdish political party , the DTP , finds itself in .
( RO ) I am a firm advocate of Turkey 's accession to the European Union .
I agree with the strong views expressed in this House regarding the need for Turkey to respect human rights .
However , I would express the hope that the same firm stance will also be used to support the efforts which Turkey is making to join the European Union .
I welcome the Spanish Presidency 's position regarding the desire to continue opening negotiating chapters with Turkey .
I would like to tell you that I visited Turkey last year as a member of the Delegation to the EU-Turkey Joint Parliamentary Committee , which came 20 years after my previous visit there , and the progress that has been made by Turkish society is impressive .
( EL ) Madam President , the years of violence and terrorism in Turkey do not appear to have come to an end .
Kurds , Alevi , non-Muslim minorities , trade unionists , the Ecumenical Patriarchate , Armenians , Cypriots , prisoners , local authorities , homosexuals , women , Kurdish political parties and the mass media have a great deal to say when they dare to break their silence .
Despite the reforms and the progress made in Turkey , numerous laws are not applied .
The dark side and violations of human rights are very real when it comes to freedom of the press , sexual equality , freedom of expression and minority rights It is for precisely this reason that the European Court of Human Rights has condemned Turkey following complaints by Turkish citizens and minorities for violation of the right to life , inhumane and degrading treatment and a whole series of other violations .
I believe that the European Union can play a catalytic role in the democratisation of Turkey by demanding full application of the European acquis without derogations , without self-seeking calculations and without applying a policy of double standards .
By buttering Turkey up and opening chapters , Mr Rehn , you are not contributing to the democratisation of Turkey ; you are contributing towards its continuing unaccountability and political amorality .
( PL ) Madam President , despite the progress made by Turkey on the road to accession , much is still to be desired as far as the process of democratisation of that country is concerned .
In a resolution adopted by the European Parliament last year , concern was expressed over the situation prevailing in Turkey concerning freedom of speech , as well as regret caused by limited progress in the area of freedom of religion .
Parliament insisted then , and still insists , that the Turkish Government establish legal frameworks , in accordance with the European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights , which will allow non-Muslim religious groups and Alevis to function without unnecessary restrictions .
Straight after the adoption in December 2009 of the resolution I mentioned , the anxiety of the Union was aroused by a decision made by the Turkish Constitutional Court to ban the DTP or Democratic Society Party , which had 21 Members in the Turkish Parliament .
The pretext for banning the party was links it is alleged to have with the Kurdish PKK .
( DE ) Madam President , the ruling by the Turkish Constitutional Court that prohibits the pro-Kurdish party for being in violation of the constitution is a clear sign that Turkish domestic policy does not approximate to democracy as we Europeans understand it .
It also clearly gives the lie to the very heavily sugar-coated status report of the Ahtisaari Commission .
Although Istanbul traditionally has an enlightened , Europe-orientated , educated population , this fact and the doubtless excellent events associated with Istanbul as the Capital of Culture in 2010 , are not , unfortunately , representative of the country as a whole .
We therefore need to face up to reality .
Anyone who prohibits the political parties of minorities for being in violation of the constitution is not in tune with European values .
This constant chopping and changing is also incomprehensible , as this will surely not gain us a good reputation or make a good impression on our Turkish partners in dialogue .
Therefore , stop the negotiations !
Please also stop these pre-accession payments , because anyone who wants moral values to be paid for will surely not allow themselves to be persuaded by such payments .
( SK ) Democracy is dependent on conditions that it cannot create on its own .
This applies equally to our Member States and the democracy in Turkey .
Although there are several problematic issues , I will only mention one of them .
While freedom of cult is respected in the Republic of Turkey , there has not been much progress in religious freedom in recent years .
The freedom of worship is formally recognised , but in reality , it is restricted , for instance , with respect to the choice of place of worship .
I regret that the EU fails to approach this issue thoroughly .
In the most recent progress report , extending to one hundred and eighty pages , this problem is mentioned only on two of them .
There is no mention there of the strong restrictions on the autonomous administration of religious communities , not only at the administrative and economic level , but also at the pastoral and clerical level .
Since the Council of European Bishops ' conferences has been saying for quite some time that religious freedom is continuously being breached in Turkey , the European Union should consistently insist on respect for human rights in the context of religious freedom .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , Turkey is , of course , an emotional topic , that is quite clear .
There is one thing that we should , of course , always take into account in this context , and this has been mentioned several times today , namely that , although the prohibition of the party is totally unacceptable , it was not pronounced by the government , but by the judicial system .
We need to draw a distinction here in order to be fair and honest .
However , that was not what I wanted to say .
As Europeans , we must ask ourselves where we actually want to go .
If , as a global player , we want to pass on not only economic - and as a Social Democrat I would like to emphasise this - but also political values , not only in Europe but also beyond European borders out into the world , then for this , ultimately , we need Turkey .
It will also give us the opportunity to be firm and clear in our dealings with Turkey , which is exactly what is required .
Only then will we succeed in setting a democratisation process in motion in order to succeed in our overall purpose .
The Council will act in relation to the issue which we will call the European Union / Turkey relationship , with a view to the accession process , in the following way :
In the first place , we believe that we need to maintain the European perspective for Turkey .
We understand that , if one day Turkey enters the European Union , it will make the Union stronger , not weaker .
Therefore , that process will be of benefit to both interests .
Secondly , negotiation .
As Mr Obiols pointed out , negotiation is an unquestionable weapon for moving forward in that process and for advancing internal reforms in Turkey .
That has been irrefutably demonstrated .
Negotiation is a strategic element and should be upheld as outlined by Commissioner Olli Rehn in his speech .
Thirdly , a very clear message to Turkey .
We must be very clear with Turkey .
This has been advocated , not just by Mrs Oomen-Ruijten , the author of this motion for a resolution , which seems to me a very broad , very thorough , detailed proposal , an excellent basis to work on , I think , but by many of the participants here this evening : Mrs Corazza , Mrs Ludford , Mrs Keller , Mr Zahradil , many others have advocated sending a clear message to Turkey .
Turkey is a country which , if it meets the Copenhagen criteria , will be able to enter the Union and must enter the European Union .
However , at the moment , Turkey is not meeting them and , in that regard , there are two essential factors , democracy and human rights , which are central to the analysis of Turkey 's possible future membership of the European Union .
With regard to human rights , some of them , specific dimensions of them , are fundamental to the definition of a democracy which meets the requirements , called the Copenhagen criteria .
In matters of justice , in matters of equality between men and women , the matter of torture and mistreatment , freedom of expression , respect for minorities and pluralism , all these are elements to be borne in mind .
In all of those , it has been shown here that we can see undoubted advances and in all of them , we also see inadequacies or even backward steps .
That outlines the situation .
It depends on how you see it .
The glass can be half full or half empty .
I think , therefore , that those are the fundamental elements to focus on in the relationship between the European Union and Turkey .
I think that the process of moving towards the rapprochement of Turkey and the European Union is possible ; it is a feasible process .
For this reason , that process is open and Turkey has the status of a candidate country .
It is a necessary process which must , naturally , progress as fast as possible .
The role of the European Parliament in that process is absolutely vital .
It must play an essential role in the development , analysis , evaluation and consolidation of that process which we all want to see move as quickly as possible .
Member of the Commission . - Madam President , I am glad to say my last word on Turkey .
I want to thank you for a very substantive and responsible debate this evening .
Actually , I said my farewell concerning Turkey to you already in December or November . I will not repeat it now .
I hope that I do not have to say any further farewells as regards Turkey in this Chamber and that we can move on and start tackling the major economic and other challenges of the European Union .
I also want to use this opportunity to thank the Spanish Presidency and Spanish Prime Minister Zapatero for launching the Alliance of Civilisations , which is a very important initiative , and I can say that I am a volunteer to join that alliance .
It is very important also for EU-Turkey relations .
Today 's debate has focused largely on the party closure and rightly so .
It is very important that Turkey reform its legislation and the whole constitutional legal framework of political parties in line with the recommendations of the Venice Commission .
Mr van Baalen and Mr Schmidt raised the issue of the Court of Auditors ' recent report on Turkey .
I can say that our conclusion in the Commission , in DG Enlargement , concurs with the report and its conclusions concerning how to make our financial assistance more strategic , multiannual and more clearly linked to the needs stemming from the political reform agenda in our countries , in this case , in Turkey .
Work is now under way to this end , including a completely new orientation for preparing our planning documents on a multiannual basis and moving from project- to sector-based programming .
This new approach also comprises a stronger emphasis on sectoral strategies being developed by the beneficiary countries themselves , which ultimately should ease joint identification of policy priorities between the Commission and the Turkish authorities .
I will be glad to provide you with a longer and deeper written response on this matter if you send me a letter shortly so that I can still do it during the term of the present Commission .
I think it is important , apart from party closures , to discuss the democratic transformation more broadly .
That is what you have done this evening and I just want to make three points briefly , which , in my view , are the most important next steps .
We have seen tremendous democratic transformation in Turkey in the past five years .
It is a very different country today compared to what it was , say , five years ago .
But , of course , the glass is not yet full , and there are many important reforms that still need to be implemented in Turkey .
The first and foremost of them concerns citizens ' rights and fundamental freedoms .
Turkey 's record on freedom of expression is not in line with EU standards .
Many authors and journalists are still facing prosecution and conviction for their work .
It is now high time for Turkey to adopt the necessary legal reforms so that this problem will belong to Turkey 's past and not to its future .
That is fundamental for any open and democratic society and it is fundamental also to further discuss such sensitive issues as the Armenian issue , the Kurdish question or the Cyprus problem .
Secondly , the past year has seen important developments concerning civil / military relations .
The ongoing Ergenekon investigation is crucial to the democratisation efforts in Turkey , and indeed , Turkish citizens deserve to see this investigation pursued to the end , and they rightfully expect all necessary precautions to be taken to ensure a fair trial for all defendants .
Thirdly , last but not least , genuine democracy cannot be achieved if half of the population - women - are grossly underrepresented in national and local politics .
Turkish women 's NGOs are relentless in their efforts to promote this agenda , as they should be , and we are their allies .
The establishment of a specific Commission on Gender Equality is an important step which I hope will help greatly to enhance political representation of women at all levels in Turkish society .
To sum up , Turkey 's EU accession process can be a long and sometimes winding road , but it is essential not to lose sight of the basic goal of the democratic transformation of the country .
That is in the fundamental interests not only of Turkey but also of the European Union , and that is best achieved by being both fair and firm with Turkey at the same time , which maintains our credibility and the power of conditionality in driving reforms for fundamental freedoms in Turkey .
In this major effort , I continue to count on your strong support .
That is essential for this project to succeed in the end .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Madam President , the development report on Turkey drafted by the European Commission in 2009 identifies the implementation of constitutional reform as an important challenge in continuing the democratisation process .
The report notes that , in spite of the people 's clear support for the government and the large parliamentary majority , the advances made up to this point in implementing political and constitutional reform have not been sufficient , because the parties have not been able to find a common language .
As in any other democratic country , the positions taken by the Turkish parties reflect the wishes of the electorate .
It must not be forgotten that in a democratic society , the parties are , above all , accountable to their electorate , and in Turkey , the European Union must turn its attention to developments at grassroot level .
We must be very cautious in merely taking a didactic approach in guiding Turkey 's democratisation process .
The successful implementation of the desired reforms requires the support of the public , for which a greater universal level of awareness is necessary , as well as a conception of the importance of and the reasons for the reforms .
The top-down reforms that have been implemented will not lead to the desired result as long as there exists a feeling that they present a danger to Turkey 's internal stability .
The pressure on Turkey 's government to accelerate reforms for which there is a lack of public support could , though unintentionally , lead to the flourishing of separatism or religious hostility .
I hope that the Council and the Commission , together with the Turkish Government , make efforts towards implementing measures which allow the population of Turkey to be involved in the democratisation process considerably more than has been the case so far , in order to ensure that there is fertile ground for implementing the reforms necessary for accession on the basis of the Copenhagen criteria .
Pre-accession negotiations with a candidate country should be aimed at the given country 's accession to the European Union . But in the case of Turkey the situation is much more complex .
Pre-accession talks have been open since 3 October 2005 .
In addition to the country 's accession itself , the talks should contribute to the promotion of democracy and freedom , and the preservation of civic and human rights in Turkey .
Instead of issuing political declarations , this particular goal should be achieved through legislative changes as part of harmonisation with the legal system of the European Union but , first and foremost , through political and social practice stemming from the example set by the Member States .
Arguments against accession based on the pattern ' European countries ' versus ' Islamic countries ' are incorrect and wrong .
Turkey 's historic affiliation with Europe is undeniable .
As a matter of fact , Turkey is today a member of the Council of Europe and the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe .
There is no religious yardstick to evaluate a candidate country ; on the contrary , freedom of confession is one of Europe 's principal values .
That is why the sole and decisive criteria for Turkey 's accession to the European Union must be its compliance with the principles of the rule of law , legislative confirmation of civil and minority rights , and respect for all the Member States of the European Union .
It is good that the European Parliament is at least addressing the issue of the democratisation of Turkey .
The Commission and the Council tend , in principle , to talk up the situation - as dramatic as it might be .
They call it ' soft power ' .
However , where has this ' soft power ' got us ?
It is quite clear that , since opening the accession negotiations , there have been considerably more backward steps than steps in the right direction in Turkey .
Now there is yet another party ban .
However , there is also the continuing massive restriction of civil freedoms , the oppression of religious minorities to the extent of attempting to expel or destroy them through bloodshed , curtailing their freedom of information and freedom of the press , attempting to annihilate the opposition press and the free trade unions , and the list goes on .
' Pacta sunt servanda ' - that is always emphasised in connection with Turkey , and rightly so .
However , this applies to Turkey , too !
With its entry into the accession negotiations , Turkey entered into an agreement with the EU to comply with the Copenhagen criteria .
If it continues to refuse to do so , it will have to ask itself whether it really wants to become part of Europe .
The ' softies ' in the Commission , the Council Presidency and the Council ought finally to act in a consistent manner instead of continually opening new negotiation chapters .
Agenda of the next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of the sitting
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 10.00 )
EU-Tunisia relations ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on EU-Tunisia relations .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I would like to thank Parliament for inviting me to take part in the discussion on Tunisia .
EU-Tunisia relations are governed by an association agreement signed in 1995 .
By the way , Tunisia was the first Mediterranean county to sign such an agreement and it has since then made significant advances .
In international relations , Tunisia is close and a reliable partner for the EU .
The views it expresses and the positions it takes within international organisations and in other fora are moderate and balanced .
It is cooperative on issues such as security and migration and has good relations with its neighbours in the southern Mediterranean region .
Furthermore , it has always played a constructive role towards regional integration in the Maghreb .
Tunisia takes an active part in the European Neighbourhood Policy and the Commission 's periodic reports on implementation by Tunisia of the European Neighbourhood Policy Action Plan are clear in their assessment : Tunisia has achieved progress in a number of cooperation areas , including the action plan .
Economic reforms have progressed , allowing for a steady growth of the Tunisian economy as well as of trade volume with the EU .
Important results have been achieved in the social field , in areas such as health care , education , the fight against poverty and the protection of women 's rights .
On the other side , the reports also highlight shortcomings , in particular , in the areas of justice , freedom of expression and association .
Political dialogue with Tunisia has been continuous on all the subjects covered by the action plan , which are addressed in 10 subcommittees and in working groups .
The EU-Tunisia Association Council has already met several times and the next meeting is scheduled in the next few months .
On 1 January 2008 , Tunisia became the first southern Mediterranean country to have a free trade area with the EU for industrial products , two years in advance of the date foreseen .
The EU is Tunisia 's first trading partner : 72.5 % of its imports come from the EU and the EU is the destination for 75 % of its exports .
EU financial cooperation amounts to some EUR 75 million to EUR 80 million per year , for which Tunisia has proved to have a good absorption capacity .
Negotiations have also been launched on the gradual liberalisation of trade in services and the right of establishment , as well as on agriculture and fishery products .
The conclusion of these negotiations , together with approximation of the relevant legislation , will mark a new stage in relations between the EU and Tunisia and progress towards the integration of the Tunisian economy in the EU single market .
Tunisia has requested that its relations with the EU be given a new impetus through an advanced status .
We believe that such an endeavour is in the interests of the EU .
We also expect that Tunisia will show a real drive towards more democratic reforms and freedom of expression .
Without progress in the important area of human rights , the country 's important achievements that I have mentioned would anyhow be perceived , despite their significance , especially by regional standards , as incomplete .
In conclusion , I would like to say that we judge relations between the EU and Tunisia as solid and friendly and that we believe that there is indeed a potential for further strengthening of those relations .
The next item is the speeches of the political groups .
Mr President , Tunisia contributes towards the stability of this region in its role as a partner in the Union for the Mediterranean , as the first country to sign the association agreement , and as the first country equipped with an action plan for the implementation of the Neighbourhood Policy .
Tunisia is comparatively ahead in terms of gender equality and the protection of children and the family , and is now awaiting negotiations on the granting of an advanced partnership status .
In the aforementioned agreements , there are clauses on democracy , the rule of law and human rights .
Plans are afoot for talks , to help us to achieve progress in what are very sensitive and important issues for us in the European Parliament .
If we want tangible results , and if we are not necessarily to achieve them via controversy and criticism , we must be careful to avoid any condescension , to prove that we are talking as equals , not as superiors or inspectors , and to show that we are also prepared to take an interest in the concerns and sensitivities of our partners .
In a context such as this , I am certain that the Tunisian Government will respond with concrete steps forward in the areas under debate .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if we had to give an opinion on the existing relations between the European Union and Tunisia , it could only be a positive one , including as regards the stabilisation of the region .
It is true that important progress has been made in economic terms , and there are also encouraging signs from a social point of view .
However , in political terms , following the presidential elections on 25 October , we are faced with the problem of supporting the journey towards democratic reforms with greater concrete action .
As we know , the European Union 's objective , in pursuing its foreign policy , is to develop and consolidate democracy , the rule of law , and respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
Tunisia has made some important commitments in the context of the Neighbourhood Policy Action Plan on democracy , governance and human rights .
The action plan lays down a series of priorities and , amongst these , particular attention must be paid to implementing and consolidating reforms , and to strengthening political dialogue and cooperation , particularly in relation to democracy and human rights , foreign policy and security .
It is within this framework that the institutions must be strengthened .
The latter allow the increased participation in political life of the various members of Tunisian society , greater development of the role of civil society , continued support for political parties to broaden their participation in the democratic process , and greater respect for freedom of association , freedom of expression and media pluralism .
We are convinced that these objectives can be achieved , and it is reasonable to expect tangible progress to be made .
Our commitment is to safeguard the friendship which binds the European Union and Tunisia while consolidating the existing relationship , including in view of the conflict which could arise concerning the idea of an advanced status for that country .
However , concrete steps really must be taken by Tunisia itself .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to begin by both thanking and congratulating the Commissioner for the position taken by the Commission on this matter .
I am in complete agreement with this position , since it seems far more reasonable than the stance taken by those who called for today 's debate , and I am unsure exactly whose suggestion it was .
As has been said , Tunisia was the first Euro-Mediterranean country to sign an association agreement , and is an active partner in the European Neighbourhood Policy .
It is worth pointing out , as Mr Kasoulides has done , that , on 1 January 2008 , Tunisia became the only Mediterranean country to have a free trade relationship with the European Union .
This cooperation is working very well , and Tunisia is proving to have an excellent absorption capacity .
Tunisia has achieved substantial progress , which has resulted in a very high standard of development with socio-economic results acknowledged by international institutions .
In economic terms , Tunisia achieved an average growth rate of 4.6 % between the years 2002 and 2008 .
Moreover , it has succeeded in reducing its debt burden .
In social terms , it would be unfair to ignore the progress made , particularly on behalf of women .
The indicators speak for themselves : 59 % of students in higher education are female .
Education is compulsory across the board for females aged from 6 to 16 , and women account for almost a quarter of the working population in Tunisia .
I admit that these results obviously cannot obscure the urgent need to encourage the Tunisian authorities to make further advances in human rights and governance ; we are well aware that there is still work to be done .
Like other speakers , I am concerned about this issue , for the sake of the democratic values that we uphold .
However , it is also important to remember that we are not the only ones to uphold these values .
They are also at the heart of Tunisian society , which is a dynamic and pro-European society .
For these reasons , we must support Tunisia 's request to be granted an advanced status in this partnership with the European Union .
I also believe that it is through this dialogue that we will find the appropriate framework for encouraging our partners to make further progress in the field of governance .
We must conduct the dialogue with our partners without complacency , obviously , but also without resorting to the kind of sanctimonious dogmatism in which Europe all too often specialises and which is , moreover , often counterproductive .
Obviously , I am not insensitive to specific cases that some people have raised .
We clearly have the right to question our partners about circumstances that we believe to be unacceptable , but I would like to finish by highlighting Tunisia 's success in establishing a political system based on the principle of separation between church and state .
The public authorities in Tunisia have the capacity to provide the people with a package of basic services , services that other countries in the region have not yet been able to implement , and I believe that it is important to point this out , too .
I am therefore extremely optimistic about the future of relations between Tunisia and the EU , since they are being forged against a backdrop of mutual respect between partners who respect one another and have an understanding on the fundamental issues .
Mr President , I am disturbed by the speeches that I have just heard , from the Commissioner right through to my fellow Members .
I feel that we really have our work cut out to gain an accurate and objective understanding of the present situation in Tunisia .
Frankly , when I listen to you , I feel as though I am listening to western intellectuals talking cheerfully , many decades ago , about the economic and social success in the countries of the USSR , with a complete inability to go and see what our shared values stand for in practice in those countries .
What are our shared values , Mr Michel ?
They are human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
You have all rightly pointed out that Tunisia was our first partner to sign an association agreement .
This is true , and that is why all this is very worrying , because we are not talking here about gaps , Commissioner , or about small steps .
No . There is a huge , ongoing decline in human rights and democracy in Tunisia .
Can you name one single newspaper , party or union that has been authorised in the last 20 years ?
No .
The truth is that fundamental freedoms are being systematically and utterly disregarded , and , with them , our own commitments .
This is not about moralising ; this is about respecting the values of the European Union , and respecting the commitments that we made by signing this association agreement .
Therefore , I demand that there be at least a shared analysis of this matter .
I believe that we have worked hard to have this debate , but it would certainly be time better spent if we were to organise an actual delegation , one that really goes and meets this civil society in Tunisia and the various members of that society , in order to make an assessment of the continued harassment experienced by human rights defenders , students , trade unionists , workers and lawyers .
There have been putsches in almost all of the associations that showed a certain degree of autonomy with regard to the authorities .
I therefore believe that you are completely deluded on this matter .
Having listened to your speeches , I well understand why you do not want to see the real picture in Tunisia .
You do not want to see it because you believe that there are economic interests at stake , and because you believe that there are interests at stake relating to the fight against terrorism and illegal immigration .
You have expressed all this in the clearest of terms , and you go on about advances relating to equality between men and women and to the family , advances that date back to Bourguiba 's time .
I repeat , these date back to Bourguiba .
There has been no further progress since that time .
I therefore believe that , if we have any respect for ourselves , for the agreements we sign , for the Neighbourhood Policy or for EU values , we certainly cannot propose an advanced status for Tunisia .
Therefore , I tell you straight : if you propose that and renounce all requirements and all commitments in relation to human rights and democracy with all the countries of the Mediterranean , that will be the guaranteed outcome .
on behalf of the ECR Group . - Mr President , Tunisia is a friend and ally of the European Union , a prosperous , progressive , modern and meritocratic secular society unique in the Arab world .
Tunisia also rightly takes an uncompromising approach to Islamist jihadi extremism .
A multiparty political system is fast taking shape in Tunisia and it is a country where women are fully equal members of their society .
Why then do we seek to alienate Tunisia and its 10 million people ?
Perhaps because of jealousy at its success , perhaps because it is small and possesses no oil , so , no , there is no economic leverage on the EU , unlike Libya or Saudi Arabia .
In my view , those who have engineered this debate are making a deliberate effort to sabotage much of the progress in EU-Tunisia relations in recent years .
It is especially galling that this debate is occurring at the same time as a visit of Tunisian parliamentarians to Strasbourg who are , I think , sitting up there watching this debate .
Tunisia needs our support , encouragement and dialogue , not a constant stream of senseless invective .
It is bitterly ironic that the Left , who claim to be so much in favour of women 's rights , attack Tunisia despite the fact that this country offers women opportunities and freedoms unprecedented anywhere else in the Arab world .
The fact that the Tunisian authorities prohibit the wearing of the hijab in public places indicates their determination to protect Tunisia 's values of secularism , tolerance and liberty .
We should respect Tunisia as our Euro-Mediterranean advanced partner .
Although I was not told that a Tunisian delegation is present , they waved when you mentioned it . I would like to welcome you to the gallery .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I personally am very pleased that we are having this debate on the human rights situation in Tunisia .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left - Nordic Green Left was instrumental in the organisation of the debate .
All along , I have defended human rights , but human rights are the same all over the world .
I regret that this debate should not have been accompanied by a vote on a resolution .
Words come and go ; only the written word remains .
As the EU 's oldest partner , Tunisia receives the highest amount of per capita aid of all the countries of the South , and is an enthusiastic participant in the setting up of the free trade area around the Mediterranean rim .
So enthusiastic , in fact , that its leaders are beginning to claim their dividends and to demand the benefits of an advanced status .
I fully support the remarks made by Mrs Flautre , and share her alarm at some of the comments made .
The EU partnership agreements henceforth include clauses on democracy and human rights .
These clauses must be examined just as closely as economic ones .
The fact is , Commissioner , the Commission 's report on the implementation of the Neighbourhood Policy is unsatisfactory in this regard ; it is a clear case of double standards .
On 25 October , Mr Ben Ali was re-elected for a fifth term , gaining more than 89 % of the vote .
This figure alone reveals the state of democracy within that country .
It is a locked democracy , where human rights defenders , magistrates , lawyers , journalists - in short , anyone who dares to challenge the regime - are harassed , imprisoned and , in some cases , even tortured .
Since last September , there has been a real drift towards an authoritarian police state , as the case of Taoufik Ben Brik , who will be tried next Saturday , shows .
However , we could also mention Zouhair Makhlouf and Fahem Boukadous , one of whom was convicted for talking about the environmental conditions in his country , and the other for taking part in workers ' demonstrations in his country .
Yes , this is the social situation in Tunisia .
Human rights defenders such as Kamel Jendoubi , Sihem Bensedrine , Sana Ben Achour , and Kemais Chamari are victims of a disgraceful press campaign .
Sadok Chourou has been rotting in jail for the last 16 years , and Radhia Nasraoui , who acts as his lawyer , has been dragged through the mud , her career permanently damaged .
Students are being arrested and arbitrarily convicted , as are others .
Their passports are held , or not renewed , and some human rights activists are being prevented from leaving the territory to act as witnesses .
Meetings of associations independent from the ruling power are forbidden , their visitors are followed , and I do not have enough time to provide a true picture of the reality of Tunisia 's social policy .
Why is the Tunisian Government taking so long to respond to the UN report ?
Why did it refuse to host EU observers if the elections are as democratic as it says they are ?
The facts are there ; they are being revealed more and more in our countries ' newspapers .
The Commission and the Council must take this into account .
Tunisia must honour its commitments in relation to democracy and human rights .
It is unacceptable , in fact , to go ahead with advanced status .
Yes , I am in favour of equal partnerships !
Yes , all the countries in the world must be treated in the same way , but on condition that they honour their commitments . I will end there , Mr President .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - Mr President , Tunisia 's situation is overall a positive one it seems .
They have the most stable society in North Africa .
They have what is technically a democracy , though possibly only a semi-democracy by Western standards , but we should not criticise them for that , since they have made much progress .
There is an official policy of working towards full democracy , and Tunisia is a stable society with a high level of personal security .
This has been achieved by the suppression of their Islamist extremists and Communists , which is a price well worth paying .
Its official policy is the pursuit of cultural unity - the creation of one nation .
This is a lesson that many European countries - including mine , the United Kingdom - could well learn .
Economically , they are progressing .
Only 7 % of the population lives below the poverty line .
It has one of the best health standards among countries in North Africa , with a relatively high life expectancy .
Politically , their Constitution limits the number of seats a party can hold in the Chamber of Deputies , with 20 % of seats being reserved for minority parties .
This looks positively enlightened when compared to the ' first past the post ' electoral system used in the United Kingdom which , in my opinion , is a conspiracy against the voter to keep the Conservative and Labour parties in and everybody else out .
So maybe we should learn something from the Tunisians .
Speaking of the UK , my party , the UK Independence Party , came in for some criticism from some Islamic extremist and supposedly liberal quarters last week when we proposed a plan that people 's faces should be uncovered in public buildings , and in private buildings if those concerned wish to impose such a condition .
But look at what Tunisia did .
Law No 108 bans the hijab , which goes much further than anybody else has proposed .
The Religious Affairs Minister , Boubaker El Akhzouri , has slammed the hijab as running counter to the country 's ' cultural legacy ' , regarding Islamic dress as ' a foreign phenomenon ' in society .
Well , that is very interesting , coming out of an Islamic country .
The more I find out about Tunisia , the more positive an impression it makes .
But I have seen some figures which indicate that EUR 70 million is to be spent on key projects in the EU neighbourhood scheme .
My constituents , who are some of the poorest in London , cannot afford that kind of expenditure .
We want trade , friendship and cooperation with Tunisia but not at the price of robbing the taxpayer in the UK .
Let us help them increase their democracy and develop prosperity and , if they would like to take some free advice , let them keep well away from the European Union and preserve their freedom and independence .
( DE ) Mr President , trade relations between the EU and Tunisia are close and multifaceted .
Tunisia , which receives EUR 80 million per year in financial aid , is a shining example of successful development policy .
As an emerging economy , the country has assumed a leading position in the Maghreb , it was the first Mediterranean country to create a free trade area with the EU and it is reaping the benefits of this with sound economic growth .
The Tunisian Republic is consequently expected to play a constructive part in the deliberations with regard to the EuroMed Roadmap for trade beyond 2010 and the cooperation with the Maghreb countries .
Now we could be forgiven for thinking that it was sunshine all the way were it not for the presence of that paragraph linking European aid in connection with the partnership agreement to respect for human rights .
This is precisely where we have a contradiction - the money that is to be used to stimulate the Tunisian economy is also used to finance and support a dictatorial , anti-democratic apparatus .
That is a common problem in connection with our development and association aid .
We need to do something about this , because the EU cannot promote human rights violations , even indirectly , in Tunisia , the Congo or , of course , Turkey , which is a candidate country .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Tunisia , like the entire Maghreb region , is an important strategic area .
It has an enormous growth potential and is an attractive area with powerful interests , not only economic but , above all , European .
Programmes with the European Union which promote cross-border cooperation have also recently been initiated .
It is therefore time to revive , if we are ever going to do so , the relations established by the European Union with the African countries at our borders , starting with Tunisia , by fully enhancing the potential of this area and maintaining its associated social and economic development , but within a framework of freedom and security .
The relationship between the countries of the Mediterranean is the key factor which gives cohesion and strength to an ambitious economic and social development programme .
In political terms , it could be said that Tunisia is a country in which democracy is still relatively young ; however , the action plan set out appears to be in line with the European Union 's expectations .
The emergence of new parties and a reasonable female presence in parliament following the elections at the end of October 2009 confirm that significant progress has been made in terms of democratic participation .
In any case , freedom of the press must be advanced and protected , as must equal opportunities for men and women and , more generally , fundamental human rights .
It is in this framework that we can help Tunisia to conclude the efforts it has undertaken by removing all potential barriers to the full development of human beings in that country , and all this within the context of a more advanced status .
Tunisia 's central role in the Mediterranean and the modernisation process under way in that country require a serious and balanced approach which results in the unconditional affirmation of the values upheld by the European Union .
Now more than ever , the European Parliament cannot allow any mistakes to be made on the road to democracy .
Constructive dialogue and careful diplomacy can instead further consolidate a relationship destined to be strengthened in a country which , in some sectors - such as justice and freedom of association - must be helped to grow , but a country which , I repeat , is absolutely central and pivotal to stability policy in the Mediterranean .
( ES ) Respecting Tunisia means also respecting its democratic opposition , which is seeking to organise itself but is being repressed , and respecting its civil society , which is also the opposition of the future .
I therefore wish to greet the members of parliament that are here now attending this sitting , but I also wish to send my greetings to those who may become members of parliament in the future , but who are currently threatened and may be imprisoned .
We therefore think that it is very important for civil society to organise itself and for the democratic opposition to be respected , despite the fact that it is not currently organised .
In Spain - I can say this as a Spanish MEP - we experienced a society in which the democratic opposition was tortured and repressed during the dictatorship .
If the opposition is not terrorist , when it is democratic , it has values , which are the values of the future .
Therefore , we need to help this opposition , which is currently not organised , but is democratic , and which is fighting for the values of the Tunisian transition and for the consolidation of those values .
We also need to help it to organise itself .
We also need to help the opposition so that they can be the leaders and protagonists of the future , possibly in opposition , or in government , but rotation is essential in a democratic society .
Therefore , this escalation of violence that we are currently witnessing , which may intensify in the future , is not the best calling card for advanced status .
We know that Tunisia has been a member of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership , and has a Mediterranean inclination and a democratic inclination .
Therefore , during this period , we also want it to contribute to this democratic consolidation and to be able to organise itself so that it can really be a loyal member and a member that contributes to the Mediterranean being an emerging area with democratic values .
That is our desire for the future and that is what we want for Tunisia .
( PL ) Mr President , there is no doubt that Tunisia is a partner with which the European Union should maintain relations on behalf of the Mediterranean Sea Region and at bilateral level .
However , while remembering economic matters , we , as the European Union , should insist on transparency of democratic procedures and the rule of law in that country .
Despite the fact that Tunisia is a stable country , it is not , unfortunately , a country where all democratic standards are maintained .
International non-governmental organisations say that the security forces there torture prisoners and act with impunity , because they are protected by high-ranking officials .
Freedom of the press and freedom of speech are drastically restricted , and the situation of journalists is said to be one of the worst among all Arab countries .
Repression often has a religious background .
Persecution of the Christian minority is becoming increasingly disturbing .
The government in Tunisia does not tolerate expressions of protest or the existence of independent opposition .
Remembering that Tunisia was the first Mediterranean country to sign an association agreement with the European Union , we must resolutely insist on observance of the terms of the agreement .
Respect for human rights and democratic standards in Tunisia must be a condition for further cooperation with that country .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , to avoid any caricatures - we have heard one or two this morning - I would like to mention some objective facts regarding Tunisia , a partner country of the European Union .
The social situation has evolved very favourably , with a spectacular increase in the average per capita income , and now the vast majority of Tunisians meet the criteria defining membership of the middle class .
More than 90 % of Tunisians enjoy welfare cover , and more than a quarter of Tunisia 's budget is devoted to education , with the result that the country is one of the very first to have achieved the Millennium Development Goals in the area of primary education .
Finally , as Mr Michel highlighted a little while ago , women 's rights are both recognised and guaranteed .
At university level , female students outnumber male students , and 40 % of teachers are women .
A quarter of politicians , local officials and journalists are women .
Many countries would be envious of these statistics .
( FR ) Mr President , for my part , I would like to add my voice to those who have already spoken to denounce the particularly worrying situation in which the journalist and writer Taoufik Ben Brik finds himself in Tunisia .
In the wake of several arrests of journalists and trade unionists , who have suffered violence and mistreatment , and of the refusal to grant entry to foreign journalists during the presidential elections , the repression against political opponents and human rights activists continues .
After a botched trial , and his incarceration far from his family , which makes visits difficult , Taoufik Ben Brik has been left in a state of health that makes one fear for his life .
How can one fail to regard this situation as a fierce attack against someone who upsets the apple cart ?
For this reason , we must not simply use trade as an answer to everything .
On the contrary , I believe it is crucial for the EU to react quickly and firmly by demanding the release of Taoufik Ben Brik and other prisoners of conscience .
There has been an alarming decline in the human rights situation in Tunisia .
It is affecting Europe 's cooperation with the country , and a tangible improvement in this situation represents one of the conditions for the opening of negotiations on an advanced status for the EU-Tunisia partnership .
( DE ) Mr President , we have a good foundation for our cooperation with Tunisia .
The association agreement and the free trade agreement have been mentioned .
Mrs Kroes said that we are talking about integrating the Tunisian economy into the single market .
That is really as far as we can go with a country outside the EU , and therefore this forms a stable foundation .
Tunisia is a solid and friendly partner with the potential for further strengthening our relations , to quote Mrs Kroes once again .
Precisely because we have these close relations , we are also able to talk to our colleagues about all of the issues that may cause us some concern .
I , personally , am in talks with our colleagues , who are here in the gallery , and my feeling is that we should talk about everything .
However , in this connection , we should not throw the baby out with the bathwater .
In Tunisia , we also have a situation where the country , as an Arab country that wants to develop in a secular manner , is threatened by extremists .
I am sympathetic towards anyone who takes action against Islamic extremists .
However , as regards other matters , I think that we will make progress in the ongoing talks .
We can talk about anything with Tunisia because it is a reliable partner .
I therefore look forward to continuing our dialogue .

( FR ) Mr President , as has already been highlighted , Tunisia is an important partner of the EU ; mention was also made of the extremely important role played by the social field in Tunisia .
I would like to add to that some political aspects that are significant , because , as has already been said , Tunisia is a society that practises multiparty politics , albeit in a limited fashion , with a quota for the opposition , no doubt , but nevertheless multiparty politics .
The issue of gender equality has also been mentioned .
In all our countries , in the countries of Europe , all these political opinions coexist with freedom of the press , and this is what makes the difference , in fact , because , in Tunisia , such freedom exists , but it is limited , and there are in fact journalists who are in difficulty .
The following question then arises : could a rapprochement with the European Union increase this freedom or not ?
In my opinion , a rapprochement with the EU could help Tunisia to supplement the social progress made with some extremely important political advances .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , you have stated your hope that Tunisia will make progress in the areas of democratic reform and freedom of expression .
You are right to do so , since this is quite simply in line with the association agreement and with the commitments that Tunisia has made to the European Union .

That is why I am very surprised by the comments made by both Mr Baudis and Mr Michel , which seem to be encouraging you to ignore this aspect of our relationship and our cooperation with Tunisia , and to ultimately abandon Article 2 of the association agreement .
Moreover , there is a long way to go before these commitments are honoured , judging from the fate - as already mentioned by my colleague , Mrs Guillaume - of the independent journalist Taoufik Ben Brik , who has been in prison since last October , following a trial in which his lawyers and the procedure were in complete violation of the law .
In addition to the unacceptable denial of his freedom , his health is deteriorating and his visiting rights have been restricted .
I therefore ask you , Commissioner : does the Commission intend to intervene within the framework of the Association Council to demand Mr Ben Brik 's immediate release and to ensure that his situation and his state of health may be taken into account , at the very least on humanitarian grounds ?
( FR ) Mr President , on 14 January , I met with members of the Tunisian delegation .
We had a frank exchange and debated our respective views .
As a Franco-Algerian , I am committed to the Maghreb and I campaign for a united , pluralist and democratic Maghreb .
The issue of human rights is crucially important to me , and it is one of the fundamental values of the European Union .
The debate on this issue , as it appears in Tunisia , is crucial and relevant .
Yesterday morning , I met Mr Ben Brik 's wife , who is leading a hunger strike , as well as activists from the Euro-Mediterranean Human Rights Network , and I am concerned .
It seems that Mr Ben Brik 's life is in danger due to his illness and his detention conditions .
I am sure you realise that if this concern should become a reality , the responsibility will fall very heavily on the shoulders of the Tunisian authorities .
Aside from trade relations , we must also take account of social issues .
The phenomenon of young Tunisians throwing themselves into the Mediterranean is the product of a closed society that offers no prospects to its young people .
The defence against fundamentalism and economic imperatives must not serve as pretexts for ignoring human rights .
Real progress in the field of human rights is now crucial .
We are not talking here about sanctimonious dogmatism but about an urgent situation that the European Union must help to resolve .
( SV ) The countries of north Africa are often lumped together , and as far as I can see , this does Tunisia a great disservice .
There has been mention of equality .
In comparison with many other Arab countries , Tunisia is exceptional in having legislation to protect children and also women .
As has already been pointed out , Tunisia has more female students than male at its universities , and the standard of living has increased .
The country 's infrastructure is in good condition .
Since the election , its parliament has elected - or appointed - a committee on human rights .
Tunisia 's willingness to cooperate with the EU is an opportunity that we should grasp with both hands .
Now that Tunisia has a delegation that is visiting Brussels and Strasbourg , and is asking for support in its work on promoting human rights and with developing and deepening its links with the EU , in my opinion , it would be contrary to the EU 's principles not to give these requests a positive reception and develop relations further .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as someone who has visited Tunisia two to three times per year since 1982 and who , as a Catholic , on 6 January attended mass , as I regularly do , I find it truly difficult to think of Tunisia as a country which suppresses religious freedom .
There are problems , but for Heaven 's sake let us not to look at these countries , countries which are trying to make progress , through the prism of Western countries , because if we were to use that parameter , a parameter which someone is using this morning with regard to Tunisia , then certain European countries would probably be denied entry into the European Union , because the violence and denial of freedom which exists there is on a greater scale than in Tunisia .
Thus , the issue arises as a result of one concrete fact : namely , that we have before us a country which has abolished Islamic fundamentalism , which is making efforts to develop a cooperation and peace policy with Europe , which is trying to evolve .
There are problems .
I believe that the way to solve these problems is to strengthen dialogue and friendship and to help these countries to achieve more .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am grateful to the honourable Members for being so open and straightforward and for making their remarks in such a way that , although certain groups have differing approaches , the emphasis is on how we can find a solution .
Having said that , I want to start by making one remark in answer to the statement made by Mr Désir .
He referred to a remark by Louis Michel .
I am sure that Louis Michel can speak for himself , but we were on the same team in a former life , so to say , so I know what line he takes on this issue .
If Mr Désir is saying that the suggestion is that we do nothing , that is not the impression I got , and I sincerely hope that you did not get that impression from my opening remarks either .
There is indeed a difference in approach .
Some are just calling for dialogue on an equal footing , and Mr Kasoulides advocates that .
There have been calls for links of friendship .
All these approaches imply sitting around a table discussing issues and trying to reach a mutual understanding on how to solve a couple of issues that we all agree on .
There is no doubt about that , for human rights and freedom of speech are indeed a very important and essential part of any agreement .
Having said that , I would like to touch upon a couple of the issues that were raised .
Firstly , reinforced institutions .
What we are trying to promote and encourage in all the meetings that are held or planned over the coming months is the establishment of a regular dialogue as a means of achieving essential progress in terms of human rights and democracy .
In the course of the next couple of months , there will be a meeting of the Subcommittee on Human Rights , and you can be sure that there will be a dialogue of substance , which will deal with the issues that we are all concerned about and how to approach them .
On the question of human rights violations in Tunisia , speakers have regularly referred to the fact that Tunisia has been criticised for its record on human rights .
Since the presidential and legislative elections of October last year , there has been an intensification of repression against opposition parties , journalists and human rights activists .
The international community has made it quite clear that that type of behaviour by the authorities is unacceptable and contrary to Tunisia 's international commitments .
So , to reiterate what I have said already , within the EU , there should be no misunderstanding : commitments are commitments , and we have to maintain that line .
Tunisia must indeed show stronger commitment to fundamental common values such as respect for human rights , democracy and the rule of law .
It should , by the way , also respect its own international commitments in that field .
The Commission will pursue our policy of engagement and dialogue on those issues , particularly in the framework of the bodies created by the association agreement .
At the same time , the EU is providing support in order to improve governance and promote reforms in the field of justice through cooperation and technical assistance .
It is our priority to make progress with Tunisia in that area , for example , by actively promoting human rights activists and civil society organisations under the European Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights .
Efforts are also being made in the field of judicial cooperation The EU is providing EUR 17.5 million to fund a technical assistance project for the modernisation of the judiciary .
That has been criticised by some Members of this Chamber because it provides funds for the President of Tunisia 's justice system .
The project has many components .
These include training for judges and lawyers , technical support for the courts , infrastructure and improved information for citizens .
When the project is complete , we will assess the outcome .
I certainly agree that working in that area exposes us to certain political risks .
Nonetheless , if we want to encourage reform , we need to act ; otherwise , EU cooperation will be confined only to the economic sector .
We all agree that that is not the right approach , and would be inconsistent with our own general policy objectives as regards relations with Tunisia .
On the issue which Mrs Flautre and Mrs Vergiat were touching upon , the advanced status of Tunisia , I consider that priority should be given to the continuation and reinforcement of dialogue with Tunisia .
We are aware that it is an important ally of the EU in the region and has achieved considerable progress in terms of economic and social modernisation .
Perhaps it comes down to whether one regards the glass as half-full or half-empty .
Having said that , we believe that we need to continue our policy of supporting those forces in Tunisia that are working for the political , economic and social modernisation of their country .
We are in favour of Tunisia 's proposals with a view to strengthening the relationship between the two partners .
The Council and the Commission will look into these issues very carefully , and I am prepared to report any further developments to you .
On the other hand , while it is in the EU 's interest to reinforce relations with Tunisia , I consider that the granting of advanced status should entail strong commitment on the part of Tunisia in terms of human rights and governance , so there will be no ' free lunch ' .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
in writing . - This debate seems to me to be untimely at a moment when the dialogue between Tunisia and the EU is resuming at both Commission and Parliament level .
Dialogue with the Commission has included the programming of several subcommittees ' meetings within the framework of the Tunisia-EU Association Agreement ( including the Human Rights and Democracy Subcommittee ) , while dialogue at the level of the European Parliament took the form of the recent visit to Brussels of an important Tunisian parliamentary delegation representing four political parties represented in the Tunisian Chamber of Deputies , along with the Tunisia-EP Interparliamentary Meeting scheduled for March 2010 in Brussels .
At a time when important and constructive dialogue between Tunisia and the EU is resuming , I think it is unfortunate to have held a debate that could undermine progress .
Let us ensure that Tunisia and other non-EU states conform to EU standards in the economic , social or political sphere .
But let us do that in a well-planned and structured dialogue .
1 .
Recent attacks on religious minorities in Egypt and in Malaysia
The next item is the debate on the motion for a resolution on the recent attacks against religious minorities in Egypt and Malaysia .
author . - Mr President , in the week of Egyptian Orthodox Christmas , an attack took place killing and wounding 20 Coptic Egyptians .
Although the attack can be seen as a criminal act of individuals , various other troubling incidents require our ongoing focus on respect for all minorities in Egypt .
Violence and hatred cannot be accepted in the name of religion .
People have a universal right to freedom of religion as well as freedom from religion .
Ethnic and religious diversity asks for a vigilant society that is able to reconcile differences in open debate , a society where people of any background or conviction know that their freedoms are guaranteed .
An open society can only be realised when the separation of religion and state is implemented in the constitution and throughout the system of government .
Security measures cannot be the only means to manage a pluralist society .
Yet state emergency laws have been in place in Egypt for the past 28 years .
A free debate is perhaps the most powerful medicine against extremism and violence .
Therefore , freedom of expression , both online and offline , can be seen as the Egyptian Government 's best tool to resolve tensions in society .
It is therefore very difficult to understand or accept that around 30 activists , politicians and bloggers were arrested by government forces while travelling to the southern Egyptian town of Nag Hammadi to express their condolences to the families of those killed during the sectarian violence .
The arrests are a particularly striking example of what has become a pattern of the Egyptian Government 's interference in citizens ' rights to freedom of expression .
Something is desperately wrong when people are treated like criminals merely for attempting to show sympathy and solidarity with fellow countrymen .
In too many cases , the argument of maintaining public order is abused .
Since 2008 , Egyptians have been unable to get an unregistered phone line , but the control is not total .
New rules are now in force , under which users of Wi-Fi have to pay for a connection , for which they need to provide an e-mail address to have a password and a username sent .
This allows for active control of users by the government .
Moreover , a draft law is under debate in the parliament about net regulation , providing for prison sentences for ' publication of multimedia content without government permission ' .
Yet the Egyptian Constitution says , ' freedom of expression or freedom of opinion is guaranteed .
Every individual has the right to express his opinion and to publicise it verbally or in writing or by photography or by other means within the limits of the law ' .
Self-criticism and constructive criticism are the guarantee for the safety of the national structure .
I urge the Egyptian Government to refrain from introducing emergency laws limiting fundamental freedoms in light of the sectarian tensions present .
An adequate response to crimes committed in the name of religion is only appropriate .
However , this should not be used as a reason to repress the population as a whole , with laws limiting free speech and expression .
Only when fundamental freedoms are safeguarded by the Constitution and all layers of legislation are free will an open society in Egypt be possible .
The Egyptian Government should lead its citizens on this road to freedom , and Europe should be its strongest partner in this .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the resolution that I have tabled is in response to some tragic events which have recently taken place in Egypt and in other countries of the world - just yesterday in Nigeria - and is intended to bring to this House 's attention an increasingly serious and intolerable situation whereby members of the Christian community are being persecuted and killed .
This is not a resolution against the Egyptian Government , which has acted to ensure that those responsible are brought to justice ; rather , it is a time to reflect on a vast and concerning issue .
Every year , thousands of Christians are killed around the world , in Vietnam , North Korea , China , Nigeria , Malaysia , and millions of others are persecuted in the most diverse ways for their faith on a daily basis .
These attacks are increasing in number and in virulence , amid silence or indifference , and they warrant urgent action .
First of all , everyone must make a commitment to change the climate of religious hatred which is spreading and to encourage tolerance and acceptance of diversity .
Europe is well acquainted with the tragedy of wars in which , for centuries , Catholics and Protestants have fought against one another , not to mention the Jewish Holocaust .
Precisely because of its history , Europe must commit itself on this front .
Another initiative could be to examine national laws within the context of which we find rules which persecute Christians or other religious minorities .
The cooperation of non-governmental organisations could be very useful in this project , but vigilance is also required to ensure that , where a right to religious freedom exists , it is actually implemented .
This debate could be an opportunity to launch the proposal to draft a European Parliament report on religious freedom in the world .
author . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , religious freedom is , in fact , the subject of this resolution .
It is therefore not an identity crusade or an attempt to cause problems for this or that government , but a denunciation of the fact that , in today 's world , people are dying because they believe in Christ or are being discriminated against because their faith is different from someone else 's .
All the political groups therefore agree that there is a problem concerning religious freedom and that it needs to be addressed seriously and firmly within the international community .
We therefore ask the Council and the Commission and , above all , the High Representative for Foreign Affairs , to pay particular attention to the situation of minorities , including the Christian minority , so that initiatives aimed at promoting dialogue and respect between communities are supported and undertaken , urging all the religious authorities to encourage tolerance and to prevent episodes of hatred and violence from occurring .
Mr President , the incident that took place in Egypt could undoubtedly have happened elsewhere .
A car passes by the doorway of a Coptic church , shots are fired into the crowd .
The outcome : seven deaths ( six Copts and one police officer ) .
The Egyptian authorities react quickly .
The public prosecutor decides - and I quote - that the three accused of the events in Nag Hammadi will be tried before the State Emergency Security Court on a charge of premeditated murder .
In Malaysia , it is the name Allah that the Christian and Muslim communities argue about , a dispute that results in the ransacking and pillaging of churches .
These news stories , which could be described as commonplace , have impacts elsewhere , throughout the world , including in Europe .
The rise in religious intolerance and fanaticism jeopardises a fundamental freedom , freedom of belief for all , whether they are religious or agnostic .
All over the world , crimes are being perpetrated against minorities , be they Christian , Jewish or Muslim .
All over the world , too , non-religious men and women are being killed or imprisoned because they do not respect the rites , dogmas or religious practices from which they have freed themselves .
As a non-religious person , I firmly support this resolution , which is an appeal for tolerance and not a stigmatisation of Egypt or Malaysia .
However , leaving aside the cases that have been mentioned , I would like to point out the responsibility of a state that is mindful of its citizens ' right to freedom of expression .
I believe that a secular state , by virtue of its structure , is the greatest guarantee of the space required for a diversity of beliefs .
This is the form in which a state can best protect its citizens and promote a dialogue between its communities .
author . - Mr President , the information about violence against Christians in Egypt and Malaysia is just the tip of the iceberg .
There are three points I want to raise .
First , Christians have become the victims of brutal violence in many countries of the world , not just two .
Second , Christians have become the single most persecuted religious group in the world .
The numbers are astounding - in the millions , not thousands or hundreds of thousands .
Third , the reaction of European societies , European governments and the EU has , so far , been unsatisfactory : timid , faint-hearted , pusillanimous , politically correct , or no reaction at all .
We must act resolutely , or else those who persecute Christians will think they have our tacit blessing .
Do we really want this ?
author . - ( FI ) Mr President , it is regrettable that there are so many different conflicts in the world dressed up in the guise of religion .
In this connection , it has to be said that there are very many different fundamentalist trends in the world in connection with the Christian , Islamic and other religions .
Personally , I have encountered fewer of these fundamentalist aspirations with Buddhism .
In any case , it is important that the European Parliament adopts a position when these kinds of violent episodes between religious groups occur .
I would like to say , however , that yesterday it was brought to Parliament 's attention that 33 human rights defenders were arbitrarily arrested when they tried to support the Coptic Christians referred to in this resolution and who were suffering violence against them .
I would now like to say to the Egyptian authorities that we need to ensure that people are not prevented in this way from coming to the defence of others .
We must insist that human rights defenders in other situations are not imprisoned or treated unjustly .
In this case , it is an undeniable fact that these 33 defenders of the Copts were treated inhumanely in prison .
They were kept in inhumane conditions .
I hope that in future , Parliament will always give its attention to cases whenever there is violence against any religious group , and not just concentrate on the persecution of Christians .
( Applause )
Mr President , Tunisia , Egypt and Malaysia have a great tradition of tolerance .
Evidence of this is provided by names like Tunku Abdul Rahman , the founder of the independent state of Malaysia , or President Sadat , whose speech here in the European Parliament was like a Magna Carta for Christian-Islamic coexistence .
This is precisely why we must support the governments of these countries in their fight against Islamic extremism and anti-Christian attacks .
Of course , we in Europe , as a mainly Christian continent , have a special obligation to stand up for Christians throughout the world , because if we do not do so , who will ?
However , this is clearly about the freedom of religion itself and I would like , for example , to thank the Malaysian Government for the fact that His Majesty , the Yang di-Pertuan Agong , and the Prime Minister , made their position on this matter clear on 9 January .
We wish them success in their fight for religious tolerance , for which this country was and still is a shining example , and it is something that , as partners who can speak openly on matters to do with human rights , we must preserve in Egypt , Tunisia and Malaysia .
Mr President , freedom of religion is an essential element of human rights .
Unfortunately , what we are seeing is that Christians have a particularly hard time in many countries where the faith of Islam dominates .
That is the case , amongst other places , in Egypt .
Coptic Orthodox Christians , but also Roman Catholic and Protestant Christians and Jews are placed at a disadvantage in an institutionalised way in Egypt .
Muslims who convert to Christianity , for example , are oppressed .
This can be seen from their identity papers , which continue to state that they are Muslims , as religious disaffiliation is legally prohibited .
Over the last 10 to 20 years , specifically , violence against Copts has grown enormously .
More than 100 attacks , with thousands of victims , have already been reported .
The Egyptian Government 's attitude , in my view , is spineless .
Three men have been taken into custody , but , generally speaking , the violence against Christians is tolerated .
I call on the Council and the Commission to engage Egypt directly in dialogue in order to ensure that the government there takes a different approach .
If Cairo refuses to do so , I think that needs to have consequences for our bilateral relations with Egypt .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - Mr President , all who are committed to democratic rights and freedom of religious expression will condemn outright the murder of Christians in Egypt and also the firebomb attacks on Christian churches in Malaysia .
We should also note the growing numbers of attacks on religious minorities in Europe itself and equally condemn that .
In Malaysia , the tactic of divide and rule on racial and religious lines has long been used by various elements of the economic and ruling elites .
The present National Front government is guilty of hypocrisy in this regard : while publicly proclaiming a ' One Malaysia ' policy claiming to embrace all religions and minorities , it manoeuvres behind the scenes , using religious and racial divisions to try and bolster its own position among the majority Muslim Malay population , as it did in relation to the ' Allah ' ruling .
There are also huge divisions economically in Malaysia .
It is the most unequal society in South-East Asia .
The current government rules on the basis of crony capitalism .
This is the result , with exploitation rife in the workplace and trade union rights severely limited .
The best background for religious freedom and democracy in Egypt and Malaysia and elsewhere is , indeed , economic justice and democracy , where wealth and power are in the hands of the big majority of working people and the poor and removed from major corporations and crony capitalists .
( NL ) Mr President , yesterday , a terrible political trial began in the Netherlands against the leader of our party , Geert Wilders .
Mr Wilders , as a Dutch parliamentarian and leader of the Party for Freedom in the Dutch Parliament , is being prosecuted for expressing his opinion .
Mr Wilders is being persecuted by the leftist elite because he warns the Netherlands , Europe and the world about a fascist ideology that goes by the name of Islam .
This is an outrageous disgrace !
Mr President , the Islamification of the Netherlands and of Europe threatens Europe 's Judeo-Christian and humanistic culture , and where many , including in this House , bend over backwards and allow the tsunami of Islamification to wash over them , the Party for Freedom fights for European culture .
Mr President , the barbaric acts that have taken place in Malaysia , Egypt and in many other places around the world , as just this week in Nigeria , are the result of the intolerant and fascist ideology known as Islam .
In Islamic countries , non-Muslims are systematically humiliated and murdered .
The events in Malaysia and Egypt cannot be regarded as isolated incidents , but have their origin in the ideology that demands respect but does not give it .
This Parliament can ensure that these terrible events never take place in Europe by taking up the fight , alongside the Party for Freedom , against the Islamification of Europe .
We ask all of you to do so .
( PL ) Mr President , quite often in Parliament , we talk about different phobias and their detrimental social effects .
I am thinking of xenophobia and homophobia .
Unfortunately , these two cases do not exhaust the list of phobias .
There is also a phenomenon called ' Christianophobia ' - a phobia of Christianity .
Just as in the case of other phobias , the social effects here are also detrimental and sometimes tragic , and it is precisely for this reason that we should take up cases of violations of the rights of Christians in different places around the world .
We take up cases involving followers of different religions , and even of people who do not profess any religion .
Christians , too , must not be deprived of our care .
We do this because religious freedom is one of the European Union 's fundamental values .
It is precisely for this reason that we condemn and will condemn every form of violence , discrimination and intolerance towards the leaders or adherents of any religion .
Violence perpetrated because of the beliefs of the victim is abominable and there is no doubt that it deserves our criticism .
( PL ) Mr President , religious freedom is a right which has been acknowledged in international and European conventions on human rights for over 50 years .
At the same time , we have , for many years , been facing a rising wave of religious hatred , which has most often affected Christians all over the world .
The place of anti-Christian Communism has today been taken principally by militant Islam .
Egypt and Malaysia have constitutional guarantees of religious freedom , but under pressure from radical Islamic circles , the religious freedom of Christians is not being sufficiently protected by the governments there .
The European Union , which has new instruments of foreign policy at its disposal , must become involved , to a greater degree , in opposing Christophobia , which is the source of beatings , looting and murders .
It is only ideological prejudice which causes the European Union to do this , today , with hesitation .
At stake is our credibility .

( PL ) Mr President , I would like to support the idea of my fellow Member , Mr Provera , who said that a report should be drawn up on religious freedom .
I would like to remind everyone that in the previous parliamentary term , Mr Mauro and I submitted a proposal to draft a report on the situation of Christians in countries where they are a minority , in countries where Islam is the dominant religion .
Unfortunately , the Bureau did not adopt the proposal , but perhaps such a report would be worth writing .
Here , I make the same proposal again .
The resolution we are adopting today should give a clear message .
The Coptic minority makes up 10 % of Egypt 's population , but even if it were only 0.5 % , the role of the European Parliament is to react , especially in a situation in which human rights are being violated so drastically .
I read carefully the letter sent to Mr Buzek by the Marshal of the People 's Assembly .
In the letter , he gives his assurance that the events of which I have spoken were isolated incidents .
I find this difficult to believe .
The Copts have been persecuted in Egypt for many years .
Let us try , this time , to ensure that our help for this oppressed minority does not end with empty declarations .
( PL ) Mr President , it is not only Egypt , and it is not only Malaysia , but also Sudan , Nigeria and many other countries in Africa , many countries in Asia and many societies which treat Christians as a necessary evil , and sometimes as an enemy .
Let us not hide these facts , let us not act like an ostrich , which buries its head in the sand .
This is a real problem , and the Parliament of a Christian Europe , Christian traditions and a Christian heritage must speak about it .
However , we should also beat our own breast .
A moment ago , the Member who spoke before me rightly spoke of Parliament 's sins of omission in the previous term .
I recall the debate we had a few weeks ago , when we rightly condemned the attacks and the oppression experienced by the Uighur Muslim minority in China .
However , at that time , certain political groups rejected amendments which were intended to emphasise that Christians are suffering in China , too , and are the victims of discrimination .
We cannot allow a situation in which we defend some religious minorities but defend others less or not at all .
( FI ) Mr President , we have heard worrying news from a number of sources about crimes against Christians in Egypt and Malaysia .
With regard to Malaysia , I would first of all like to say that we are deeply concerned about the attacks on churches in what has traditionally been a tolerant and moderate country .
Secondly , I wish to mention the exemplary work of Islamic NGOs on behalf of religious tolerance .
The Malaysian Prime Minister 's statements about using the name of Allah triggered a show of public discontent targeted at Christian communities .
The exemplary attitude on the part of Islamic NGOs and an uncompromising public stance on the statements by the Prime Minister have nevertheless calmed the situation .
It is unfortunate that we did not have it recorded in our final resolution , because in my view , we pay attention too rarely here to positive situations .
Should not Muslims also be lauded when there is cause to do so ?
Religious tolerance needs to be promoted both by those that hold political power and at grassroots level .
It is equally important to realise that there have been failures as it is to acknowledge progress and offer support for it .
( FR ) Mr President , the acts of fanatic criminals , who have killed some Christians in Egypt , cannot be ascribed to an entire population and its government .
It would be unfair to hold Egypt and the Egyptians responsible for this appalling massacre , for which the perpetrators will be brought to justice .
We must not confuse the acts of one criminal with the policy of an entire country !
Let us not tar fanatics and an entire population with the same brush .
Finally , by seeking to intervene between the Coptic Christians and their fellow Muslim citizens , we are adding fuel to the fire of the extremists , who want to portray Eastern Christians as agents of the West .

( HU ) There is very recent news that a few days ago , the Egyptian regime arrested several Coptic rights activists who were travelling to the site of the crimes that took place at the Nag Hammadi settlement in order to defend and support the Coptic Christian communities there who had seen several of their members murdered on Christmas Day .
The Egyptian authorities , partial towards the Muslim majority , are trying to downplay the violent acts committed against the Coptic minority , and are now blocking the Christians ' lawful self-defence with discriminatory bias towards one side of the issue .
The United States administration has unequivocally spoken up against this .
Knowing that the Coptic Christian community , who are considered native Egyptians , have , for over 1 500 years , often been subjected to cruel oppression , the European Union must step up in its defence even more forcefully and unambiguously than it is doing at present .
( SK ) Thank you for bringing attention again to the breaches of religious freedom in certain countries , just like back in 2007 and 2008 .
I wonder whether it is the EU 's weakness or indifference that prevents it from promoting the observance of human rights in this area more consistently .
We keep hearing the same complaints and proposing the same measures .
Egypt and Malaysia are among those countries where Christians live in extremely dangerous conditions , face persecution , expulsion from their homes , abductions and murders , and their churches are being closed .
This is happening from the Maghreb to Iran , in India , China , Pakistan , and many other countries .
Christians are usually persecuted by extremist groups .
However , this presents a danger to all Christians , Jews and Muslims .
I request that representatives of the EU and delegations of the European Parliament make use of every opportunity to improve dialogue , religious tolerance and respect , and the coexistence of different cultures .
( FI ) Mr President , I am especially worried about the situation in Egypt because of the historical , ethnic and political background connected with it .
Actually , the Coptic Christians are still a considerable minority .
In Egypt , around 10 % of the population , eight million , are Coptic Christians , and it is for that precise reason that they are a former majority .
They are proud of this and also of their oriental Christian tradition .
This is why the provocation that occurred at the Christmas celebrations last January was particularly blatant and premeditated .
Furthermore , many Copts have been pressurised through violence to change their beliefs and there have been cases of rape and other crimes .
The situation in Egypt is a very bad example for other countries where there is a chance of the same sort of spiral of revenge taking place , and that is precisely why the EU has to be vigilant , intervene immediately when there is trouble , and stress the importance of peaceful dialogue between religious groups .
( SL ) When a murder takes place , in particular , a religiously motivated one , we naturally can do little but recoil in horror and condemn it .
However , this new incident and this new crime in the Middle East is , in fact , evidence of general developments and ongoing intolerance of religious freedom and lack of respect for those who are different .
That is to say , there are many quarters where religious values are not respected .
The reason why the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has proposed that this debate be postponed , or rather , that debates on the respect of human rights and religious freedoms in Egypt and Malaysia be held separately , is that we need to deal with this issue with a great deal of sensitivity and address every country individually .
Egypt is certainly not one of the worst examples of religious intolerance . Quite the contrary .
Mr President , sadly , there has been a general climate in the Islamic world of increasing jihadi militancy aimed at non-Muslim communities in their midst - in particular , and more often than not , this means the Christians .
The Copts , who represent one of the oldest Christian churches in the world , have a large diaspora in London , which I represent .
Their leaders have come to me and complained of a worsening situation , regrettably , in Egypt , orchestrated by the Muslim Brotherhood .
In spite of the best efforts by President Mubarak 's government to protect them , matters have deteriorated .
We witness a similar story with the Assyrian Christians in Iraq , the Christians of Palestine and Pakistan , and now , as we see for the first time , even in Malaysia .
This House has - for too long , in my view - ignored Christian minority rights in the rest of the world , but they look to the European Union and to the United States for protection .
So I welcome this resolution .
Mr President , the persecution of Christians and other religious minorities is growing in Islamic countries .
Christians who have lived in countries such as Egypt and in the Mediterranean area for almost 2 000 years are increasingly being persecuted and driven out of their ancestral homelands .
This is because of the growing power of intolerant fundamentalist and extremist Islamist ideology - Islamo-fascism .
The persecution of Christian minorities and others across the Islamic world is vastly under-reported by the West 's media .
The media should not only report the persecution as it happens but they should explain to the general public the reasons why it is happening .
They should explain who is doing this , namely Muslim fanatics , and why they are doing it - because of the intolerant and violent fault lines in Islamic ideology .
Democratic governments worldwide should put maximum diplomatic pressure on countries such as Egypt to suppress this intolerable persecution .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the Commission is deeply shocked and saddened by what happened on Coptic Christmas Eve in Nag Hammadi in southern Egypt , the tragic deaths of six Copts and a Muslim policeman in a drive-by shooting .
We are positive that the authorities took rapid action to find and arrest those suspected of committing this awful crime , and a thorough investigation and bringing those responsible to justice will send a clear signal that violence based on religious influence is not acceptable in Egyptian society .
Egypt 's Constitution provides for freedom of belief and free practice of religion .
However , we do hear complaints of discrimination against the Copts and against other religious minorities such as the Bahá 'í in the workplace and by the judicial system .
We are aware of difficulties encountered by several Christian converts , such as Maher El-Gohary and Mohammed Hegazy , in Egyptian courts .
We raised those issues in our regular political dialogue with Egypt .
We understand that the government is seeking to address some of the grievances of the Copts , for instance , by removing the obstacles that delay and limit the building and refurbishment of churches .
We welcome and encourage such moves and urge the government to identify and tackle the root causes of religious tensions in Egyptian society and to end all forms of discrimination against those belonging to other religions .
The acts of vandalism against churches in Malaysia following a High Court ruling on the use of the word ' Allah ' give rise to serious concerns .
The government , as well as the opposition , including the Pan-Malaysian Islamic Party and 130 Muslim NGOs , have all strongly condemned those attacks .
The government has increased security measures to safeguard all places of worship and has also reconfirmed its commitment to protect Malaysia 's social and religious harmony and a culture of religious and ethnic diversity .
The Malaysian Federal Constitution states that Islam is the religion of the Federation but other religions may be practised in peace and in harmony in any part of the Federation .
We encourage the authorities to initiate as soon as possible an all-encompassing inter-faith dialogue with all religious beliefs to promote mutual understanding so that Malaysia can continue to develop peacefully in ethnic and social harmony .
In that regard , the Malaysian Home Ministry has a particular responsibility to explain thoroughly and objectively to its citizens the issue at stake .
We strongly condemn all acts of intolerance against any person because of his religion of belief wherever they occur .
Unfortunately , no country is immune from this .
We call on public authorities to fully protect all religious communities , including Christians , from discrimination and from repression .
The Commission gives high priority to freedom of religion or belief as central tenets of the EU 's human rights policy by raising the issue in political dialogue with countries where the problem persists , by supporting local human rights projects and by actively promoting freedom of religion or belief at the UN forums .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in voting in favour of the joint resolution , I am highlighting the particular seriousness of the violence carried out in Malaysia in response to an exclusively nominalistic issue .
Indeed , it is certain that both Christians and Muslims believe in only one God , who is the God of all men , believers and non-believers alike .
The fact that He is referred to by different names is absolutely secondary .
To claim that the Muslim God is only Muslim and can therefore be invoked only by Muslims , using a traditionally Muslim name , means returning to the ancestral and tribal view that there is a God for each group of human beings .
In other words , it means contradicting the monotheistic idea that makes universal religions which , like Christianity and Islam , oppose idolatry and polytheism , great religions that are close to people .
No less serious is the persecution of the Copts in Egypt .
It was on the shores of the Mediterranean that monotheistic religions , which claim to be , and are , forces for promoting brotherhood and peace , were born .
However , it is remarkable that it should be precisely on the shores of the Mediterranean , in Jerusalem - a holy city for those who believe in God , Allah and Jehovah - that the main breeding ground for conflict is found .
It is precisely Egypt that is the most powerful country in the area , where Christians and Muslims must coexist peacefully in order to play a peacemaking role throughout the southern Mediterranean area .
I support the joint motion for a resolution on the recent attacks against Christian communities because it strongly condemns all kinds of violence , discrimination or intolerance that is based on religion or beliefs .
I think that it is vital to support all initiatives that are aimed at encouraging dialogue and mutual respect between communities and which seek to safeguard fundamental rights such as freedom of thought , conscience and religion .
Men and women all over the world continue to suffer the most brutal forms of persecution simply because they believe in God in the same way that He is venerated from the Atlantic to the Ural Mountains .
Following statements by China , India , Iraq , Pakistan , Turkey and Vietnam , among others , Parliament today condemned the harassment of Christians in Egypt and Malaysia .
Europe views all this with relative indifference .
There are even those who defend this failure to act by invoking respect for other people 's culture and freedom to worship .
Europe 's silence on this issue , truly astonishing in a region whose origins , culture and traditions are imbued with the Christian faith , threatens to become deafening ...
This brings to mind the Cardinal Archbishop of Bologna 's comment on earlier persecutions , which aptly illustrate the spirit of our times , whereby he noted that people are quicker to worry about the fate of polar bears than about the thousands of Christians who live their lives under threat .
Another year , 2010 , has started with the bloody persecution of Christians in many parts of the world .
We cannot , as the European Parliament , be passive in the face of these crimes and acts of violence .
The situation of Christians is equally dramatic in countries not mentioned in today 's resolution , such as North Korea , Iraq , India and Sudan .
Attacks on Catholics are increasing in Vietnam .
As a Member from Poland , a country with a deep-rooted Christian tradition and a country with a long tradition of respect where many religious communities coexist , I would like to express solidarity with the families of the victims .
The Egyptian and Malaysian authorities must guarantee Christians and members of other communities and religious minorities the possibility to enjoy all human rights and fundamental freedoms , or face sanctions from the European Union .
For this reason , we should endorse the resolution on recent attacks on Christian communities .
The recent attacks against Christian communities in Egypt and Malaysia can be viewed from two different perspectives .
First , we must emphasise that the European Union , as a community of European States that have reached a high level of democracy and the rule of law , must not , in the spirit of religious tolerance , human and minority rights , pass over such events in silence , regardless of where in the world they may occur .
We must make it clear to governments that strive to continue to maintain good relations with us that Europe demands that the widely accepted norms of universal human rights be respected by its partners , and that the future development of relations can be affected by problems involving human rights .
At the same time , we must not forget the infringements of human rights that occur on the territory of the European Union .
In some cases , religious tolerance , human and minority rights - including those of members of minority churches - need to be developed further in EU Member States as well .
If Europe wants to set an example to the world , it cannot allow anyone on its territory to suffer discrimination for his or her religious convictions , ethnic origin or membership of a national minority .
We can see that the legislation in force in Egypt similarly guarantees religious freedom , but in practice , the experience of Christians is that the opposite is the case .
Unfortunately , we can find similar examples of a discrepancy between the law and daily practice in EU Member States as well .
2 .
Human Rights violations in China , notably the case of Liu Xiaobo
The next item is the debate on seven motions for resolution concerning violations of human rights in China , notably the case of Liu Xiaobo .
author . - Mr President , last month , Mr Liu Xiaobo , the very well-known writer and political activist , was sentenced to 11 years ' imprisonment for ' incitement to subvert state power ' .
He was arrested over a year ago after drafting Charter 08 , a charter which was signed by more than 10 000 ordinary Chinese citizens , demanding the most normal things in a democratic society : the right to free speech , open elections and rule of law .
The prosecution of Mr Liu Xiaobo , based solely on his peaceful initiatives , and the judicial harassment he faced are undoubtedly incompatible with internationally acknowledged norms of human rights and fundamental freedoms .
Therefore , we should call strongly for Mr Liu Xiaobo 's unconditional release , which should take place immediately .
In the last few years , relations between the European Union and China have focused mainly on the economic dimension , which has overshadowed the country 's democratic record and the gross human rights violations which have systematically occurred in China .
A few days ago , for the first time , a police official admitted that the famous human rights lawyer and 2008 Nobel Peace Prize nominee , Mr Gao Zhisheng , had gone missing after a year in the Chinese authorities ' custody .
Many people fear that he might be dead .
A few weeks ago , the Chinese Government disregarded an EU appeal not to execute a British citizen .
It is particularly disturbing to see how the Chinese Government ignores its international commitments in the field of human rights .
One is entitled to wonder why , under these circumstances , China submitted its candidacy to the UN Human Rights Council - was it simply to legitimise the way it suppresses human rights ?
In April 2009 , the Chinese Government issued a national human rights plan , a lengthy document which appears to be nothing but a piece of paper .
There must be no doubt .
This House , the European Parliament , has the obligation to thoroughly evaluate the results of the EU-China human rights dialogue .
author . - Mr President , China has demonstrated impressive economic progress .
However , part of this progress has been achieved by the use of methods that are in flagrant conflict with universally accepted human norms .
Hopes that events like the Olympic Games would motivate the Chinese authorities to show more respect for democratic norms have proven to be in vain .
On the contrary , acts of repression have increased and we need to draw conclusions from this fact .
Today , the European Parliament voices concern over the fate of the prominent human rights activist and scholar , Liu Xiaobo , signatory of Charter 08 , which urges constitutional reform and the safeguarding of human rights .
This Charter has been bravely co-signed by more than 10 000 Chinese citizens .
Last month , Liu Xiaobo was sentenced to 11 years ' imprisonment .
We ask today for his immediate and unconditional release .
We express our solidarity with the peaceful actions of Chinese citizens in favour of democratic reforms and the safeguarding of human rights , to which the Chinese Government has committed itself .
Mr President , urgent resolutions are always a difficult exercise because more often than not , they reflect political impotence rather than a humanitarian emergency .
The naming and shaming strategy that we apply every month is a last resort .
It clearly means that all the other means of dialogue or of exerting pressure have proved ineffective and that , finding ourselves powerless to act , we condemn .
In the case of China , I am not sure that increasing the number of urgent resolutions as we have been doing - in March 2009 , in November 2009 , in January 2010 , and in March 2010 , with the other planned resolution - is productive .
This is not because I underestimate the difficulty that China is having in managing its transition towards democracy ; it is because I believe that , in constantly being on the offensive , it is not the target that is wrong but the strategy .
There are other more convincing political tools .
I was the first person to request resolutions on the Uighurs and to harbour the sadly vain hope that capital punishments would in this way be avoided .
On behalf of our group , I would like to give my support to Liu Xiaobo , the recently convicted Tiananmen dissident , whose only crime is his passion for democracy .
However , I refuse to pillory China every two months , quite simply because that will not make it give in .
Quite the contrary , in fact , because this key trade partner , this country which has a permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council , which is seeing intensive growth and is in the midst of democratic change , which we need in order to combat climate change , this country must be a partner to which one tells a few home truths but which one respects for the efforts that it undertakes .
It is this respect that is missing in the resolution .
It is for these political reasons that my group has withdrawn its signature .
However , to ensure that there is no ambiguity on the issue of human rights , which I value at least as much as you do , my group will vote in favour of all the amendments that relate to it .
As regards the final outcome of the vote , that will depend on the amendments that we have tabled .
Mr President , China is a large country with a rich history and with huge development potential .
The hosting of the Olympic Games in Beijing last year did not have the results that some had expected .
The relationship that the European Union is able to maintain with China is of particular importance .
It is our duty as MEPs to say loudly and clearly what we consider important and what is unacceptable .
The fact is , the human rights situation in China is unacceptable .
The case of Mr Liu Xiaobo , found guilty of demanding democratic reforms in his country , along with more than 10 000 of his fellow citizens , exemplifies this .
Dare I say that , in my opinion , making such mobilisation possible in that country is an achievement rather than a crime ?
We must demand the release of Mr Xiaobo , and of all the men and women who , like him , are being harassed and imprisoned for having committed just one crime , that of defending human rights , and more specifically , one of the most fundamental of those rights , namely freedom of expression .
As one of my fellow Members said , just recently a British citizen was actually executed , despite the fact that he was mentally ill .
This is the first time in more than 50 years that a European has been executed in China .
Indeed , freedom of expression is being flouted a little more each day , as recently revealed to us by Google , which nonetheless has a reputation for being the operator that provides if not the best protection , then at least the least worst protection for Internet users .
It is common knowledge that , to establish themselves in China , operators must comply with the Chinese authorities ' request to install software filters , which even Google has ended up agreeing to do .
We cannot accept a government engaging in Internet piracy and denying Internet users their freedom of expression .
The European institutions must join forces and take action on this matter .
Chinese Internet users must be able to access uncensored information .
The European Union has a duty to support Internet businesses that refuse to help the Chinese authorities to censor the Internet or , worse still , to arrest human rights defenders , democrats , or even journalists , as was the case with Mr Xiaobo in April 2005 .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , I cannot end my speech without asking you to remember the deaths in Tiananmen Square ; many hundreds of young Chinese people met their deaths on the night of 3 June 1989 .
It was 20 years ago now , a sad anniversary which we would be honoured to commemorate by paying tribute to those young victims .
Not all the events of 1989 have deserved the same attention , however .
author . - Mr President , the fact that yet again in this House , we are debating human rights abuses in China indicates that the Communist authoritarian leadership of Beijing remains determined to suppress any political dissent .
However , that fact should not stop us from raising these issues in Parliament .
I believe not only that we have a duty to do so , but that we owe it to the victims of human rights abuses in China such as Liu Xiaobo , most of whom have been denied a voice .
This is why we are debating this matter again today .
Indeed , the award of the Sakharov Prize in 2008 to Hu Jia showed the world how seriously we MEPs take the issue of human rights in China .
We take it seriously because China really matters .
Its vast size and global outreach , its military muscle and economic power compel the EU to seek a strategic partnership based on mutual respect and security .
Perhaps eventually our relationship with China will also be based on our common values of democracy , human rights and the rule of law : we can but hope .
I think all of us hope , nevertheless , to see the day when we will really see this in practice in the People 's Republic of China .
It has been suggested that such ideals are somehow alien to Asia .
I always look to democratic Taiwan and vast India with its democratic secular traditions , where these flourish in a free society , to basically put a lie to the idea that the PRC cannot be democratic .
author . - ( FI ) Mr President , what is significant about the Liu Xiaobo case is that now as many as 10 000 people have openly expressed their support for him , and I think that the European Parliament should acknowledge the bravery of these people and praise them for it .
At the same time , we have to remind ourselves that China itself has given promises to improve the human rights situation .
China tried to join the Human Rights Council saying that it would be committed to the promotion and protection of human rights and would uphold the highest standards in this area .
Thus , these are China 's own promises before the United Nations and it is to these that we ought to refer .
This resolution also speaks of human rights dialogues between the EU and China , and however optimistic we would like to be , the end result is that they have hardly been of any benefit .
The institutions of the European Union also need between them to think about how they can improve their own strategies and make China understand that its commitments in matters relating to human rights are our business too and that the future of cooperation between us depends crucially on them .
Finally , we might ask why the European Union 's policy on China is so incoherent and inconsistent , and what we can do about it .
The European Parliament , for its part , will certainly support the Commission in a combined effort to establish a new strategy with China .
' We should end the practice of viewing words as crimes ' .
This is what Liu Xiaobo asserted in Charter 08 , the political manifesto which he launched and which was supported , as has already been said , by thousands of Chinese people .
Liu Xiaobo has been sentenced to 11 years in prison and will be deprived of his political rights for a further two years for making such a statement and for continually supporting human rights .
I believe that this punishment is symptomatic of the Chinese authorities stepping up their campaign against human rights activists .
Further proof of this is highlighted by the announcement this Sunday that Tzu Yong Jun , a leader of the Tiananmen Square movement , was also sentenced to nine years in prison .
As a result , I believe that it is vital to raise the subject of human rights as part of the next European Union-China Summit , as specified in Article 9 of the resolution .
I believe , as also suggested by Mrs Hautala earlier , that dialogue is not sufficient for human rights .
This human rights issue needs to be dealt with as part of summit meetings because dialogue has not yielded any results so far .
on behalf of the S & D Group . - Mr President , the European Union is now negotiating a new framework agreement with China , which will set a further path for the development of economic relations with the country .
Those relations are very tight , but we must not close our eyes before repeated human rights violations and with respect for the rule of law .
The European Union must strengthen the EU-China human rights dialogue .
This dialogue , established in 2000 , proved to be inefficient .
The EU , and especially the High Representative , should ensure coordinated and effective EU common foreign policy towards China .
Respect for human rights must serve as a basis for this policy .
Mr President , when China was selected to host the Olympic Games , I initially hoped , after all China 's promises to improve the human rights situation , that this would perhaps actually happen .
However , during and after the Olympic Games , we , unfortunately , had to admit that there was no improvement , but rather a worsening of the human rights situation .
Now , following the judgment against Liu Xiaobo , we have even seen a homosexual party banned by the police , which clearly threatens to result in a political ice age in China for dissidents , human rights defenders and homosexuals .
For this reason , we demand the immediate release of Liu Xiaobo and other human rights defenders and we call on China in particular - if it wishes to be a recognised partner in the international community - to put an end to its hysterical censorship measures and monitoring methods .
This , of course , applies in particular to the Internet .
We cannot accept political filtering of the Internet .
It is an essential element of fundamental rights that the freedom of expression must be defended in all nations of the world .
Human rights are universal and indivisible , whether here in Europe , in the US , in Sudan or in China .
The People 's Republic of China will have to get used to that if it really wants a different role .
I am firmly convinced that we , as Europeans , need to make it clear to China within the framework of our official relations at summits - precisely because we have an interest in cooperation in the areas of climate protection policy , environmental policy and regulation of the financial markets - that it urgently needs to change its human rights policy .
on behalf of the EFD Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , one of the most significant problems regarding human rights in China is the exploitation of forced labour in the Laogai , the Chinese concentration camps .
This issue , apart from being a true form of modern slavery , specifically concerns the European economy .
It is , in fact , certain that very many goods coming out of the Chinese market are produced by detainees in the Laogai , with an obvious slashing of labour costs that leads to unfair competition with respect to European goods .
Going by the experience , also , of the United States , which has already passed certain laws prohibiting the import of Chinese goods produced in the Laogai , Europe can and should do everything possible to prevent the entry of goods produced wholly or partially by forced labour .
Firstly , a campaign should be conducted to raise public awareness about this issue ; and secondly , the same hygiene and safety parameters that are required of European products should be demanded of all products imported into Europe , and legislation on labelling should be introduced to ensure the traceability of goods .
Moreover , entrepreneurs who invest in China must be asked to follow precise rules regarding workers ' rights .
Finally , we need to establish rules and , above all , ensure that they are respected so that there is an absolute ban on the import of goods produced by forced labour .
I am convinced that this is the only way we can genuinely help the Chinese people in their fight for human rights .
If this does not happen , we will remain accomplices who wish to deny these people their freedom .
Mr President , I have the honour to be the European Parliament 's Vice-President responsible for democracy and human rights .
Rightly , the resolution focuses on Liu Xiaobo , the principal author of Charter 08 .
An English version is available on my website charter08.eu.
After my last visit to Beijing in May 2006 , all the dissidents with whom I had contact were arrested , imprisoned and , in some cases , tortured ; Hu Jia , for example , who is still in prison and needing medical treatment .
In particular Gao Zhisheng , who reportedly has disappeared after three and a half years in prison , under house arrest and under torture , which caused him twice to try and commit suicide .
Gao 's open letters to the regime in 2005 set the tone for Charter 08 .
His investigation into the persecution of the spiritual Buddhist group , Falun Gong , led to widespread support across China .
I believe the authorities should now produce Gao Zhisheng and release him .
Nobody should be in any doubt that the European Parliament will not give up on reform in China and , of course , in Tibet .
( FI ) Mr President , it is intolerable that commercial interests should have drawn the longer straw in relations between the EU and China and that the insistence on respect for human rights and democratic development has been more or less put in the role of cordial greetings .
I have been following with interest the boldness showed by the search engine company , Google , and its plans to end cooperation with the Chinese authorities with regard to the filtering of Internet web pages and censorship , and even to leave the country .
At the same time , Google is visibly calling for freedom of speech for Chinese Internet users .
I share the concern of my fellow Members regarding the treatment of Liu Xiaobo and other Chinese prisoners of conscience , and I hope that the Council and Commission will take up Xiaobo 's case at the next summit meeting between the EU and China .
The agreements being negotiated right now should make it quite clear that the future development of commercial relations with China will be tied more effectively to political dialogue and a respect for human rights .
( DE ) Mr President , we have talked about various different things as regards what would be the right way to go about talking to China and putting it under pressure , because clearly , very little makes much of an impression on this country .
Mrs De Keyser said that , for this reason , her group had withdrawn its signature .
I do not think that that is the right way forwards .
As the EU , which has enshrined human rights in the Charter of Fundamental Rights and in the Treaty of Lisbon , we of all people should keep on pointing out violations of fundamental human rights .
There are no other options available to us at the moment .
When we think of something better , I will be there straight away to give it my support .
However , it is not only about Liu Xiaobo ; it is also about Gao Zhisheng , who has disappeared and , from what we now hear , has allegedly committed suicide .
Everyone assumes that he has probably been killed in one terrible way or another .
That is not acceptable .
In connection with the Olympic Games , we discovered that if we go to China and make contact there , absolutely nothing changes with regard to the human rights situation .
We all hoped that it would , but it did not work .
Therefore , we should not let up with our urgent appeals .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , the EU has clearly expressed its deep concern at the disproportionate sentence against the prominent human rights defender Liu Xiaobo of 11 years ' imprisonment for his role as the author of Charter 08 , a blueprint for democratic and rights-based reform in China , and for publishing a number of essays relating to human rights issues on the Internet .
We attach great importance to freedom of thought and expression : cornerstones , as we are all aware , of our democratic system .
The verdict against Mr Liu is entirely incompatible with the right to freedom of expression enshrined in the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , to which China is a signatory .
We are also attached , by the way , to the protection of the right to sexual expression and orientation , as mentioned by Mrs Trüpel .
The EU attempted to observe the trial , and we deeply regret that our observers were barred from the courtroom .
The details of the trial , which we have nevertheless been able to learn , indicate clearly that Mr Liu was not afforded the opportunity to present a proper defence and that he did not receive a fair trial .
The EU will continue to call on the Chinese Government to unconditionally release Mr Liu and to end the harassment and detention of other signatories of Charter 2008 .
Our overall policy towards China is one of constructive engagement in the framework of our strategic partnership .
On several occasions in the past , we have welcomed China 's progress with regard to social and economic rights , as well as the recent launch of China 's human rights action plan , but , on the other hand , there are extremely serious concerns with regard to civil and political rights and a number of recent developments , such as those that the honourable Members of this House have raised in the draft resolution .
The EU 's commitment to human rights is conveyed during our regular political contacts and , in particular , during our human rights dialogue with the Chinese authorities .
The last session , as you are aware , was on 20 November last year in Beijing .
The strength of our relationship allows us to discuss those matters frankly .
Last year , at the 12th EU-China Summit in Nanjing , human rights were raised , both during the discussions and in the press conference .
Mrs Vergiat and Mrs Korhola touched upon the cyber attacks against Google .
The Commission thinks that this is another worrisome development in the framework of freedom of expression in China .
We are obviously monitoring the situation closely .
We understand that there are ongoing consultations between the company and the Chinese authorities .
We will remain vigilant in case similar attacks target EU companies .
Let me reassure this House that we will continue to raise those issues , including at the highest level , recalling the international human rights obligations of the People 's Republic of China .
We also recall the Chinese constitutional guarantees on freedom of expression .
We all share the goal of a more open , transparent China , adhering to international standards on human rights and working together to address global challenges .
To achieve this , we must continue to work on the development of our strategic partnership .
I would like to react to a question from Mrs De Keyser .
Regarding the execution of the British citizen , Akmal Shaikh , the European Union has condemned his execution in the strongest possible terms .
It deeply regrets the fact that China did not heed repeated calls by the European Union and one of its Member States for the death sentenced passed against Mr Shaikh to be commuted .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12.00 .
Written statements ( Rule 149 )
The right to life , the right of free expression and thought form the bedrock of European integration and our world vision .
When one of our partners , in this instance , China , repeatedly violates these rights , we are obliged to respond .
However , we must not do it based on the ' shame and blame ' model , and accuse China and ignore the differences in culture and civilisation which separate us .
This resolution relating to the violation of human rights in China , particularly in the case of Liu Xiaobo , is proof of a simplistic approach to the issues which Chinese society is facing .
We certainly did not adopt our position in the face of the principle of the inviolability of human rights underlying the resolution , which we wholeheartedly subscribe to .
It was , in fact , about the way in which it was conveyed .
In order to achieve the results we want , we need to maintain an atmosphere devoid of conflict between ourselves and China .
This is the only way in which we can contribute to China 's development towards a society with a deep attachment to the importance of respect for human rights .
in writing . - ' Don 't be evil ' is the well-known motto of Google .
There has been criticism regarding their policy in China over the years , questioning the motto .
Human rights groups have accused Google of helping the Chinese Government in repressing its citizens and particularly human rights activists .
Apparently , Google will be less evil in the future .
Their decision to start to operate an unfiltered search engine in China deserves the warmest congratulations .
By announcing the change in their China policy , Google risks profits from the biggest Internet market in the world and potentially abandons almost 400 million users .
In this particular case , Google has proved that a big multinational company can really stick to its ethics policy .
Having its founders still aboard directing the company , Google has every chance of reflecting its core values and beliefs in its every action in the future .
And , if Google continues to prosper , it will prove that there is no inherent conflict between making money and acting in a sustainable and humane way .
There have been recurring violations of human rights in China , and we cannot omit to condemn them .
The fact that the EU is one of China 's main economic partners increases our responsibility to condemn all actions that violate the rights of any citizen , especially those who defend freedom of expression and human rights in this country .
It is crucial that the People 's Republic of China respects and honours the commitments it made before the Human Rights Council .
The larger a country is geographically , and the more independent it is economically , the more difficult it is to demand the observance of human rights by this country .
I find it unacceptable that in its relations with China , the European Union keeps putting economic interests first .
At almost every meeting at higher diplomatic levels , all we are able to do is to give a shy reminder of the issue of violations of human rights in this country .
In Europe , unfortunately , we have had plenty of negative experiences with the practices of Communist regimes with respect to suppression of human rights .
I am therefore convinced that the real number of violations of human rights is much higher than our information leads us to believe .
For this reason , there is an urgent need for us to be able to make China respect human rights even at the cost of economic and political sacrifice .
Otherwise , the developments in China may have an unfavourable impact on the overall developments in the political situation in Asia with subsequent impacts on the overall global economy and politics .
I voted in favour of the resolution condemning violations of human rights , because we must not tolerate or consent to their being broken , either as people or as citizens .
Conduct which is harmful to people , their freedom and rights , which were defined many years ago , is contrary to the foundations on which Western democracies are built .
The dialogue which was begun between the European Union and China in 2000 has not brought the expected effects .
We should , therefore , ask ourselves if we have done everything we could have done , and if the answer is ' no ' , we should apply the provisions of resolutions on the effectiveness of economic cooperation .
Human rights should become the basis for dialogue between the Union and China , and the interests of people should stand above economic interests .
The arrest and sentencing of peace campaigner and human rights activist Liu Xiaobo , who has called for greater democracy in China , is a clear signal that our current measures are not effective .
Therefore , it is worth taking other steps , apart from resolutions , which will make possible greater respect for what Liu Xiaobo is fighting for , as well as thousands of Chinese people and many other people around the world .
Thirty years ago reforms were begun in China which showed the world that something was changing , that it may do something for the benefit of society .
We expect the same today . We want , today , to have a partner which respects principles which , for us , are fundamental .
3 .
Philippines
The next item is the debate on six motions for resolution concerning the Philippines .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the series of killings being carried out throughout the world for political , religious and other reasons is now sadly an everyday reality , but I am astounded by the cruelty with which 57 people were murdered whilst queuing at a political meeting to support a presidential candidate in the Philippines .
This was a cold-blooded massacre carried out by an armed group in the name of a revolution of which it is difficult to make any sense .
Moreover , this mass killing is not an isolated incident in this country where , in some regions , such as in the Mindanao region , armed uprisings - including those motivated by religion - have been taking place for years .
Apart from duly expressing our condolences regarding these bloody events , I believe that we must offer our strong support to the Philippine Government so as to establish how Europe may be of use in resolving the serious armed conflicts and opposition which are bathing this unfortunate country in blood .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the massacre on 23 November of last year in the Province of Maguindanao in the Philippines was a black day for human rights and a barbaric act of terrorism .
Fifty seven people were killed , women were raped , people were injured - they convey a bloody message .
As a journalist , it struck me , in particular , that there were 30 journalists among those killed .
According to the renowned International Crisis Group , in no other case on record have more journalists ever been murdered at one time .
For this reason , it is appropriate for the European Parliament to make a clear statement , as we are doing today in this draft resolution .
However , as the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) , we request that the present text be toned down in three places through a split vote , because we ought to support the Philippine Government in its fight against terrorism and violence and therefore dispense with overly accusatory remarks directed at the government .
Therefore , on behalf of the PPE Group , I request a separate vote on recital F. This accuses the Philippines of showing all the signs of a non-functional legal system .
In paragraph 2 , we would like to delete the insinuation about what are referred to as initial delays in the investigation .
Finally , in paragraph 6 , it is claimed that some missing persons are locked away in Philippine prisons .
This , too , is currently an unproven insinuation and should , in our opinion , be deleted .
author . - Mr President , this horrendous crime in Maguindanao is undoubtedly deserving of our strongest condemnation .
It reveals the extent to which lawlessness has taken root in some parts of the Philippines .
There are many reasons for this depressing development : the dispersed nature of the islands of the Philippines archipelago , the weak central government , corruption , poverty and an ongoing Islamist terrorist insurgency supported by al-Qaeda in the south .
This crime , apparently politically motivated , therefore must be seen in its wider social and historical context .
We should not disregard the efforts that the Philippine Government has made to develop a more democratic political culture in the past 25 years following the fall of the kleptocratic dictator Ferdinand Marcos .
Nor should we underestimate the existentialist threat posed by the terrorists of Abu Sayyaf and how they are destabilising the whole of the society that makes up the Philippine state .
Constructive engagement and targeted assistance offer the best chance of helping the Philippines , a country which shares our common values in many ways , in order to enable them to embed the rule of law in central and in local government .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , last November , I had the opportunity to welcome Mrs Edita Burgos , the mother of Jonas Burgos , to the European Parliament .
This young Filipino was abducted by armed men in a very busy shopping centre in Manila on 28 April 2007 .
Since that day , neither his family nor his loved ones have had any news of him .
Jonas Burgos is one of hundreds of people who have disappeared or been killed in the Philippines .
Murders are committed with total impunity , and the perpetrators are very rarely brought to justice .
Looking ahead to the May 2010 elections , we are fearful of an increase in crime and of abductions of all those who are opposed to the government in power .
As such , we condemn the Maguindanao massacre of 23 December last , and we hope that light will be shed on the murder and torture suffered by the Ismael Mangudadatu convoy .
Mr President , little more than two decades ago , the Philippines excited a great sense of hope around the world when they set off a democratic wave in Asia .
This led us to harbour hopes for human rights in that area , and an increase in employees ' rights , students ' rights , the rights of the people and electoral and democratic normality in those countries .
Now that the world 's attention is directed elsewhere , we cannot leave the democratic situation in the Philippines to deteriorate .
Over the last few years , there have been some very disturbing instances of corruption and , in particular , violence and harassment directed at the opposition during the elections .
The most disturbing event , and the subject of our resolution , was the Maguindanao massacre , the assassination of 46 people who had been following the electoral convoy of the opposition candidate Mr Mangudadatu .
They were allegedly slaughtered by a group linked to the dominant clan in the province of Maguindanao , the Ampatuan clan .
Among other aspects , I would like to draw attention to the fact that 30 journalists were assassinated in this massacre .
This makes it the greatest massacre of journalists in world history .
Apparently , the House itself is distracted from what we are discussing here , which is a shame , but we cannot allow the world 's distraction to let the Philippines slip into a situation where it goes from being the best example of democracy to being known as the worst , a mere two and a half decades down the line .
This massacre needs to be investigated and there needs to be a demand for President Gloria Arroyo , who belongs to the Ampatuan clan , to conduct the investigations through to their conclusion , as a matter of urgency .
It is also important for the Philippines to know that Europe is alert and carefully watching developments in the country .
Mr President , the reason for this urgency is the brutal murder of 57 people , who were accompanying a politician on her way to register as a candidate in the elections for the position of provincial governor .
The perpetrators belong to a local militia and some local police officers were involved .
This brutal attack is an extreme example of the menacing rise in politically-motivated extrajudicial executions and the forced disappearance of people that has been going on for years without these serious crimes ever being investigated .
The government has not shown any discernible will to take decisive steps to counter this development .
Out of hundreds of cases , only two were investigated and not one senior official has been prosecuted in relation to these .
In 2008 , the UN Special Rapporteur on Extrajudicial Executions wrote that ' These killings have eliminated civil society leaders , including human rights defenders , trade unionists and land reform advocates , intimidated a vast number of civil society actors , and narrowed the country 's political discourse . '
This is the climate in which the Philippines is preparing for the elections in May .
There is a danger of there being further political murders .
It is therefore of the utmost urgency that the Philippine Government should take effective measures to put a stop to this .
I would like to propose an oral amendment .
Paragraph 6 states : ' to release all disappeared persons who are still in captivity ' .
We would like to replace this with : ' to make every effort to ensure that all who have been abducted are safely returned to their families . '
on behalf of the S & D Group . - ( LT ) If a Central European citizen were asked what is happening in the Philippines , he probably would not be able to answer and would say that there is nothing about it on television , so things are probably calm there .
However , political murders , clan warfare , people being buried alive , chainsaw massacres , a state of war - this is everyday life in the Philippines .
Quite recently , 57 people were murdered , half of them journalists .
That is the biggest ever death toll among journalists in the world .
We call on the government , we demand that it immediately stop such occurrences , disband the private militias and finally put an end to impunity .
This is particularly important during the upcoming elections .
( PL ) Mr President , presidential and local government elections are planned in the Philippines for 10 May .
Now is the time to do everything to ensure they are fair elections .
First of all , it is necessary to establish who was responsible for the murder , in November , of 57 journalists , family members and co-workers of Ismael Mangudadatu , a candidate for governor in the province of Mindanao .
So far , local law enforcement agencies have not shown any determination in finding the perpetrators of this massacre .
So many mistakes have been made in the investigation that it almost authorises the use of force in politics .
The Philippine Government must , at last , face up to the people from the criminal world who have used the opportunity of recent election campaigns to make so many politically-motivated kidnappings and have now murdered over 100 candidates .
In addition , the Philippines should take steps to make efficient use of means available under the EU-Philippine Justice Support Programme , which has been established to strengthen the judicial system and build civil society .
The elections in May will , therefore , not only be a check of the efficiency of the Philippine authorities , but also of the effectiveness of our aid instruments .
( ES ) Very briefly , I would simply like to say that we are in a new year , with a new Treaty , but with the same bad habits as before .
We still miss the presence of the Council in this type of debate on urgent matters , and we also continue to miss this interinstitutional dialogue that should enable us to respond to this type of case .
In the specific case of the Philippines , I must point out once again that , although this situation does not have the impact of others , such as Haiti , the fact that in the last decade , almost 1 000 people have disappeared or died means that there is a structural problem that requires structural measures .
We cannot always be acting based on headlines .
We need to act based on problems , and the fact that currently , the main people affected are human rights defenders and journalists means not only that we cannot pass over these situations in silence , but also that we need to act forcefully in response to them .
( PL ) Mr President , defence of human rights is the trademark of the European Union .
I greatly regret that this trademark is not important to the Spanish Presidency , and that there are no representatives of the Council here at the moment .
This is a very disturbing and downright scandalous situation .
We are talking about human rights , we want to defend them , but there is no one here from the Council , and no representatives of the country which is leading the European Union for the next six months .
This is , truly , an absolutely unacceptable situation .
I will be very brief , because we want to vote .
The Philippines is a country with a Christian tradition going back to a culture which is , in part , European .
In that country , especially , human rights should be respected , because they are often not respected in that continent .
We must talk openly about this and show solidarity with all those who suffer discrimination in the Philippines .
It is the role of the European Parliament to speak on this matter .
Member of the Commission . - Mr President , I am representing the High Commissioner and I am representing the Commission .
The massacre in Maguindanao on the island of Mindanao on 23 November last year in which 57 people were killed has highlighted long-standing human rights issues in the Philippines related to the disappearance or unexplained killing of citizens and the effective impunity for the perpetrators in the past .
On this occasion , the government has acted swiftly and has taken decisive action to prosecute the perpetrators .
That is very welcome .
It is important to break the culture of impunity about such killings and to put an end to them .
The government has taken some important steps in strengthening human rights .
The current administration of President Arroyo has abolished the death penalty and with ASEAN , has advocated including human rights provisions in the recently adopted ASEAN Charter .
An objective still to be achieved is ending the 40-year-old conflict with Muslim rebels in Mindanao on the basis of a peace deal that is fair to all sides .
There appears to be renewed progress , and hopes have risen for agreement later this year .
It should be noted that the massacre in Maguindanao took place between political families - all Muslim by the way - and that , as such , it was not related to intercommunal conflicts .
The EU has a well-established dialogue with the government of the Philippines where both sides discuss a wide range of issues , including human rights .
We are also negotiating a PCA with the Philippines which will include important human rights commitments .
We actively support the government in its efforts to improve respect for human rights .
In agreement with the government , we have launched an ' EU-Philippines Justice Assistance Mission ' .
This is a very timely action aimed at capacity-building for the Philippines judicial authorities , including police and military personnel , to help them investigate cases of extrajudicial killings and to prosecute those guilty of murder .
We shall also put in place a monitoring system to develop confidence .
EPJUST has an initial duration of 18 months and is funded under the Instrument for Stability , but can be extended .
Furthermore , we have ongoing projects at local level to promote respect for human rights .
These include monitoring of the implementation of international commitments , actions to support the ratification of the Rome Statute of the ICC and voter education .
The EU is also helping in the Mindanao peace process for the moment , mainly through support for social services and confidence-building activities , but we stand ready to do more if the process advances .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place next .
I would like to remind Mrs Lochbihler to table her oral amendment at the correct time , during the vote .
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law
Announcement by the President : see Minutes
Calendar of part-sessions : see Minutes
Approval of the minutes of the previous sitting : see Minutes
1 .
Recent attacks on religious minorities in Egypt and in Malaysia ( vote )
2 .
Human Rights violations in China , notably the case of Liu Xiaobo ( vote )
3 .
Philippines ( vote )
author . - Mr President , we would like to replace the sentence in paragraph 6 which reads : ' to release all disappeared who are still in captivity ' .
Instead we would like to introduce : ' to make every effort to ensure that all who have been abducted are safety returned to their families ' .
4 .
European Strategy for the Danube Region ( vote )
( The second part was rejected )
Voting time
Explanations of vote
Oral explanations of vote
( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the resolution on the European Strategy for the Danube Region , because I think the European Union needs such regional strategies .
I am convinced that implementation of such strategies can have a very positive influence on regional development and , as a consequence , can influence the lives of the region 's residents and improve their quality of life .
For surely it is the residents of the European Union who are the objective of our action - of Parliament 's and the European Union 's action .
This is why I voted in favour of adopting the resolution .
( DE ) Mr President , I welcome the Danube Strategy as something that is profoundly European .
It connects a founder Member of the EU , namely Germany , with the two most recent Members , Bulgaria and Romania .
It also connects the next candidate country , Croatia , with a country that is striving for candidate status , namely Serbia .
I am pleased that the intention is to also include the Czech Republic , Montenegro and a few others which , historically and geographically , belong to this group , although they are not directly situated on the Danube .
However , I would ask that Bavaria not be neglected in all this .
If it was independent , Bavaria would be the second largest state on the Danube after Romania .
Bavaria has a particular interest in the Danube Strategy .
I am therefore grateful and pleased that we are now pressing forward with this strategy .
Mr President , we see once again how the European Union elevates appearance over substance , how it elevates motive over outcome .
We have just voted through a series of resolutions condemning human rights abuses in China .
What , though , is the European Union doing in the real world ?
We are isolating Taiwan ; we have agreed in principle to sell weapons to the Communist regime in Beijing ; and we are collaborating with it to create a rival to the American system of GPS , which President Chirac refers to as ' technological imperialism ' .
See how hypocrisy has been elevated into a governing principle !
We bleat about human rights , and then we funnel money to Hamas .
We refuse to deal with the anti-Castro dissidents in Cuba , we disregard democracy within our own borders when referendums go the wrong way , but we convince ourselves that we are still the good guys because - look at the text of our resolution on human rights !
We are now going to have the extraordinary spectacle of sending Baroness Ashton as our foreign representative to Iran and Cuba and these places to tell them that their democracy is inadequate , when she has never once in her entire career subjected herself to the ballot box , or invited her fellow countrymen to vote for or against her .
I shall finish , if I may , by congratulating the good people of Massachusetts for taking a stand against excessive taxation and excessive government .
It was the people of Massachusetts who began the revolution in order to get away from the idea that taxes could be levied without popular consent .
We need such a revolution again here in Europe .
( PL ) Mr President , I want to express my satisfaction at the adoption by the European Parliament of the resolution on attacks on Christian minorities .
Members of the European Parliament must not remain silent in the face of attacks on Christian minorities around the world , because this matter concerns the foundations and roots of the nations of the European Union .
For our voice to sound credible , today we should have adopted two amendments put forward by the European Conservatives and Reformists Group to distance ourselves from the ruling of the European Court of Human Rights on crosses .
I regret this did not happen , because we must remember the fundamental role which Christianity has played in forming Europe 's historical and cultural identity , and promote and protect these values in the world as well as inside the European Union .
Mr Piotrowski , I allowed you to speak even though you did not have the right to do so , because explanations of vote are admissible only on the Strategy for the Danube Region and not on emergency resolutions .
However , you have spoken now ; therefore , for future reference , I will state that there shall be no explanations of vote on emergency resolutions .
Therefore , I will also state , for the benefit of the speakers who have registered , that explanations of vote may refer only to the European Strategy for the Danube Region .
Oral explanations of vote
Motion for a resolution
( PL ) Mr President , I , too , would like to speak about the discrimination experienced by Christians in Africa and Asia , but I am going to speak , of course , about our strategy on an extremely important matter .
Let us remember that the Danube is the second longest river in Europe , after the Volga .
The Danube flows through 10 European states , and as many as 17 states lie within the Danube river basin .
This is , of course , a question of a certain responsibility , a certain challenge , for the European Union , because , in addition , some of these countries are currently affected by the very severe crisis .
I am also talking about Member States of the European Union .
The European Union is showing a certain solidarity in this way .
I hope it will also be like this in other cases .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of the resolution on the Danube Strategy .
Why ? - because it shows that the European Union is open to specific regions , to regions which have a feature in common like , for example , a long river flowing through them .
I would also like to express my satisfaction that the amendments which were put forward by the European Conservatives and Reformists Group were not accepted .
This has made our resolution clearer .
I would like this resolution to be followed by a focus on other characteristic regions , too , including perhaps the Odra Corridor .
Written explanations of vote
I welcome the European Council 's conclusions of 18-19 June 2009 in which it asks the European Commission to draw up a European strategy for the Danube Region by 2011 .
I am voting in favour of the motion for a resolution presented here .
The Danube Region is facing several challenges , and a strategy for this region will improve connections and communications systems , preserve the environment and encourage growth , job creation and security .
It is important that the Commission makes the most of the operational experience that it acquired with the strategy for the Baltic Sea , and that its strategy is based on the determination of the governments and citizens of the Member States and the regions to overcome immediate common challenges .
It is also important to bring this strategy into line with the EU 2020 Strategy and the Commission report entitled ' Regions 2020 ' , to tackle the major challenges that Europe is currently facing , such as globalisation , demographic trends , climate change and energy use and supply .
I would also urge Parliament to develop a process of reflection on the future of the European Cohesion Policy and to devise new possible strategies for other regions in order for them to adapt to the changes and pressures of a global world .
I think that the importance of reinforcing a European Union strategy for the Danube Region will facilitate the EU 's external action in its immediate neighbourhood , highlighting its potential role in helping bring stability to the regions of south-eastern and eastern Europe through implementing specific projects supporting the economic and social development of these regions .
The fact that Member States bordering the Danube have assumed responsibility for promoting at EU level the proposal for creating this strategy for the Danube Region confirms their ability to make a specific contribution to promoting major initiatives capable of ensuring the continuation of the European integration process .
I voted in favour of the European Parliament joint resolution on the Danube , proposing that a European strategy be drawn up for this region as a matter of the utmost urgency .
This strategy will give a considerable boost to inter-regional cooperation and will have the following objectives : the development and modernisation of river transport on the Rhine / Meuse-Main-Danube waterway , as well as road and rail transport in the Danube Region ; the development and efficient use of renewable energy resources with a view to cutting carbon emissions and increasing energy security ; the protection of the environment through implementing projects intended to restore and protect the ecosystems in the region ; efficient absorption of EU funds and the attraction of investments , the promotion of tourism , all of which feature in the EU 2020 strategy .
This strategy will have a beneficial impact on Romania , particularly on the country 's connections with European transport networks , the protection of the Delta 's national heritage , as well as the socio-economic development of the localities in the Danube basin and in other areas .
I firmly believe that the full development of the European Union can only come about if there are adequate development policies for all EU regions which respect their differences , needs and specific features .
I consider that territorial cohesion means creating different strategies for the different regions , fostering sustainable development within a context of respect for the environment and economic exploitation of its potential .
I am aware that macro-regional strategies are aimed at promoting balanced regional development within the EU , using existing resources .
Last but not least , I recognise the strategic , territorial , environmental and cultural importance of the Danube in Central Europe .
For all of these reasons , I am voting in favour of this motion for a resolution for an EU strategy for the Danube Region .
This resolution backs a strategy for the Danube Region with a coherent , territory-based approach for this important river , and enables the sustained and integrated development of a region that stretches over 14 European countries .
The proposed strategy will allow a coordinated and integrated policy which can achieve synergetic effects , promote cohesion and foster economic growth and competitiveness , all while protecting the environment .
The objectives to be achieved and harmonised include modernising the ports , improving the navigability of the river ( with freight corridors , interconnections and intermodality with the North Sea ) , improving the quality of the water , protecting the whole Danube Basin and , last but by no means least , protecting the ecosystems that fall within the Natura 2000 Network .
Therefore , the Commission should soon launch a broad consultation process with all countries along the Danube so that the strategy in question is set out by the end of this year and is brought into line with the next multiannual financial framework .
We agree with the creation of a strategy for the Danube Region , based on an earlier consultation and cooperation between the countries and regions that are located along its course .
Such a strategy will promote economic and social cohesion in those regions and promote territorial cohesion without jeopardising any of them .
The strategy calls for improvements to the ecological status of the Danube , along with the development of a comprehensive plan for conserving and restoring the natural stocks .
Furthermore , it proves to be a positive strategy in the proposal for improving the Danube 's multicultural environment , cultural dialogue and protecting its cultural and historical heritage .
As stated in the report , we believe that implementation of this strategy must not impinge on the responsibilities of regional and local government , being based instead on cooperation between the countries and areas within this region .
in writing . - ( PL ) The strategy for the Danube Region which we have prepared , and which we have voted on today , makes it possible to promote regional and cross-border cooperation .
The Danube river basin unites as many as 10 European countries at present - Germany , Austria , Slovakia , Hungary , Croatia , Serbia , Bulgaria , Romania , Moldova and Ukraine , of which most are Member States of the European Union or countries aspiring to become Member States .
For this reason , the Danube Region is a significant factor , bringing together different programmes which are part of EU cohesion policy , as well as programmes for candidate countries and countries included in the European Neighbourhood Policy .
What we have adopted today is a certain outline plan of support for the Danube river basin area , but whether the programme remains on paper or the model is filled out with specific content depends on whether additional means are found which will not affect , or will not reduce , the pool designated for the cohesion policy in individual countries .
I hope that a cohesive strategy for the Danube Region will contribute to a rise in prosperity and sustainable and lasting development , and will generate new jobs and security in the region .
I voted in favour of drawing up a development strategy for the Danube , which will allow us to ask the Commission to draft this document as soon as possible , taking into account specific consultations with experts in the field and in the relevant regions , while identifying the financial resources available and including non-EU countries .
This strategy must focus on aspects relating to environmental protection and water quality , economic potential and Trans-European transport networks .
The Resolution on the European Strategy for the Danube Region emphasises the role and importance of broad consultation with local actors , which the European Commission must organise so that citizens ' interests can be represented as faithfully as possible .
Furthermore , the Resolution states that any strategy relating to macro-regions must be incorporated into the cohesion policy , which is the coordinating policy at European Union level .
In addition , an analysis will need to be carried out on the added value created by this strategy in terms of European territorial cohesion .
I think it is necessary to correlate the TEN-T ( Trans-European Network of Transport ) strategy , where the Danube comes under point 18 , with the new territorial and economic development strategy , so that development takes place in a cohesive manner .
Given the strategic importance of the Danube Region due to its location , closer relations between all countries in this region are crucial , particularly for those that do not yet belong to the EU .
This will aid integration in case of future EU enlargement .
Thus , the implementation of all the recommendations approved in this motion for a resolution is crucial if there is to be a proposed EU strategy for the Danube Region by the end of 2010 .
in writing . - ( DE ) The strategy for the Danube Region represents a reasonable model for coordinating EU measures for this contiguous region .
In addition to issues that relate to the river itself , such as improving the water quality and the ecological situation , the programme that the Commission is to draw up could also result in economic and administration-related synergies .
The report that has been tabled put forward some good proposals in this regard and I therefore voted in favour of it .
in writing . - ( PL ) I endorsed the resolution on a European Strategy for the Danube Region .
Territorial cohesion is listed in the Treaty of Lisbon as one of the European Union 's priorities .
Operation of the Strategy for the Danube Region concerns many areas of support , such as social policy , culture and education , environmental protection , infrastructure and lasting economic development .
The very fact of the great impact of the strategy and its solutions in these areas proves that regional strategies should be established and implemented .
The Danube Region needs a strategy , and needs support and our action , because this matter concerns many European countries .
Six of them are EU Member States , and the rest are potential candidates .
The influence of the region is also important for other countries