Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament which was adjourned on Thursday , 31 May 2001 .
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of Thursday 31 May 2001 have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I have a comment about the Minutes .
In the Annex to the Minutes , in the Texts Adopted , on the Méndes de Vigo report - I am just looking for my papers and of course cannot find anything now - it states at one point that a European constitution should be drafted .
This goes back to a proposal for an amendment by Mr Brok .
When I checked with Mr Brok , he confirmed that he did not choose this phrase in his proposal for an amendment .
I would therefore request that the proposals for amendments be used to check again whether this theme has now been included correctly in the final Méndes De Vigo document in all the languages , as we obviously want to avoid any misinterpretations here .
Of course , Mr Ferber , we shall certainly check this .
( The Minutes were approved )
Agenda
Madam President , we found it very difficult indeed to put forward this proposal , especially as we are always keen to cooperate , also with Mrs Hautala , as far as politically possible .
However , we wanted to have enough time for the debate on Gothenburg , which is why we have proposed that the Wuori report be postponed until the mini-session .
This is therefore not a substantive objection ; it is simply a matter of having more time to prepare the important Summit in Gothenburg .
Madam President , I would like to appeal to my colleague Mr Poettering and also everyone else who planned the successful postponement of the reading of my colleague Mr Wuori ' s human rights report .
When this Parliament addresses human rights this is always done at a very theoretical level but when something really could be achieved people want to delay it .

I would request that Mr Poettering consider that my colleague Mr Wuori ' s report not be removed from the agenda and that a short discussion be held nevertheless on the Irish referendum in addition to the discussion we are going to have on the Gothenburg Summit .
It would be a pity if the undeniable high point of the week , my colleague Mr Wuori ' s report , were now suddenly to be taken away .
None of you wanted this last week .
We should perhaps have realised that the Irish referendum would arouse discussion but we did not .
Madam President , my group is prepared to support the postponement of this debate on human rights provided that it takes place during the July part-session and is not postponed indefinitely .
This is because we believe that the debate on this report is very important , but we also believe that there are other events , such as the case of Ireland , which deserve our attention on the eve of the Gothenburg Summit .
I will add one piece of information : if I am not mistaken , the Belgian Prime Minister , Mr Verhofstadt , will appear before this Parliament during the next part-session .
Mr Verhosfstadt , as a senator in the Kingdom of Belgium , was the rapporteur for the committee which studied Belgium ' s responsibilities in the case of Rwanda .
An historic judgment is currently being drafted in Brussels which will define the universal dimension of genocide , which I believe does honour to Belgium and the European Union .
I believe that it is very important that we listen to the Belgian Prime Minister on such a crucial issue .
Thank you , Mr Barón Crespo .
I believe that Mr Poettering agreed to include the report in the agenda of the July part-session .
Mr Poettering presented the request and Mrs Hautala has spoken against it .
A speaker in favour of the request will now take the floor , since Mr Poettering tabled it .
Mr Barón Crespo in its favour , as long as the debate is placed on July ' s agenda .
This means , then , that there are two speakers in favour of postponing the debate .
Madam President , let me make an alternative suggestion .
I propose that my colleague Mr Wuori ' s human rights report remain on the agenda and in addition the Council and the Commission be asked for a statement on the Irish referendum in conjunction with the Gothenburg discussion .
This is completely possible .
We have the whole morning for these two discussions .
Mr Gollnisch will now speak in favour of postponing the report .
Madam President , thank you very much .
Pursuant to Rule 111 , I shall speak in favour of the proposal to amend the agenda in order to take into account the extremely important event which took place in Ireland , which proves to us that the cohesion of smaller nations that refuse to give up their freedom is something which must certainly be taken into account .
I am fully aware of the importance of what Mr Barón Crespo has said and of the presence of our eminent Belgian guest , who is a specialist on human rights in Rwanda , but I also believe that there will be the opportunity at the July session to discuss , in particular , human rights in Belgium and the infamous procedure , which is currently being waged against the Vlaams Blok , which should encourage the Belgian leaders to put their own house in order .
I shall put to the vote the request by the Group of the European People ' s Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats to postpone Mr Wuori ' s report to the July part-session .
( Parliament gave its assent )
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , although we are unable to change the United Nations ' vocabulary , I believe that we are able to use self-discipline .
Now , at Nice , you proclaimed a charter on our behalf , which gave rise to considerable discussions as to whether the expression ' human rights ' should be replaced by ' individual rights ' .
I believe that this is the terminology that we should use in our internal work .
Madam President , I have another question regarding Wednesday .
Due to our ill-judged decision to cancel Friday , for which you cannot be held responsible , we now have to begin at 8.30 a.m. on Wednesday .
We are on the way to a five-day Wednesday !
We might as well start at midnight on Tuesday and work right through until 8.30 a.m.
However , I rise to address the issue of Question Time again .
Question Time with the Commission has been cut yet again .
We always prepare ourselves very carefully so that we put specific questions to specific Commissioners .
This was enforced by this House during a reform of Question Time years ago .
We have thus addressed questions to specific Commissioners , and I see that apart from a single question to Mr Kinnock , everything has been thrown into one enormous pot .
The attendance of all the other Commissioners at this Question Time , which was scheduled six months ago , has been cancelled without substitution .
I would like to know why this is the case .
I have no requests for amendments to Thursday 's agenda .
The order of business is thus established .
Speeches relating to procedure :
Madam President , with your permission , I rise for the first time here in connection with the Rules of Procedure .
I wish to propose that we include a debate on the impact of the referendum in Ireland as a separate agenda item .
In my view , the referendum in Ireland offers this House the unique opportunity to shape democracy and intervene immediately in the current debate , rather than always following after the event .
Nice resulted in too little democracy and failed to create a sound basis for enlargement .
We need more than this now , and with the help of the Irish people , we can re-open this debate .
This is the reason for this motion to amend the agenda : we move that a separate agenda item be included to debate the impact of Nice , our positions as parliamentarians with regard to our own willingness to create more democracy in Europe , and the finality of Europe .
Europe 's citizens would not understand if we shirked this issue at this time .
Mr Martin , I think that your request has just been more than fulfilled by the vote that the House has just taken .
Obviously , although the House has decided to postpone Mr Wuori ' s report until the July part-session , the reason was not , of course , as Mr Poettering has explained perfectly clearly , because Mr Poettering was opposed to Mr Wuori ' s report , but simply so that there would be sufficient time to hold a thorough and in-depth debate .
I therefore believe that this is a satisfactory outcome for you .
Madam President , I would like to support Mr Martin ' s proposal , for the situation is one of great urgency .
The Foreign Ministers are , of course , meeting today and tomorrow in Luxembourg and will probably decide to press ahead with the ratifications as if there had been no referendum , and the Treaty is now set up in such a way that 15 signatures are required in order to amend it .
Consequently , we should take the initiative to ensure that there is at least pause for thought and that we do not just ride roughshod over the Irish referendum .
The Irish referendum should provide everyone with reason for reflection , bearing in mind the substantial resources employed on the ' yes ' side compared with the few employed on the ' no ' side .
Mr Bonde , I would , in any event , refer you to the Rules of Procedure .
You know that such requests must be submitted at least one hour before the beginning of the sitting and I am absolutely sure that this was not done .
Madam President , my point of order has , perhaps to some extent been pre-empted by the earlier discussion , but following the Irish referendum I should like to ask whether you , in your capacity as President of Parliament , will write to the President of Ireland congratulating the Irish people on their wise and far-sighted decision , which strikes a blow for freedom , independence , self-determination and the nation state .
I wonder whether you will also join me in congratulating our colleague , Dana Rosemary Scallon , on the marvellous role that she played in Ireland in helping to deliver a no vote in the referendum .
Mr Helmer , as you are aware , I sent a message which is not exactly along the lines that you suggested , but which expresses what I believe to be the opinion of the majority of the House .
Madam President , I should like to say that it is a decision made by the Irish people , whether we like it or not , and I do not particularly like it .
I want to say to the Eurosceptics in this House and throughout Europe that , whether they like it or not , that decision was made in good faith .
At the same time it ill-behoves those anti-Europeans to dance on the grave of the Eastern European nations that are so anxious to join the European Union and to join us in this House .
The Irish people are a generous people .
We have accepted great support from the European Union since we joined it and we are prepared to give back a great deal of what we received .
Confusion , however , was spread at a great rate by the fundamentalists of the left , by the fundamentalists of the right , by the cranks in the middle ; and the truth was not properly sold .
Let me say to the Commission and to the others that in future we must make these Treaties simple and comprehensible to the European people ; but do not blame the Irish people for making a truly democratic decision .
We must now reflect on that decision , each and every one of us in this House and throughout the European Union .
It was a decision made in good faith .
Madam President , I canvassed and voted in favour of the Nice referendum in Ireland and was disappointed with the result , but , I hasten to add , I fully accept the democratic decision taken by the electorate in my country .
The will of the Irish people must be respected .
We should not rush into a debate .
It is time for reflection and analysis .
A debate at this time would only suit the many Members in this House who are opposed to giving the eastern and central Europeans the opportunity to share in the economic growth we are enjoying in the European Union .
Clarification is undoubtedly necessary .
Let there be no ambiguity : the Irish people are a generous people .
They have a social conscience and favour enlargement .
This matter will be resolved within Ireland ; we do not need any interference from outside , from Members of this House , whether they are for it or against it .
The Irish people will resolve their own problems .
Any future debate here should follow the debate in our own country .
Madam President , my point also concerns the Irish referendum .
It has been eloquently made by more experienced Members than myself and so , in the interests of not detaining the House , I shall withdraw it .
Mr President , following up on Mr Helmer 's point on the Irish Referendum , you may recall another event last week , in the UK .
Mr Helmer 's party campaigned on the principle of keeping the pound against the euro .
Now we all know that the British people soundly rejected his party on that policy .
Will he now join me in voting to go with the euro ?
Madam President , one thing that makes my heart very glad is to hear the last unreconstructed Tory of the seventeenth century agree at last that freedom is a good thing for Ireland .
( Laughter and applause ) I extend the hand of friendship to Roger .
I welcome his conversion .
I say to him - because he does not have a great understanding of history - that historically , a ' Tory ' means somebody who is hunted : ' tóraidhe ' , a hunted one .
I am beginning to think that Roger and those of his political party are feeling a little bit that way since last weekend .
The tóraidhe were Anglo-Irish people who were expelled from their land on account of their religion .
They refused to go and were loyal to the king .
I hope that Roger is enlightened now .
I certainly hope that we have bridged the gap between us .
Edmund Burke , a great British parliamentarian , said : " All that is necessary for evil to triumph is that good people do nothing " .
Evil triumphed last weekend , not in the person of those people who went out and mistakenly voted for the wrong side , but of those who told them lies and deceived them .
They are the people who cadged money from abroad in the interests of breaking up the solidarity of the people of Europe and spent it to tell lies to the Irish people , while the Irish government - and , unfortunately , the opposition - were so complacent that we thought everybody would trust us .
I want the people of this House to know that every major newspaper supported a ' yes ' for eastern Europe .
I want this House to know that a large number of the people who voted ' no ' believed that they were doing no damage to the interests of the eastern European countries .
I have one disagreement with my colleagues Mr Andrews and Mr Gallagher about the generosity and special merits of the people of Ireland .
I believe we are different .
We have a slightly different culture and a very different history .
Yet we are the same as everybody else here .
We have good people and bad people .
We accept democracy nevertheless , because it is the only way .
As the Jacobites said after the Battle of the Boyne , " Change kings and we will fight you over again " , and I believe we will win the next time .
Thank you , Mr McCartin .
I think that Mr Helmer has the right to respond to the first part of your point of order .
I shall therefore give him the floor once again .
Madam President , I would like to take this opportunity of thanking my friend and colleague Mr McCartin for his lesson in history .
However , primarily I want to respond to Mr Miller who made a point about the British election and about the euro .
As he knows perfectly well , but is apparently seeking to hide , the Conservative Party 's position on the euro was supported by between 65 % and 70 % of the British people .
It was the one key issue where the public were definitely and clearly on our side .
I would remind Mr Miller that his Prime Minister has just sacked the pro-euro foreign minister Robin Cook and replaced him with the much less pro-euro , indeed some have called him a Eurosceptic , Mr Jack Straw .
So put that one in your pipe and smoke it !
Madam President , I rise on a point of order concerning my friend Roger Helmer .
We share the honour of being representatives for the East Midlands - information I give to this House more in shame than in anger .
Mr McCartin pointed out quite rightly that Mr Helmer had no understanding of history .
In the interests of accuracy : Mr Helmer has no understanding of politics , of statistics , of literature , of courtesy towards a fellow Member State of the European Union - and I could go on for a considerable amount of time .
( Laughter and applause )
Madam President , allow me a final remark on Ireland .
Is it not strange that those Members of Parliament who speak most about national independence are the same ones who lead massive foreign intervention in elections in other countries ?
I look forward to asking them on Wednesday what it is they want .
Do they want to weaken Ireland the same way they weakened Denmark ten years ago ?
I warn against that .
Madam President , following on from the last comment , it is obvious that the Irish made their decision in a very democratic way , as did , alas , the British people , because they voted in this wonderful Labour government .
But as we are trying to change what the Irish said in their referendum , maybe we should look at the British vote .
Surely this House would have wanted to see a Conservative government returned , and on the basis of fact and realistic policy , people would have wanted to vote Conservative on Thursday last .
That is the result that we would all have liked .
My fellow Danish MEP , Mr Haarder , decided to speak in a language other than his own .
I intend to speak in our common language .
I believe that it is very important that we here in Parliament seek to bring about a debate in which we show respect for the decision that was made in Ireland .
Although the participation rate was low , I think it is worth remembering that it was no lower than it was in many places in the European Parliamentary elections at which we were elected .
The participation rate in Ireland corresponds very well to the participation rate in elections to the European Parliament .
I would like to say to the Irish people that of course it is up to them to work out how we move forward .
However , I cannot fail to recommend the Danish model .
In complete contrast to my good fellow Member , Mr Haarder , I would gladly recommend the Danish model .
I believe that it is the way forward for this cooperation and that it would bring somewhat greater flexibility and somewhat more latitude into it .
This latitude could also provide room for that diversity which will become part of the experience of all of us when enlargement becomes a success , which hopefully will happen very soon .
Madam President , I should like to say that I do not entirely agree with my Danish fellow Member , Mr Haarder , in his attack on Jens-Peter Bonde , who was the campaign leader in Ireland .
In fact , I would like to say that there are an incredibly large number of us Danes who are pleased the more he is away from Denmark , because then he is not doing damage there .
However , now that Mr Bonde is advocating openness so much , we should like to know whether the DKK 100 000 that he obtained for the campaign came from opponents or from his former comrades on the central committee or in East Germany .
Madam President , since you have been asked to write to the Irish authorities as a part of the debate on the events in Ireland , I am wondering if we should not also ask you to write to the leader of the British Conservative Party to pass on our condolences at the outcome of the elections , which is mainly due to deep-rooted euroscepticism which is not a good sign .
Madam President , I rise under Rule 174 , the right to petition the European Parliament .
You may be aware of a number of petitions concerning Lloyd 's of London , as well as complaints to the European Commission .
One of the names of Lloyd 's of London received a letter from Lloyd 's criticising him for daring to raise this matter with the Commission , and a rather threatening letter saying that it was a clear breach of the terms of an agreement .
Lloyd 's therefore requested written confirmation within seven days that this citizen would desist from taking any further action in breach of the settlement agreement .
I have written to the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , saying that this not only dealt with complaints but also the right to petition Parliament . The President is looking into the question of complaints to the Commission , but he said clearly this is an issue that Parliament would itself want to address .
I will certainly give you full details of this later but it is such a serious matter that I thought it should be raised in the House now .
Thank you , Mr Perry .
I shall , of course , take note of what you have said .
We have somehow moved onto dealing with the points of order , but we had already established the agenda .
Madam President , Mr Joaquín José Martínez was declared innocent by a jury in Tampa of two murders for which he had previously been condemned to death .
All of us in the European Parliament have many times been deeply involved in the debate on the death penalty .
During that debate , we defined our set of values and our beliefs , and we have also entered into a dialogue with our American friends on many occasions .
We have campaigned at Senate and Congress level in all manner of ways .
This should give us a great sense of satisfaction , and I also hope that you will be prepared to express this on behalf of our Parliament during your visit to the Gothenburg Council this week .
We have in any event noted that , for once , the position of Europe against the death penalty has triumphed over that other set of values .
I hope that the intensification of the debate on that other set of values between Europe and the Americans can lead to increased awareness on the part of the Americans . If one wishes to condemn another person , but ultimately wants to protect one ' s own values , one should not back down from those values , but should defend them instead .
That is why our protest against the death penalty is crucial .
I hope that you , on behalf of the entire Parliament , will once again be prepared to voice this at the Gothenburg Council this week , particularly at a time when President Bush is visiting Europe .
Mr van den Burg , I had already intended to speak at Gothenburg on this issue , along the lines that you have described .
I would like to remind you , however , that the European Parliament ' s Bureau decided that Parliament would co-organise a very important meeting , which will be held on 21 and 22 June , on the world-wide abolition of the death penalty .
We have already been assured that around 30 leaders of the national parliaments , from all continents , will be taking part , and have accepted to come to this meeting .
Madam President , I am sorry , but something seems to have got lost in translation .
My question was very precise .
I wanted to know why , out of the three Commissioners who were scheduled to participate in Question Time with the Commission , two have been cancelled and all the questions addressed specifically to these Commissioners , such as Mrs Schreyer , have been bundled together under ' General Matters ' , where they have no chance of being answered .
That was my question .
Yes , Mr Posselt , I was informed that Question Time has been shortened because the Members of the Commission scheduled to attend have not received enough questions .
Yes , that was why . Your comments have been noted .
Madam President , I would like to come back to a less amusing issue than the exchange which we have heard during the last five minutes .
I wish to ask whether there have been any further developments concerning the application for the removal of Mr Dell 'Utri 's immunity since the last Parliamentary session .
After all , since 8.30 this morning , we have been deprived of the other case , to the great regret of our colleagues in the PPE-DE , so I am told .
I would like to ask you this : since the last Parliamentary session , have you received any documentation from the Spanish authorities concerning the application for the removal of Mr Dell 'Utri 's immunity ?
If so , have you already forwarded this documentation to the committee responsible ?
If not , do you intend - now that a further month has passed since May - to take any initiatives to request the Spanish authorities no longer to block the process initiated by the Spanish judiciary ?
There have been no new developments , Mr Schulz .
The Supreme Court has still not sent us a request through the official channels , namely , via the appropriate Spanish governmental authority .
I do not think that it is the task of the President of the European Parliament to urge the Court to do this or otherwise .
I believe that the President of the Supreme Court is , I would say , old enough to look after himself and able to make up his own mind .
Madam President , I do not fully understand your reply to Mr Schulz , since , according to your reply to my letter of 15 May , you acknowledge that you have received documents from the Spanish Supreme Court relating to the request for the waiver of the immunity of Mr Berlusconi and Mr Dell 'Utri , and that does not square with your reply to Mr Schulz .

This is not the case at all .
The Supreme Court subsequently sent further documents , and they were again sent directly to me .
I really do not understand the need to go back over this subject , as the matter is perfectly straightforward .
The Spanish Minister for Foreign Affairs wrote to inform me of the opinion of the Spanish Council of State , in other words , that it is the task of the governmental authority to submit requests for waivers of immunity .
This is clear .
I cannot really see why there is a need to persist with this , as , in my view , the matter seems to be perfectly clear .
Therefore , until I have received the request sent via the Spanish governmental authorities , I shall not take it into consideration .
In addition to the answer I gave Mr Schulz , I would also like to reiterate that , as you know , a certain number of initiatives have been taken .
We have drafted and drawn up an exhaustive document on all the requests for waivers of parliamentary immunity involving MEPs since Parliament was elected by universal suffrage , as , in fact , requested by Mr Barón Crespo .
This document could not have shown any more clearly that , with the exception of Portugal , all the requests have always been submitted to us by the governmental authorities , again with the exception of Portugal and another case involving Spain , where there is some doubt , in relation to which , the Official Journal stated that the request came from the Spanish Ministry of Justice .
Another initiative that has been taken is that the Conference of Presidents asked the Committee on Constitutional Affairs to draw up a report on the general problems relating to requests for waivers of immunity and to propose amendments to the regulation , if need be .
I think I am right in saying that it is Mr Duff who has been appointed rapporteur and we look forward to the report that Mr Duff will present to us at the Conference of Presidents .
As you see , therefore , we are keeping a close eye on the progress made in this matter .
Madam President , thank you for permitting me to rise again .
I greatly regret the fact that my only opportunity to put a question to you regarding the Dell 'Utri case is at the opening of Parliament during the discussion of the agenda .
As a simple Member of this House , there is no other opportunity to raise this type of issue .
I have been accused on several occasions in this House of only having an interest in this matter due to the Italian election campaign .
The election campaign is now over , and so I would like to come back to the Dell 'Utri case since it has great significance for every Member of this House .
An application for the removal of immunity could be lodged tomorrow against any Member of this Parliament - against me , against Mr Poettering , against Mr Haarder , against Mrs Frahm , against any one of us - and , in order to avoid public speculation , the Member concerned must have the opportunity to make a direct statement about the accusations .
For the last nine months , Mr Dell 'Utri has been denied the opportunity to make a statement on the accusations made against him here .
This is why it could be quite important to tell the Spanish authorities that the way in which the Spanish government deals with applications for the removal of immunity submitted to this House is also a matter of honour in its relations with the European Parliament .
One further point , Madam President : in Europe , where there is a separation of powers , it is accepted that the judiciary can approach the legislature direct .
There is only one Parliament where it is claimed that the executive must have a proviso in such cases , and that is this Parliament .
This is an absurd situation for which I hold you , Mrs Fontaine , entirely responsible .
Mr Schulz , I am sure that Mr Dell ' Utri will listen carefully to your concerns .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia is worsening .
Albanian rebels are dangerously close to the capital , the authorities in northern Greece are preparing to receive refugees and Olympic Airways flights to Skopje have been cancelled .
We all know that the terrorists are from Kosovo , an area under NATO control , which alone is responsible for what is happening in the FYROM .
At the same time , both ÍÁÔÏ and the European Union are preventing the government of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia from taking basic measures to protect the country and the people , while agreeing to talk to the terrorists and the government on equal terms .
Yet the Greek government has proposed a plan which , rather than disarming the terrorists , allows them to depart in safety , requires the European Union and the USA to be directly involved in the negotiations and prepares the ground for military intervention .
We urgently need to take account of the peoples ' struggle in order to put a stop to foreign intervention and so that NATO forces can leave and these nations can resolve their differences peacefully and without any foreign interests being brought to bear .
Thank you , Mr Alyssandrakis .
I would like to remind you that , as you know , the President of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia will be coming to address Parliament on Wednesday morning .
His visit will , naturally , be brought up at Gothenburg and , as you would expect , I shall also be referring to this in my speech .
I would like to bring up two points .
First of all , the death penalty .
The death penalty equates to murder , and even if a murderer is killed under the death penalty , this is still murder .
We are opposed to the execution of Timothy McVeigh , even though he is a murderer .
This should be pointed out .
There is no good or bad use of the death penalty .
Even the lowest of the low do not deserve to be killed in this way .
I would like the European Parliament to adopt this position .
My next point refers to the debate on Ireland . I hope that it will be organised differently and that it will not take place merely at the level of the group leaders .
We saw earlier that a slightly more spontaneous organisation gave rise to much more lively debate than when the debates are organised by the heads and leaders of the groups .
I hope that we shall draw the appropriate lesson from what happened five minutes ago .
Sexual exploitation of children - Trafficking in human beings
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
report ( A5-0206 / 2001 ) by Mrs Karamanou , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Framework Decision on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography [ COM ( 2000 ) 854 - C5-0043 / 2001 - 2001 / 0025 ( CNS ) ]
report ( A5-0183 / 2001 ) by Mrs Klamt , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Framework Decision on combating trafficking in human beings [ COM ( 2000 ) 854 - C5-0042 / 2001 - 2001 / 0024 ( CNS ) ] .
, rapporteur . ( EL ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , may I start by offering my personal congratulations to Commissioner Vitorino on taking such an important legislative initiative and thank the Swedish Presidency for its support , which will ensure that the Council takes a decision as quickly as possible .
The sexual exploitation of children and child pornography are , of course , a scandal in a modern civilisation and it is unthinkable that criminal networks and customers should go unpunished and avoid criminal prosecution by taking advantage of the lack of cooperation between countries and shortcomings in our criminal legislation .
It is high time we addressed appalling cases such as the Dutroux case in Belgium , where the inadequate legal framework means that it is still impossible to prove the constituent elements of the crime and hold the trial which has been pending for the last four years , which is why the Union initiative to stamp out this vile crime and create a common reference framework to strengthen judicial and police cooperation between the Member States and bring these criminal syndicates to justice is all the more important .
The Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs has worked through the Commission framework proposal line by line and has adopted a series of proposals and amendments which enhance and strengthen the initial legislative text , such as the definition of child pornography , which has been expanded considerably so as to include the various permutations of this crime and ensure there are none which escape prosecution , taking account of course of new technological developments .
As far as the sexual exploitation of children is concerned , given the composite nature of the crime and the international networks involved , we have included types of criminal conduct over and above those proposed by the Commission , such as facilitating , buying , selling or transporting a child within or outside national borders .
Another important point which we have added apportions responsibility both to the natural persons who care for the child , such as parents , teachers etc. and to legal persons , including distribution companies and Internet service providers , which are now required to design protective mechanisms to prevent new technologies from being used to facilitate the exploitation of children .
As far as crimes relating to child pornography are concerned , we have proposed that importing , exporting , purchasing , selling and advertising , and not just producing , distributing and disseminating child pornography should be criminal offences .
What is also extremely important is that we have made the possession of pornographic material a criminal offence , subject of course to safety valves which ensure that people who receive material unwittingly , for example by electronic or conventional mail , need not fear prosecution .
As far as punishment is concerned , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms accepted the proposal by the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities for a stricter criminal framework for crimes inflicted on children under the age of 16 , rather than the age of 10 proposed by the Commission , with stricter punishment of at least 10 years rather than the 8 years proposed by the Commission .
We have also proposed that , in addition to condemnation , any movable or immovable assets which are proceeds from these offences be traced , seized and confiscated and that punishment be accompanied by psychiatric treatment .
This is another innovation which we have proposed .
As the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms , we have also made an important contribution on the procedural side by making provision for criminals to be extradited , so that the phenomenon of sexual tourism can be stamped out , and amending legislation on double criminality , so that offenders cannot escape to countries in which crimes against children are punished more leniently .
We also propose compensation for victims and a host of measures to protect victims during investigations and hearings and of course afterwards , especially for disabled children .
Finally , we propose setting up registers of persons who have committed the offence , in collaboration with Europol , Interpol and national police forces , and involving candidate countries in action to combat the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
I am well aware that promoting legislative arrangements is not the only solution .
We need to focus on the causes of the mental and physical abuse and exploitation of children , such as poverty , the lack of fundamental structures to protect children , the lack of control and prevention mechanisms , the breakdown of the family and , of course , the fact that such a market - a market of huge supply and demand - exists and , unfortunately , operates within the European Union , discrediting our European civilisation .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it is estimated that as many as 700 000 women and children are trafficked every year .
From the Central and Eastern European states alone , 120 000 women and children are lured to the European Union every year .
These are the figures on which the Commission proceeds .
The fates of the individuals profiled in the media , but also the statistics highlight the urgent need to combat human trafficking through a coordinated and cooperative approach .
Combating trafficking in human beings is a very difficult task in itself .
However , it is made more difficult through the highly diverse provisions of criminal law at national level .
Definitions and penalties differ widely , and in many Member States , ' human trafficking ' does not even exist as an offence in the criminal code .
The European Union has therefore worked for a number of years to develop a comprehensive strategy to combat this trade in human beings .
With the Palermo protocol , which was signed at the end of 2000 , agreement was reached on specific common definitions for the first time .
The Commission proposal now aims to lay down , by means of a Framework Decision , minimum rules concerning the constituent elements of criminal acts , and minimum penalties .
The imposition of a minimum jail sentence of six years , or ten years where the circumstances make the crime more serious , should be sufficient to bring trafficking in human beings within the scope of other instruments already adopted for the purposes of enhancing police and judicial cooperation in the European Union against organised crime .
In my opinion , the Commission 's proposal should be viewed positively .
I especially welcome the fact that it encompasses not only the criminal act of trafficking in human beings for the purpose of sexual exploitation , but also trafficking in human beings for labour exploitation .
The Commission also makes a clear distinction between trafficking in human beings , and facilitation of unauthorised entry of migrants , commonly termed ' smuggling ' .
While the smuggling of human beings is viewed as an offence against the state , trafficking in human beings is a crime against persons .
The Commission 's draft and the various amendments proposed by the participating committees will enable us to achieve a uniform Europe-wide definition of trafficking in human beings , set minimum penalties , and give priority to protecting the victims as well as punishing the perpetrators .
I should like to thank all the members of the participating committees for their cooperation in achieving this result .
Finally , I should like to comment on the requested referral of my report back to the Committee on Home Affairs .
At the start of deliberations , such a tight schedule was imposed on the European Parliament by the Council 's timetable that tremendous efforts were required to ensure that the substantive work on the draft could take place with the necessary thoroughness and level of detail .
The Members involved expressed their willingness to undertake this task and performed outstanding work , to which I wish to pay tribute .
However , the Council - without listening to the people 's elected representatives - has already progressed so far in its deliberations that the signing of the political agreements is merely a formality .
Clearly , the Council has no interest in the decision of the only institution in the European Union with direct democratic legitimation .
A revised draft of the Framework Decision with the Council 's radical amendments is already available - but not to the European Parliament .
In my view , the referral of the report back to the Committee on Home Affairs is urgently required to ensure that this new version , and the Council 's unacceptable approach , can be discussed .
I would therefore ask you all to vote for the referral back to the Committee on Home Affairs during tomorrow 's vote .
In the second half of my speech , I would like to comment on Mrs Karamanou 's report on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography in the Member States , which calls for a Europe-wide coordinated approach .
Organised crime - and it is primarily organised crime which is involved here - is not restricted to specific regions or states .
Cross-border cooperation between criminals is well-established , especially as regards the sexual exploitation of children .
The European Union therefore urgently requires measures in order to facilitate the cross-border prosecution of these appalling crimes .
I am delighted that agreement on this Framework Decision has been achieved across party lines , thus pointing the right way forward towards common definitions of criminal acts , the harmonisation of criminal law , and improving the situation of victims .
This also includes extending the definition of child pornography to include the new media and discussing the issue of extraterritorial jurisdiction .
In my view , victim protection is especially important .
Crimes against children , in their most despicable form , that is , sexual exploitation , should no longer be dealt with solely with a view to punishing the perpetrators .
The children concerned will suffer for the rest of their lives as a result of the harm inflicted on them by adults .
They should therefore be our priority , and they deserve our greatest possible support .
During criminal proceedings , their primary role , in legal terms , is to act as witnesses , but we should not forget that they are victims first and foremost .
With the support of the European Parliament , all these points should be included in the draft before us .
I am convinced that the report by Mrs Karamanou , whom I would like to thank for our good cooperation , will be supported by a substantial majority in this House , enabling us to take a further significant step in combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
Mr President , I too should like to congratulate Mrs Karamanou on this report .
As draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Culture , I should also like say a word of thanks for the cross-party cooperation I had in that committee on this most important issue .
We must tackle the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography across the EU .
Whatever anyone thinks of subsidiarity , for something as important as this we have to make sure we have common rules , particularly because of the Internet and the free movement of people across the EU countries .
I know that there are several child pornographers who have set up business in one EU country because if they are caught they know they will get a lesser sentence in that country .
We must make sure that we stamp that out .
I am very pleased that much of the opinion I drafted has been accepted by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , particularly the section on penalties and ensuring that we have the same penalties across the EU .
I thought the Commission was wrong to bring in tougher penalties for the exploitation of children under 10 .
I worked very hard in my committee to make sure we also set tougher penalties for those who commit offences against children under 16 .
I also wanted to bring in children with learning difficulties .
I talked a lot with some of the organisations working in this field and they said that disabled children are twice as likely to be abused as any other children .
It is important that we protect children with learning disabilities , whose mental age is often much lower than their physical age .
The question of definitions is , of course , going to be difficult and we have to work on that .
We had great difficulty in the Committee on Culture , as we have had across the board .
But we must make sure that photographs of naked children are caught in that net .
We see what happened with the Wonderland Club , where individuals had to provide 10,000 photographs of naked children in order to get into that Wonderland Club .
I want to say very briefly that we have to clamp down on sex tourism and make sure that nationals from Member States can be prosecuted if they commit a crime in third countries .
Mr President , Commissioner , in my view , our debate today concerns a highly sensitive issue : the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
Both are on the increase . For this reason , we must engage in closer cross-border cooperation , work far more intensively to prevent such crimes through information and awareness-raising , and try to include society in this process to a greater extent .
Of course , it is also important to amend our criminal law and ensure that it functions on a cross-border basis , as trafficking , abuse and child pornography operate across borders as well .
We believe that various measures are necessary for this purpose . The penalty , that is , the term of imprisonment , should be increased from a minimum of eight to a minimum of 10 years , with stiffer penalties being imposed when the victim is under 16 , rather than under 10 .
I cannot understand what is meant by the reference to child abuse involving ' particular ruthlessness ' .
Any form of child abuse is ruthless ! There is no such thing as ' mild ' child abuse .
Anything that happens to a child in this context is ruthless .
That is why I believe that the age limit should be raised to a minimum of 16 , as the harm suffered by children is just as profound whether they are under 10 , or 11 , 12 or 13 years of age .
I am therefore in favour of raising the age limit to 16 .
Victim protection for these children must also be safeguarded , not only for the children but also for the families and the witnesses .
Legal assistance and psychological support are very important .
Children should also be given the opportunity to make their witness statements on video , which is unfortunately not the practice in every country .
Sadly , there is not enough time for further comments .
However , I would like to thank everyone who supports the work in this field .
Mr President , when the Commission submitted its proposal , it said that its ambition was to go further than the Palermo protocol did .
I am very disappointed at the fact that , instead , the Palermo protocol has been watered down .
I believe that it is incredibly important that we really keep separate the definitions of refugees , which after all have nothing to do with this particular matter , and of the exploitation of labour and of sexual exploitation .
We now know that roughly 90 % of the victims of trafficking in human beings , whom these matters concern , are women whom it is intended to exploit sexually .
I realise that the Commission and the Council , just like ourselves here in Parliament , may find it difficult to cooperate on these matters , particularly in view of the fact that there is incredible variation in national legislation .
In Sweden , we have had active legislation for eighteen months now that also addresses the buying of sexual services , that is , the clients have been criminalised .
We have thus focused on the man instead of stigmatising the person who is prostituting herself .
This is to be seen in the light of the fact that a number of the Member States are now legalising brothels and thus also pimping .
What this does is preserve stereotypical images of women ' s and men ' s sexuality and sexual needs .
As far as Mrs Karamanou ' s report is concerned , I would like to state that if Amendment Nos 3 , 5 , 6 and 13 are carried , then my group will not be able to vote in favour of the report .
The definitions of child pornography that we adopted in the women ' s committee are much better .
In Mrs Karamanou ' s report , the definitions are so wide that there is a risk that we will have to cover up the Maneken Pis in the future .
Mr President , Commissioner , many countries in the European Union , and particularly my own , Portugal , are experiencing cases of the exploitation of people from Eastern Europe who , having come to find a better lifestyle , fall victims to organised gangs which exploit their suffering .
The exploitation of human beings , men , women and children , is an abhorrent phenomenon , whatever its purpose may be : for clandestine work , to work in the sex industry or for any other reason .
We therefore have a responsibility to fight this scourge and to create the necessary legislative instruments .
This was our aim and we tried to reach a common definition of the elements of these types of crime , and attempted to establish minimum thresholds for the maximum penalties that could be imposed . We also sought to define rules of competence and of police and judicial cooperation .
I wish to congratulate Mrs Klamt , Mrs Karamanou and Commissioner Vitorino for the commitment they have demonstrated in these matters . Issues related to the trafficking of human beings and the sexual exploitation of children must indeed be one of the main priorities of the European Union ' s political agenda .
We must step up the fight against the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography by improving the measures adopted by the joint action of February 1997 and by ensuring that there can be no safe havens for the perpetrators of sex crimes against children when we suspect that they may have committed a crime in a country other than their own .
We must also complement the work that has already been undertaken by the Union and the international Community . Amongst these , we should highlight the fact that , in December 2000 , the United Nations protocol on trafficking in human beings was adopted under the Convention on transnational organised crime , which was signed by 81 States .
Our Parliament ' s approval of these proposals would constitute a clear demonstration of our will to wage an effective fight against these unacceptable violations of people ' s dignity and human rights .
I am delighted that the Council has reached agreement on the basic principles of the proposal for a Framework Decision on the fight against trafficking in human beings , but I am sorry that it could not reach consensus on the level of criminal sanctions .
Mr President , firstly allow me to congratulate the two rapporteurs , Mrs Karamanou and Mrs Klamt , and also in particular to congratulate the Commission on its proposal .
For years this Parliament has wanted clear and common legislation for combating the trafficking and exploitation of human beings , which are odious and widespread crimes .
We do not wish to be aware of it , but we only have to look at what is happening with prostitution in our countries to see what is going on .
The European Commission ' s proposal to define the crime in a common manner and harmonise penalties is truly a step forward in the direction proposed by the United Nations in its Palermo protocol , and I am pleased to accept it .
However , having debated Mrs Gradin ' s proposals in this House , which of course have been very useful to some others , such as the United States , which already have federal legislation to combat human trafficking , I must express my great concern at the Council ' s attitude at its last meeting .
There was no agreement on this proposal , whereas we saw remnants of legislation proposed by France , on the entry of people without documentation , go ahead , when it is clear that the trafficking and exploitation of human beings is one of the gravest of crimes . It is much more serious than the issue dealt with at the Council meeting .
I do not understand it , and nor does anybody else , because no explanation has been given .
I would like to ask , Mr President , whether tomorrow at the vote the Council will come to explain its position to us , what it intends to do , and whether it intends to introduce any amendments and , if so , which ones . Or , have we instead reached a point of such harmony between the institutions of this Union that , without my realising it , there is only one executive , the Commission , and only one legislative body , Parliament , and that the Council has no part to play .
Mr President , the only way to catch international and organised criminals is for our police , prosecutors and judges to work together .
Anyone who opposes such moves must be prepared to justify traffickers and paedophiles getting off scot-free .
I congratulate Mrs Klamt and Mrs Karamanou , but on some points my group is not entirely happy .
The first problem , in both reports , is the tendency to be too prescriptive and interfering in the detail of Member States ' criminal justice systems .
The first example is penalties .
It is quite right to harmonise the maximum sentences , so that wherever a criminal flees , he risks the same penalty - no hiding place .
But it is not appropriate either to stipulate that the penalty in connection with trafficking must be a prison sentence or to lay down minimum penalties .
I do not always agree with the Council , but I agree with its view that approximation of the criminal law of the Member States could be necessary for certain specific types of offences , but when approximating criminal law the specificity of the national systems has to be taken into account .
Both reports are also too prescriptive on the treatment of victims and witnesses , and fail to take differing national arrangements into account .
Turning to the definition of child pornography in the Karamanou report , my group has problems with the definition which includes creating the impression that the person depicted is a child .
This will give rise to endless argument and is not a sound basis for a legal definition .
It is better to target pornography which exploits real children , not pretend ones .
I also wish to draw attention to Amendment No 38 from the ELDR , which would make access to sex offenders ' registers subject to data protection rules .
Lastly my group agrees with the referral back to committee of Mrs Klamt 's report , for the reasons she gave .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council has been too quick off the mark .
What the Council finds important , we deem inadequate and one-sided .
What I do welcome in the Council ' s report is the commitment towards the Member States .
That is a step forward , but the reception and protection of victims is still being afforded too little importance .
More guarantees must be offered in this connection .
That is why , and certainly for humanitarian reasons , we should not so much aim for interim , but permanent , residence permits .
Where are the bottlenecks ?
Mafia groups have capitalised on the globalisation of the economy faster than anyone else .
A second bottleneck is the rift between rich and poor regions ; and then there is poverty .
It is thus not only beneficial to launch dissuasion campaigns against the trafficking in human beings in all those countries of origin , poverty must also be addressed .
We should also develop immigration policy and open up the borders more , even if this is at the expense of the countries involved .
Despite this , most European countries still prefer a repressive approach in practice , which first and foremost targets the victims themselves .
The heavyweights involved in the trafficking in human beings , the entrepreneurs of the trafficking in human beings , and those with vested interests usually remain out of harm ' s way , and the current policy on fighting the traffickers has virtually no humanitarian dimension to speak of .
And where is development cooperation in this respect ?
The approach must be international , but the Mafias have international , well-oiled networks at their disposal , with fiscal and financial experts and telecommunication and computer experts of the highest calibre .
Those fighting these practices still need to content themselves with proportionately few people , little expertise and few tools , loopholes in legislation and still a distressing lack of actual international cooperation , despite Europol etc .
A structural approach is thus necessary , both in terms of criminal law and international migration policy .
I should also like to say : do not overlook corruption .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to come back to the issue of the European Union ' s signing of the additional Palermo protocol , entitled the ' Protocol to Prevent , Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons , Especially Women and Children ' .
The important part , of course , is ' especially women and children ' and today we have Amendment No 1 in the report by Mrs Klamt , whom I would like to thank , which expressly states that we want to combat trafficking in human beings for the purpose of sexual exploitation and labour exploitation .
In my view , it is not sufficient to mention trafficking in human beings alone .
The clarification regarding women and children was proposed at Palermo .
In my view , it is absolutely fair for this amendment to propose that the purpose of sexual exploitation should be mentioned before the purpose of labour exploitation , as we know only too well that trafficking primarily involves women and children , so let us avoid hypocrisy .
If we had placed labour exploitation before sexual exploitation , we know that we would not really be facing up to the facts .
That is why , in my view , Amendment No 1 is crucial and I hope that the Commission will take this on board .
A point which I also believe to be important is that trafficking should be treated as a crime and not a misdemeanour .
Everything relating to sexual exploitation is a crime and not simply a misdemeanour - we should acknowledge this , highlight this , be aware of this and should not play on this vagueness .
I would like to thank the various committees and rapporteurs for having insisted on this .
I would like to add that , out of all the amendments , I believe that the additions relating to the status of the victims are extremely important .
These additions affect at least three points .
First of all , there is the fact that we can talk about incitement , which can be one of the punishable causes .
That means incitement and not just fraud .
As you can see , there is a small difference between the two concepts .
There is also the state of vulnerability of the victims , in addition to the pressures that we could easily pinpoint ; the vulnerability of the victims is something I see as equally important .
My last point , which was stressed by the Council of Europe in its recommendation published in May 2000 , is that the argument of consent was not relevant . This is another important point .
The consent or non-consent of the victim is not always relevant - in fact , it is far from being relevant .
I believe that we must be vigilant on this issue , and we should recognise that consent should not be used as an argument for those involved in trafficking to escape punishment .
That is why I believe that these reports are crucial .
I would like to thank the two rapporteurs .
I would like to say , unlike some Members , that I hope there will be , of course , more cooperation between Member States .
How can we combat trafficking if there is no cooperation between Member States ?
Does this proposal allow for sufficient cooperation ?
Not exactly , and personally I would hope for more , so that we can identify all the victims , male and female , because men can , of course , also be victims of trafficking and sexual exploitation .
Both men and women can be victims , but the main victims are women , especially , and children .
I would like to reiterate that one of the amendments proposes we recognise that adulthood begins at the age of 18 , and that those under the age of 18 must be considered to be children .
Mr President , this is a very important report and a significant step forward .
Like the rest of the House , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on her report .
It is through working together at EU and international level that we can do something important for children , who must be protected from such crimes .
I fully endorse the proposal that depictions of persons under the age of 18 involved in sexually explicit conduct constitute the sexual exploitation of children .
In my view this is compatible with the Convention of the Rights of the Child .
The sexual exploitation of children , including child pornography on the Internet , in any form , is abhorrent .
As the Commission points out , tens of thousands of human beings - especially women and children - are trafficked for exploitative purposes each year .
None of our countries can claim to be free of these threats .
None of our countries can halt these acts on their own .
None of our countries should hesitate about signing up to closer cooperation in the fight against such crimes .
The European Union has not been ignoring this worrying phenomenon .
We have spoken about it many times in Parliament : in 1997 the Council joint action to combat trafficking in human beings and the sexual exploitation of children paved the way for Member States to review the relevant criminal law so as to ensure the criminalisation of certain behaviours and to encourage judicial cooperation .
The new proposal brings us a further step forward by hopefully ensuring that each Member State will take the necessary measures to guarantee that facilitating or in any way profiting from child prostitution or child pornography is penalised , including by terms of imprisonment of not less than four years .
Furthermore , we are calling on each Member State to ensure that convictions for such crimes are subject to the tracing , seizure and confiscation of all moveable and immovable assets representing the proceeds of those crimes .
Finally , I fully support the compromise agreement reached by our committee on Article 5 ( 4 ) .
The maximum penalty of not less than eight years should apply in the case of child pornography and aiding and abetting such crimes , including the exploitation of children , when they involve a child below the age of 16 .
Mr President , it is dreadful that we should once again have to pore over these excrescences of human nature .
International criminal organisations are ruthless and act with extreme effrontery .
That makes it absolutely vital for the EU Member States and the candidate countries to act in close cooperation in order to combat these serious offences against humanity with all lawful means possible .
The rapporteurs , Mrs Karamanou and Mrs Klamt , succeeded in presenting an extremely strong case and managed to table sound amendments .
I sincerely hope that their compassionate proposals can stand the test of legislation . However , I share Mrs Ludford ' s doubts .
I am sure that Commissioner Vitorino would like to expand on this matter .
Hard-nosed criminals can only be tackled successfully by a concerted , equally hard-nosed approach by the authorities .
Any hesitation or weakening in the policy should therefore be firmly nipped in the bud . This is why , in this area in particular , the government carries the sword of justice for a very good reason .
The mere fact that , from Central and Eastern Europe , as Mrs Klamt reminded us , 120 000 women and children are enticed into the European Union annually should make us go red in the face with shame .
We should never have let things get this far .
In addition to punishing the traffickers , we also need better control systems in order to liberate those annual 120 000 victims from their slavery .
Moreover , we should be greatly concerned about the demise of fundamental values and standards at the margin of our society .
That is why I am grateful that we in the European Parliament are fighting these excrescences with considerable unanimity .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , during the debate on this report , we can examine this phenomenon , examples of which seem to exist at the highest levels in some Member States , that is , at least , according to public fears .
The explosion of child pornography has its causes , and it is these that must be examined first of all .
I can distinguish two causes , the first of which is the explosion of pornography itself and the second is the unfortunate trend of treating children and childhood with contempt .
The explosion of pornography is in itself due to a loss of moral standards and the domination of the spirit of enjoyment , the fruits of which are bitter .
We are now counting the cost of this ' unrestrained pursuit of pleasure ' , a rule by which even some of the Members of this Parliament lived during the 1960s .
This reckless pursuit of pleasure inevitably leads to the quest for extreme sensations , and also to the pursuit of violence and sadism , and it is a result of the way these things have become increasingly commonplace in newspapers , films and television .
This is the first factor .
The second factor is contempt towards children .
This contempt certainly begins at a very early stage , since we are proud about presenting the fact , as if it is a right and as if it represents progress , that we are sending unborn children to their deaths in clinics , at the same time as we discuss the poor treatment to which some children are subjected .
We should not be surprised that there is no rhyme or reason to this aspect of our civilisation .
The ' right to a child ' outside the family unit , outside normal sexual relations , the ' right to adoption ' for example , by homosexuals , are claims which are also gaining ground , including in the conservative press , and all this cannot pass without having some impact .
However , these issues do not lead us to condemn the excellent provisions in the report that has been submitted .
I would , nevertheless , like to speak briefly about the Council ' s legal instruments .
Why have a Framework Decision rather than a directive , when it is a question of amending several , very important points , several provisions of the penal code in each of the Member States ?
I would also like to bring up the method which has been used in the report .
The Commission text was written in sufficiently general terms so that all types of criminality could be included .
We added to them . In some areas , has the wording of the report not been made more cumbersome than is necessary ?
On the other hand , we approve the definition of extreme circumstances such as the use of children under the age of 16 years or children with physical or mental disabilities .
A particular point in the text is raised by Amendment No 26 , which seeks to amend Article 8 ( 3 ) .
Apparently , this amendment applies when a Member State maintains the requirement of double criminality against its nationals who are accused of child pornography .
In such cases , the Member State must , nonetheless , take steps .
What is meant exactly by the term ' requirement of double criminality ' ?
Does this refer to the principle that lawyers understand by its Latin name , the non bis in idem principle ?
If so , it would , in that case , mean the principle of non-double criminality , in other words , the refusal to convict nationals if they are involved in legal proceedings in another Member State .
I believe that we should revise the wording of this point .
The definition of pornography is more extensive in the report than in the original text ; as is the definition of the material used for child pornography or the responsibility of persons that have children in their care .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would , however , give you a warning as regards the Internet .
It is difficult to ask for the impossible .
The Internet itself is no more responsible than the postal services for this criminal material , which can be transmitted by post .
If we ask Internet service providers to carry out checks , which can only be effective if they are comprehensive , would , in my view , bring about the same pernicious effects as if we asked the postal services to check the content of the mail that they deliver .
With these reservations , we support the majority of the report , as well as Interpol ' s integration with Europol .
We hope that , in this way , the report will contribute to eradicating this despicable phenomenon .
Mr President , we must congratulate the authors of the two reports , which are crucial and a credit to Parliament 's work .
The proposed measures , which we shall support , aim to preserve the integrity of those who need us most , namely children .
They represent the future of this world , they are also the most vulnerable and , I regret to say , they have to suffer from the selfishness of adults even before they are born , when they cannot even plead for mercy as they have no voice and no real identity .
We shall support these two reports by voting in favour of the amendments that go further than the Council proposal .
We would particularly like to say that these are crimes for which we should show no complacency , and that these measures must be applied in cases where the children involved are under 16 years of age , which is what we voted for in committee .
In parallel with these provisions , we should combat the genuine , deep-rooted causes of this evil , one of which is the lax attitude of most European nations towards pornography .
Under the pretext of freedom of the press or freedom of the individual , we are allowing a minority to distribute , via films , books , magazines , the minitel system and , increasingly now over the Internet , a vast library of pornographic material , which scorns the dignity of human beings and , quite freely , shamelessly and disrespectfully , stimulates the sexual instinct in an anarchical manner .
Taking pre-emptive action in order to combat this crime is part of a policy that is centred on the family and which encourages proper integration of children within society .
Experience tells us that children who are properly integrated within a family are afforded better protection from the evils of today ' s society , such as drugs , the trafficking of human beings and pornography .
They are also in a better position to resist these evils if they do encounter them .
Mr President , I was in Parliament in the summer of 1995 when the appalling crimes of Mr Dutroux were exposed .
It was as a direct result of the horror expressed in this Parliament at those dreadful crimes that we began on the path we are still moving along now towards improving legislation for the protection of children .
I should like to congratulate both our colleagues on their excellent reports .
I would also like to express my great regret that six years after those heinous crimes were exposed , this man has still not been brought to justice .
That perhaps demonstrates that the extent of the crimes was unbelievable to us at the time and that the law was not adequate to deal with them .
Yet it remains an absolute disgrace that this man has not yet been brought to justice .
I should like to make a few technical remarks about the report .
The strong transnational dimension of the problem requires the establishment of high standards of Community law in relation to child sexual exploitation , standards that also apply to the CEEC countries where the problems are even greater than within the Union .
The age of consent varies between countries : 13 years in Spain and the Netherlands , 17 years in Northern Ireland and in the Republic of Ireland .
So a child abuser can move quite easily between countries where the legislation provides for a lower age of consent .
They can do this purely to avoid criminal sanctions .
This also presents a considerable obstacle to developing common standards and comparative data protection .
Article 5 ( 1 ) of the Commission text proposes that the penalties for abusing a child under the age of 10 years should be more severe .
We reject this because any abuse of children is a criminal offence .
Finally , acquisition and possession of child pornography with the aim of handing it over to the law enforcement authorities should be made an offence .
It is a criminal offence to own this pornography , and very often the people using it are only pretending they are collecting it for the police .
I do not think we can believe that .
Mr President , trafficking in human beings is a serious violation of human rights which is akin to slavery .
It is a form of slavery which , however , mainly affects women , as Mrs Fraisse has already stated .
It is not only about enforced labour , but mainly about the granting of sexual services and forced marriages .
It is therefore to be welcomed that the EU ' s Framework Decision , following the UN ' s Palermo protocol , contains a common definition of trafficking in women which is as broad as possible , thus covering all forms of trafficking in human beings .
However , we do not achieve anything with a common definition on paper if no concrete measures are put in place to trace the perpetrators and accessories , and to offer the victims the necessary legal protection .
What measures ?
First of all , it is necessary for the victims of trafficking in human beings , once they have reported their case , not to run the risk of being evicted from the country prematurely because they are residing there unlawfully .
Actual legal protection and personal support can only be brought about when they obtain an interim residence permit which enables them to take part in their trial .
Secondly , it is necessary for a specific deterrent to be put in place to combat the complicity of officials on duty , such as police and customs officers , since they play a key role , whether they turn a blind eye or effectively fight the trafficking in human beings .
In short , the Framework Decision to fight trafficking in human beings does reflect the political will of the Member States to tackle trafficking in human beings , but it remains to be seen whether this problem is granted sufficient priority in practice on the agenda of both national and European cooperation at judicial and at police level .
I would therefore call for periodic reports from the Council and the Commission to this Parliament , so that we can keep a finger on the pulse and can highlight in good time the need to intensify that policy .
Finally , I should like to comment on Mrs Karamanou ' s report on child pornography .
I remain in doubt as to whether the definition is worded correctly since it is inadequate in the legal detailing and is too broad , and therefore opens the way for a witch-hunt approach .
I am therefore seriously considering abstaining from voting on this matter .
Mr President , we must clamp down on child pornography , for children are being abused in the name of child pornography , and we must therefore commit to a firm no in terms of criminal law and society .
For this purpose , however , we require a well-thought out definition of child pornography which does not compromise the seriousness of the abuse of children and respects the European rights of both victims and suspects .
The very broad definition in Mrs Karamanou ' s report therefore gives my group some cause for concern . Indeed , censoring fantasy is taking things too far in our view .
Virtual child pornography , pornographic texts and misleading images may be products of an unspeakable fantasy , but cannot be equated with the actual abuse of a child .
The accounts of the Marquis de Sade do not strike me as particularly uplifting , but I do not want to impose a legal ban on them via this report either .
Equally , I often dislike violence in books and films , such as Pulp Fiction , but only when fantasy touches reality should criminal law be introduced .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , let me begin by thanking Mrs Klamt and Mrs Karamanou for producing such good reports .
The sexual exploitation of children , child pornography and trafficking in human beings are appalling crimes which are assuming alarming proportions .
Their proliferation is facilitated through globalisation and modern telecommunications technology .
These problems can no longer be resolved through national measures .
The European Union and its Member States must adopt a joint approach in cooperation with the third countries concerned .
As regards the trafficking in human beings , a clear distinction must be made between two areas : sexual abuse , and the exploitation of labour .
At the beginning of the twenty-first century , there are more slaves in the world than were trafficked from Africa in the previous centuries .
The United Nations estimates that worldwide , around 200 million people are exploited as slaves .
Trafficking in human beings is conducted via well-organised criminal and in some cases international networks .
The Framework Decision is an important step towards better cooperation between Member States .
The harmonisation of Member States ' legal provisions will establish a basis for better cooperation between judicial authorities in order to enable Europe to combat this trade in human beings .
The same applies to the Framework Decision on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
All the preventive options must be expanded further .
In order to take effective action against these criminal networks , we need targeted training for the police and law enforcement officers .
These problems must be considered in the accession negotiations with the Central and East European countries .
With regard to the trafficking in human beings , for example , some accession countries have now become countries of origin , transit countries , and even target countries .
On the European Union 's borders , prostitution , sex tourism and the sexual exploitation of children have become a sad reality .
Swift measures are therefore required in these countries to combat crime in these areas and strengthen cooperation with the EU .
Mr President , 140 years ago , slavery was abolished in the USA and Russia .
Now , it has been introduced into Europe .
According to the UN body the IOM , half a million women are lured or forced into Europe every year for a life as sex slaves .
This substantially increased trade is more profitable than drug smuggling and is increasingly often controlled by an organised mafia .
At the same time , every year over a million children are forced into child prostitution and the growing child pornography industry .
These children are increasingly being exploited by tourists and businessmen who , remarkably often , come from Europe .
Despite this grim reality , the penalties for the sexual exploitation of children , for child pornography and for trafficking in women are exceedingly low compared with the penalties for drugs smuggling .
It may perhaps be a matter of two years ' imprisonment compared with 10-15 years for serious drugs crimes .
Few perpetrators are brought before the courts and even fewer are sentenced .
We are today debating an attempt to turn rhetoric and fine words , to which we have in fact been devoting ourselves for many years , into concrete measures .
Our four rapporteurs have carried out excellent work and , on a number of points , go further than the Commission , which moreover I would also compliment .
It is essential to achieve a harmonisation of the legislation and to increase the penalties .
Where the sexual exploitation of children is concerned , our most important demand is that the legislation must encompass all children under 16 years of age , which is entirely in line with the usual definition of children in international conventions .
Setting the limit at 10 years of age may even worsen the situation for children who are just 10 years old , because demand for these children will then increase dramatically .
The lack of legislation applies not just to measures to combat the criminals , but also to the absence of the laws protecting the victims .
There are already many of us who support the call to stop the sexual exploitation of women and children , but more are needed .
We need more men and more governments to support it , and above all we need more practical action .
Mr President , after complimenting Mrs Karamanou and Mrs Klamt on their fine work , I would like to make two comments , one general and the other institutional in nature .
As regards reflections of an institutional nature , it seems to me that cooperation between Parliament and the Commission on this very sensitive issue is making significant , excellent progress .
That is far less the case , though - and here I agree entirely with Mrs Terrón i Cusi - when it comes to the Council .
We are dealing with an extremely sensitive issue , an issue that is of fundamental importance to our society .
It is important for there to be an interinstitutional relationship which can give concrete form to the guidelines so well specified in these two reports .
For the first time since the Charter of Fundamental Rights was adopted at Nice , we have the possibility of converting a policy document into a legal document and implementing Article 24 .
My general comment is that , on such a delicate issue , so well addressed in these reports , we are faced with a society where , increasingly , we see a creed taking root which is very close to a sort of new nihilism .
A whole series of personal and interpersonal relationships have been greatly disturbed .
We imagine that by giving our children everything they ask for , through the benefits of consumerism - I say this as a father - we are giving them some kind of happiness .
We should think carefully about the decisions we take as a European Parliament .
The European Parliament synthesises the tensions present in society .
The issue we are now dealing with , the exploitation of children , which pervades all societies from the most to the least developed , needs to be dealt with through legislation , as we are now doing , but also in general sociological and societal development terms .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I greatly welcome the content of these two reports , and also wish to thank the Commission for its initiatives to combat these appalling crimes : the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
It is right that we should think not only about how to define child pornography and sexual exploitation but also to what extent and where we set the age limits .
It is also right that we should discuss the maximum penalties .
I support the proposals put forward in the report .
However , I should like to draw your attention to a further point - and I am grateful that it has been included in the reports - namely the problem of minimum , rather than just maximum , penalties .
A society 's condemnation of a crime is reflected to a substantial extent in the minimum penalties it applies .
Even today , in many cases of child pornography crimes , the inadequate minimum penalties available mean that a suspended sentence is imposed .
However , child pornography is certainly not a crime where a suspended sentence is appropriate .
I therefore call for this House , through its cooperation on defining adequate minimum sentences , to create conditions which ensure that society genuinely recognises that these crimes are the worst form of harm that can be inflicted on a child .
Together , through these initiatives , we should lay the foundation stones for this awareness within the European Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on behalf of the Commission I congratulate Mrs Karamanou and Mrs Klamt for their excellent reports and thank all those of you who have been raising this very important issue for several years .
I would like to start with Mrs Klamt 's report .
The Commission 's proposals should be viewed in the context of a more comprehensive policy that includes the closer police and judicial cooperation in the fight against organised crime ; the contributions that important Community programmes like STOP and DAPHNE have given to this issue ; and , last but not least , the Forum on the Prevention of Organised Crime recently launched by the Commission , which includes a specific workshop on trafficking in human beings .
However , prevention is only one side of the coin .
Providing victims with assistance and protection is equally important .
I would like to remind you that in March the Council adopted a Framework Decision on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings .
That decision addresses several important issues taken up in some of Parliament 's amendments .
Furthermore , I would like to reiterate that the Commission will be submitting a proposal on temporary residence permits for those victims of trafficking prepared to cooperate in investigations against their exploiters .
Such an initiative should be autonomous and provide a platform for more structured assistance and protection , by clarifying the status of victims vis-à- vis residence .
Given the circumstances , and bearing in mind the specific nature of the legal instruments under discussion , the Commission shares the underlying aims of several of the amendments put forward by Parliament .
However , we will be unable to accept those that fall within the scope of other Framework Decisions - the Framework Decision on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings , for instance - or those whose detailed nature is incompatible with a specific instrument such as a Framework Decision .
I regret to say that , although I wholly favour the idea of creating a fund to protect the victims , such a fund would run counter to the subsidiarity principle that we need to honour in specific instruments such as Framework Decisions .
Having said that , the Commission accepts most of the amendments to the recitals , including those inserting references to the Charter of Fundamental Rights and to underline the work carried out by Parliament over the years .
The Commission also fully shares the objectives of the amendments on the abuse of vulnerability , on vulnerability and debt bondage , and on vulnerability , physical and mental disabilities and illegal residence .
It can also support the amendments on transportation in inhuman conditions as an aggravated circumstance .
As far as the Klamt report is concerned , I would like to emphasise that the sterling efforts and commitment of the Swedish Presidency have culminated in a basic agreement on several provisions , but sadly , no consensus has been achieved on the severity of sanctions .
The Commission has not , therefore , submitted a revised proposal .
We will await Parliament 's opinions and then incorporate them into our own position .
Let me now turn to Mrs Karamanou 's report .
I would like to praise her approach and to add that , indeed , action should always take practical as well as legal form .
For those actions to succeed it will be vital to harmonise criminal law and criminal regulations relating both to sanctions and to the definitions of child pornography , and child pornography on the Internet in particular .
Here again , we share the objectives of some of the amendments that have been put forward , but we sincerely feel that they come under the provisions of other legal instruments such as the Framework Decisions on the standing of victims in criminal proceedings .
Regarding the amendments concerned with the definition of child pornography and the offence of child pornography , we believe that the definitions decided by the Union should be as much in line as possible with the definitions taken on board by the draft Convention on Cyber Crime drawn up by the Council of Europe .
Coherence between these two instruments is , in my opinion , extremely important .
The Commission would like to highlight its position on two sets of amendments that are particularly difficult from a political point of view .
First I turn to the amendments suggesting that sexual exploitation of persons below the age of 16 years should be regarded as an aggravated offence .
This involves very complicated issues of a legal nature , not least as regards the relation between national law and European Union law - subsidiarity .
Under many Member States ' criminal law , sexual exploitation is an offence when it involves a person below the age of sexual consent , as soon as the occurrence of a sexual act has been established .
This means , in turn , that the amendments setting the age limit for an aggravated offence at 16 will undoubtedly interfere not only with the systematic approaches in the Member States but also with national considerations on the age of consent .
We have no legal title to harmonise the issue of the age of consent to sexual relations .
The Commission cannot therefore agree with the relevant amendments but would be willing to consider an age limit set at a higher level than in the original proposal , that is , changing the age limit from the age of 10 to 12 years .
Secondly , as regards the amendments concerned with jurisdiction and extradition , it should be observed that the articles of the proposal are modelled on provisions reflecting the state of play in regard to specific instruments in this field .
The Commission cannot therefore agree to the suggested amendments .
At the same time , we are willing to consider these issues in a broader context .
However , as regards the extension of the jurisdiction article to habitual residents , the Commission would be prepared to take that amendment on board , as it would all other amendments to the recitals of the proposal .
In conclusion , I sincerely hope that it will be possible to reach a political agreement in the Council as far as sanctions are concerned .
I share the view of those who say that in reality the application of penal law differs in our 15 Member States .
That is true .
We must not , however , give the wrong message to those who traffic in human beings by not having common sanctions at European level .
It would seriously defeat our common aim if we were not capable of agreeing on common sanctions when it comes to trafficking in human beings .
We have already achieved agreement when it comes to counterfeiting the euro , when it comes to money-laundering , or when it comes to smugglers ' and carriers ' liability .
I do not see any justification for not reaching political agreement on common sanctions on trafficking in human beings for purposes of economic exploitation and sexual exploitation .
Animal welfare
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on animal welfare .
Mr President , honourable Members , today ' s debate shows that the European Parliament , the Commission and the Swedish Presidency have a common interest in animal welfare and animal ethics .
It also provides us with the opportunity to exchange thoughts on these important matters .
Man ' s relationship with animals is increasingly a matter of discussion in today ' s society .
During my time as a member of the EU ' s Council of Agriculture Ministers it has been clear that matters concerning animal welfare have come up on the agenda with increasing frequency and taken up increasing amounts of time .
In this respect , the year 1995 is not like the year 2001 .
When we discuss issues concerning animals , however , in recent times these have mostly been concerned with diseased animals and with occurrences within agriculture that have had catastrophic consequences .
The issues concerning the protection of animals dealt with by the Council , primarily concern technical provisions , but I believe that it is high time that we also discussed matters of principle concerning man ' s relationship with animals and how animals are to be treated .
The ethical aspects of livestock farming must guide our decisions in the area of agricultural policy to a greater extent in future .
Ethics is not about labelling things as good or evil , or good or bad ; rather they are a tool to help us as we make difficult choices .
We must dare to ask why animals are regarded merely as products in some contexts and why we allow animals to be treated poorly in certain cases .
When unsatisfactory states of affairs are revealed , we tend to react with demands for stricter provisions , but it is not possible to prevent the cruel treatment of animals through legislation or control measures alone .
How animals are treated is also a matter of people ' s attitudes and values .
At the Council of Ministers in May , I took the initiative for a debate on ethical aspects of livestock farming .
The purpose of the debate was to highlight the matter at a level of principle , starting from the fact that , in the future too , we will have a society in which animals are in the service of humans .
All the Member States felt that the ethical aspects of livestock farming are important .
These must be integrated to a greater extent into future decisions concerning livestock farming .
The Member States pointed out that animals are sentient beings that must be treated well .
Several countries stated that knowledge concerning animals and animals ' needs , as well as training measures for people who deal with animals in their everyday work , are of crucial importance .
My conclusions from the debate included the fact that animals are sentient creatures with an intrinsic value .
They must be treated with respect , and consideration is to be given to their health and welfare .
In my conclusion , I pointed out that the statements made must not just remain fine words ; rather , they commit us to take practical measures in respect of the protection of animals .
The scientific conference , Food Chain 2001 was held in line with the Swedish Presidency ' s emphasis on a holistic view of the food chain .
I think it is important to note one of the conference ' s conclusions in particular . Improved animal welfare which guarantees healthier animals often has crucial economic benefits .
At the informal meeting of ministers in Östersund in April , the EU ' s future agricultural and food policy was discussed .
Here , it was clear that changes must take place .
In their contributions , many of my colleagues highlighted the crisis that agriculture is currently in .
Mad cow disease , foot-and-mouth disease and unacceptable animal transport are just some of the matters that make the need for change clear .
Another of Sweden ' s conferences during its presidency was Ethics and Animal Welfare 2001 , to which Parliament was also invited .
The aim of this conference was to bring together representatives of industry , animal welfare organisations and public authorities and to conduct a discussion on animal welfare and ethics .
The participants agreed that the exchange of experiences and an open , continuous dialogue are a prerequisite for improvements in the area of animal welfare .
For example , it is important that provisions that are adopted are also implemented in practice .
I am pleased that discussions on animal welfare and animal ethics have been conducted in so many contexts , but in order for improvements to animal welfare to come about , tighter provisions are also needed in many areas .
During the period of Sweden ' s Presidency , the Council has dealt with several proposals in the area of animal welfare .
One of these dossiers is the Commission ' s report on animal welfare during transport .
The report was presented and discussed at the Council of Ministers in January .
One of the report ' s conclusions is that every Member State must earmark further resources for the implementation of existing provisions .
It is also important for the Commission to come up with concrete proposals for improvements in the legislation .
The Presidency is also working to bring about adoption of a resolution on animal transport at the Council of Ministers in June , that is , next week .
The purpose is to ask the Commission to provide suggestions for provisions to improve animal transport .
Naturally , the Presidency needs great support if such a resolution is to be decided on .
In my opinion , the most urgent matter is for the provisions that already exist to really be implemented in the Member States , but that is still not happening .
This is shown , in particular , by film and video footage that has been recorded in various countries , often in secret .
Such footage clearly shows that provisions are not being implemented and are also a source of disgust on the part of our citizens .
It is important to implement the common decisions that we have taken in each country .
It is also important that the periods for which animals are transported are shortened and that export subsidies for live animals are abolished .
Fortunately enough , during the latter part of this spring the Commission submitted a proposal within this area .
The proposal concerns improved ventilation in the road vehicles used for transporting animals for over eight hours .
The Presidency has initiated discussion of the proposal in the Council ' s working party .
The Presidency has worked very intensively on the Commission ' s proposal for a new directive on the welfare of pigs .
As you already know , the proposal involves improved conditions for pigs .
We very much appreciate the rapporteur ' s , Mr Busk ' s , work on this proposal .
I believe it is very important that we in the Council are able to arrive at a decision on improvements in pig keeping as quickly as possible .
This of course requires an opinion from the European Parliament .
I therefore hope for your understanding of our desire for a fast procedure .
This should allow a clear signal to be given by both the European Parliament and the Council that we see animal welfare as a priority matter .
Detailed provisions are important , but they must be based on a fundamental position concerning our responsibility for animals .
Within the EU , we have decided that we must take animals ' needs into consideration .
This is clear , for example , from the Treaty of Amsterdam , which establishes that animals are sentient beings and that animal welfare is to be taken into consideration in the drawing up and implementation of the Community ' s policies .
Naturally , we will continue to show consideration for animals because our legislation demands it .
Moreover , it is my personal conviction that our human dignity bids us accept our responsibility for animals .
Man is in a unique and special position and therefore also has a moral responsibility to show consideration for animals .
Mr President , I would like to thank the Swedish Presidency for taking the initiative to request this debate .
It is a measure of the importance attached to animal welfare by the Presidency , and by Minister Winberg in particular .
The past several months have seen a sharp rise in interest in animal welfare issues at Community level .
There have been several discussions on the issue in the Agriculture Council and a major conference was also organised in Stockholm late last month , as Mrs Winberg has just told you .
I was pleased to represent the Commission in all these debates and discussions .
Of course , this presidency is not yet over and there will be further opportunities to address animal welfare issues .
This Wednesday I will address Parliament 's intergroup on animal welfare for the second time this year .
In a little over a week there will be a further discussion in the Agriculture Council .
This discussion is intended to lead to a resolution helping to set the future policy agenda .
A cynic might argue that all this discussion amounts to hot air and is camouflage for a lack of real progress .
I am satisfied that this is not the case .
These discussions are genuinely worthwhile .
It is important to build up a solid consensus on the need for more action on animal welfare .
We should not forget that until very recently animal welfare was a neglected issue on the Community agenda .
This is changing fast .
Moreover , I am convinced that it will become even more important in the future .
The reason for the higher profile of this issue is not hard to see .
People care deeply about the treatment of animals .
They are increasingly intolerant of mistreatment of animals and insistent that our systems of agricultural production must ensure better treatment of animals .
These sentiments are also feeding into the market .
There is a much greater demand from consumers for information on the conditions in which animals are reared .
The public demand more and better information on products and foodstuffs : how and where they are produced , under what conditions and with what ingredients .
It makes good business sense to respond to these demands .
I recently received on my desk the results of a reputable survey on consumer attitudes towards key animal welfare issues .
The survey results include the interesting information that up to 85 % of consumers are prepared to pay more for food produced in accordance with the highest welfare standards .
Even if these results are not fully reflected by consumers in their shopping behaviour , there is a clear potential for the market to give greater prominence to higher standards as a competitive tool .
These trends will continue to grow and there is no reason why they cannot be accommodated .
We already have a system in the EU for the identification and traceability of each individual cow .
There is clear potential to use this system to provide information on other important factors , such as the breed of the animal concerned and the conditions in which it was reared .
This argument should also be considered in relation to the global dimension of the trade in animals and animal products .
It is essential to share our knowledge on animal welfare with countries outside the European Union and to create a consistent approach towards the issue .
In this context , I was pleased to learn that the World Organisation for Animal Health , the OIE , adopted last week at its general session a five-year work programme that includes animal welfare questions .
This is the first time that a broad-based international forum , like the OIE , has decided to address this question .
The Commission strongly supports this initiative and intends to actively participate in this future development .
This House is , of course , very aware of these concerns .
There is an ever-increasing postbag of letters from the general public and from Members of Parliament on animal welfare issues .
A disproportionate number of written and oral questions to the Commission are also on this subject .
It is our duty and responsibility to reflect on these concerns .
I would like , however , to sound a word of caution on a number of fronts .
There are increasing calls for more Community action on animal welfare , but we should be careful that this does not distract attention from the responsibility of all parties to promote higher standards .
I spoke at length on this in Stockholm recently .
The Commission can ultimately only play a subsidiary role in relation to animal welfare .
Certainly , within our area of competence , we must take our responsibilities very seriously . However , Member States continue to have the most important role to play since animal welfare requirements are adopted as minimum standards in European legislation .
In addition , Member States are responsible for the day-to-day enforcement of Community legislation in this field .
They also have the personnel resources to carry out this role , which the Commission clearly does not have .
A second qualification relates to the role of farmers and the livestock industry in general .
There is a danger of stigmatising the very large number of people who work in farming by associating them with images of mistreatment of animals .
This is unfair , untrue and counterproductive .
Ultimately , farmers are the persons in closest contact with animals and are the most conscious of their needs and behaviour .
The vast majority clearly treat their animals in a good and humane manner .
We can either choose to work with the farming community on these issues or risk alienating them .
I know where I stand on this : work with the farmers .
Turning to more general issues , I would like to signal some clear Commission orientations .
First , animal welfare questions need to be integrated more fully into food policy .
I reject the argument that animal welfare has nothing to do with food safety .
I insist that it is an issue which should be included in the policy agenda of the European Food Authority .
This applies in particular as regards scientific advice and information , which the authority should provide to the Commission on all matters having a direct or indirect impact on consumer health and safety .
Second , there is the need for further Community actions .
There are a number of important initiatives already before the Council and Parliament , for example the proposal on improved welfare conditions for pigs reared in intensive rearing systems .
This proposal includes provision for the abolition of individual sow stalls , a major and legitimate demand of welfare activists .
The presidency is very anxious to reach final agreement on this proposal .
This , however , requires an opinion from Parliament and I hope that you will be in a position to respond favourably to the request for the urgent adoption of this opinion this week .
That would provide a very positive signal of Parliament 's own commitment to animal welfare .
There is also a proposal for improved humidity and ventilation systems on trucks transporting animals .
The Commission is also awaiting an opinion expected in October from the Scientific Committee on Animal Health and Animal Welfare on densities and travelling times .
This opinion will help shape our future policy on animal transport , which will be discussed in depth in the Agriculture Council later this month .
Third , I intend to continue to focus on the global dimension in the issue of animal welfare and animal products , including the World Trade Organisation .
There is a common misconception that this is a protectionist agenda .
This is unfair .
Europe is progressively implementing higher welfare standards .
We have a duty and a responsibility to press for recognition of these standards both on purely ethical grounds in recognition of the need for the humane treatment of animals and in recognition of the higher costs which these standards entail for producers and consumers in the European Union .
These are legitimate issues which deserve to be discussed on the international stage .
Finally , the Commission will continue to press for improved respect of existing Community legislation .
I repeat again my frustration at the repeated reports from my officials of continued non-respect of Community provisions on animal welfare .
Equally , the single biggest immediate and practical measure to promote animal welfare would be the strict implementation of existing legislation .
This is just a brief outline of a complex and sensitive issue .
Thank you for your attention and I look forward to hearing your views on the issue .
Mr President , Minister , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , when the issue of animal welfare is mentioned , no one in Europe thinks of cats in cages at the airport , no one thinks of horses being transported to the Olympic Games on the other side of the world , and no one thinks of birds in cages on fifth-floor window sills .
Over the years , it has been the transport of livestock in Europe and overseas which has understandably upset the public most of all .
The consumers and the animal rights activists do not understand why there is still a need for it .
In my view , the question is not so much ' why ' but - quite rightly - ' how ' .
How are the animals transported ?
This has been discussed for many years at European level , so it is not a new issue .
Commissioner Byrne , I have been a Member of the European Parliament for 12 years , and we have been discussing this issue throughout these 12 years .
We have already produced vast quantities of papers and resolutions .
Why , then , are we making such slow progress ?
Animal welfare is now given far greater priority , and the focus is no longer solely on costs and competition .
In contrast to earlier debates about animal welfare , the agenda increasingly includes ethical issues as well as technical aspects .
To use a metaphor : we are all broadly in agreement about the destination of our journey , but the path is very rocky .
I say this : through their shopping behaviour , consumers could have made a very significant contribution to setting a new course in the past as well .
Prices were a key factor then , and I would argue that the final prices paid by consumers will be a key factor in future too .
In its report , the Commission emphasises its plans to improve the implementation of existing legislation .
I greatly welcome this statement .
The licensing of transport companies , transport plans and the Member States ' inspection reports must all be coordinated far more effectively , and I completely agree that Community standards should now be introduced for third countries as well .
The definitions of the animals ' fitness for transport , but also vehicle standards , densities , travelling times and rest periods , etc. must all be brought into line with current scientific knowledge to a far greater extent .
I am in favour of animal welfare , and let me assure you that farmers are too .
They have been for decades - in their animal husbandry , breeding and transport .
Mr Byrne , thank you very much for stating this so clearly today .
Let me conclude by saying that what I am opposed to are the different definitions of the animals ' wellbeing .
Given the great many directives in force , this diverges widely in the Member States .
Happy hens in Germany will have to feel different from perky pigs in Holland or contented calves in Denmark .
We cannot have that . It leads to distortions of competition , and I really must oppose it , also in the interests of farmers .
Mr President , we greatly welcome the fact that the issue of animal welfare is being discussed by the Council and the Commission in the European Parliament today .
The Community 's obligation to take full account of animal welfare requirements within the framework of its agricultural policy is anchored in the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The question which now arises in this context is whether this is sufficient for the Community or whether there should be European framework legislation on animal welfare in future .
Sadly , animal welfare is not understood the same way everywhere .
Laws are one thing ; the actual treatment of , and attitude towards , animals are another .
The responsibility for animals as living creatures falls exclusively on humans .
For this reason , it is important to start teaching children how to treat animals responsibly when they are still very young .
Anyone who goes on to handle animals in the course of their work , who farms them or transports them , must have a certificate proving their suitability and skills .
Animal welfare also has an impact on farms ' competitiveness , however .
There will have to be restrictions on livestock farming for economic purposes in future too .
Demands for optimum conditions , which often stem from emotional responses , cannot always be translated directly into practice .
Viable solutions must be devised .
The classification of animals as farm animals , breeding animals and pets is not an arbitrary one , after all .
Economic considerations and global competition ultimately compel us to adopt specific conditions of animal husbandry , thus limiting the scope for truly animal-centred livestock farming .
However , these farming conditions must be shaped in a way which ensures that animals have the maximum scope for natural behaviour .
Political decisions on animal welfare can now be based on comprehensive scientific knowledge of the different species .
The laws on animal welfare should only be developed and improved with the involvement of those concerned .
In a holistic view of animal protection , the animals ' natural behaviour and needs should be compatible with environmental concerns and consumer protection , but also with the expectation of profit .
Our society 's high standards of hygiene must also not be compromised .
After all , more consumer protection ultimately leads to better conditions of animal welfare .
Mr President , the treatment of animals is a question of civilisation .
Pets are cherished , but cattle is often still treated abominably .
Intensive cattle farming has elevated animal abuse to a methodology .
The policy is unilaterally focused on cheap production .
Animals have degenerated massively into commodities you eat or which earn you money , instead of living creatures with an intrinsic value .
It is high time that animals were no longer adapted to suit their environment , but the environment to suit the animals .
Drastic improvements are required in terms of their accommodation .
For example , pigs and calves must be kept in groups and must be given plenty of straw .
The castration of pigs , bobtailing and the cutting of teeth must be banned .
Laying hens must be kept exclusively in spacious , free-range bird houses .
The artificial , fast-track breeding of chicks and turkeys must be discontinued .
Cows must regularly be led to pasture again and geese must from now on be spared torture for the sake of their tastefully prepared livers .
It is sheer madness that pigs are dragged across Europe for the sake of being able to label them ' Parma ' .
Long hauls with live cattle must be abolished .
In my view , four hours , or 250 km , are the maximum .
The inspection of cattle transports must be tightened considerably .
International trade should be conducted in meat and not in live animals .
Proper slaughterhouses must be set up everywhere , so as to restrict transport . Cattle markets must be abolished .
The recent disasters may well be the salvation of future animals , but only if we gain the awareness that animals are more than mere production factors .
Until such time , animals will suffer , and people will suffer from a lack of civilisation .
Mr President , I also welcome the statements from both the Council and the Commission .
I welcome all the statements concerning this issue of the protection of animals and animal welfare .
I would like to thank the Swedish Presidency which , for the first time ever , has succeeded in bringing about a public debate on animal ethics in the Council of Ministers .
This is therefore progress .
Animal ethics is about much more than mere rules .
It is about attitudes and knowledge of animals and about how animals must feel well .
Nonetheless , it is very important that the legislation and rules of both the EU and , especially , the Member States are followed .
On 8 March , the Greens held a conference on animal welfare here in Parliament , at which , I am pleased to say , Margareta Winberg was also present .
At this conference , it emerged that there is no overall supervision whatsoever of the EU ' s animal transport directives , nor any checks on whether they are being observed .
Twenty-four hours a day , seven days a week , animals are being transported the length and breadth of Europe under terrible conditions without anyone intervening .
The provisions that exist on the transport of live animals are well known , for example , the limits on time in transport and requirements of veterinary certificates .
However , there is no functioning supervisory apparatus .
Now we have been given an answer from the Commission to the question that I put .
The Council too has also stated that the transport of live animals must cease ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , there is a well-known saying that well-being is more important than welfare .
This may not always be obvious in the case of people , but in the case of animals , I would say that that is a matter of fact .
Welfare for people can even harm animals ' well-being , particularly if we consider the pursuit of profit .
However , what is more important to us is that animals should also be accepted as God ' s creatures .
Without putting them on a par with people , that means that we should be proper stewards .
Unfortunately , cattle species in particular have been reduced to production factors in our economy and , let us be honest , the consumer is all too happy to benefit from the low prices which this entails .
Legislation on animal welfare is mostly very detailed in certain areas , but lacks a coherent vision .
The enforcement of that legislation is , at the same time , a great cause for concern , and it often amounts to nothing but rules on paper .
In fact , it is telling that , in a totalitarian regime such as China , the concept of animal welfare does not even exist in the language .
We welcome initiatives which considerably restrict the transport of live cattle .
It is really beyond me why slaughter cannot take place prior to transport instead of afterwards .
In that connection , I consider breaks in the journey to be a stopgap .
The maximum period of transport for live animals should make these redundant .
Mr President , if we really take the well-being of animals into account , then it will be obvious that agricultural policy cannot merely be based on economic measures .
Mr President , in the context of the foot-and-mouth crisis , millions of animals , including hundreds of thousands of vaccinated animals , were killed in the EU as a precautionary measure , despite loud protests from farmers , citizens and country people .
This was due to European directives which , in principle , prescribe a slaughter policy without vaccination .
Ring vaccinations are permitted in exceptional cases but with such far-reaching implications for the exports of the Member States involved that , in practice , that also involves removal .
The European Commission recently decided to allow exports of meat from Uruguay back into the EU without guarantees as to whether the meat concerned originated from animals vaccinated against foot-and-mouth .
It must be the ultimate in bureaucracy for meat from animals vaccinated against foot-and-mouth from outside the EU to be allowed on the internal market , but for that from within the EU not to be permitted .
Now is also a good time for the Council to make drastic changes to legislation on controlling foot-and-mouth , also in the light of unnecessary animal suffering .
With the imports from Uruguay , the market argument not to vaccinate against foot-and-mouth has been laid to rest for ever .
If the Council takes European farmers and citizens as seriously as the farmers from South America , now is the time for action .
I should like to persuade the Commissioner and the Council to repeal the non-vaccination policy .
I should also like to mention a second point , namely the large discrepancies in terms of animal welfare among the Member States .
I would concur with the remark made by my colleague , Mrs Keppelhoff , on that point .
Animal welfare is still too often an element in the distortion of competition among the Member States .
What is also striking is that , in these matters , the Commission ' s and Council ' s ambition certainly leaves something to be desired .
For that reason , Parliament is very likely this week to make the directive on the welfare of pigs stricter but , at the same time , to present an initiative proposal on animal transport in September .
It is crucial , in this connection , to consider the role of consumers and the possibility of introducing a green tax system .
Mr President , it is a real pleasure to hear Mrs Winberg and the Commissioner speaking with one voice on an issue which should concern us all .
This seems to me to mark a turning point in how this Parliament debates these matters , because it sets out here a coherent , ethical framework by which we should all subsequently be judged .
Animals are not merely products , nor are they simply commodities .
One of the most appalling things I heard in my own country came from a trader concerning the spread of foot-and-mouth disease : " They are commodities .
I take them around .
I trade them here , I trade them there . "
They are not stocks and shares .
They are not speculative metals .
They are sentient creatures .
Because of that I believe , with the Commissioner , that the way in which animals are kept reflects on us morally , but also practically , in that bad conditions for animals affect the health and safety of humans as well .
The Food Safety Authority will need to address this matter .
The Commissioner is right to say that consumers would be prepared to pay more for ' ethical food ' .
Another thing they want - but do not always get - is follow-through in the area where animal welfare is promised , but not always delivered .
Like everyone else in this House , I hope and expect that the sow stalls proposal will go through on Thursday .
It will certainly have our support .
I would like to feel that at the same time we are looking at other issues which , because they are cherished in some Member State or in some particular group or community within the European Union , are shrugged aside .
I have seen recently that the Italians have tackled the issue of how foie gras is produced .
Others have begun to raise the issue of the cruelties involved in the breeding of animals for the fur trade .
Now we are coming to the point where , in the testing of chemicals , perhaps we ought to have an absolute assurance ( and I know Commissioner Byrne has gone some way towards this already ) that we will minimise - and I use that word advisedly - the number of animals sacrificed in the validation of chemical testing .
Those things seem to me to be enormously important .
Against such a backdrop we can begin to persuade the WTO that these issues are humanitarian , not protectionist .
Then , perhaps , we will able to fashion the means of arriving at a food system in which people matter , but animals matter too .
Mr President , Minister Winberg , however much I can identify with what else has been said here today , I should like to focus on one topic .
More specifically , I should like to talk about the transport of live animals .
I have asked you a question in this connection . It is clear to me : animals intended for slaughter should not be seen as products .
Meat can be transported over long distances ; animals cannot .
That is my guiding principle .
You stated that you need to monitor this long-haul transport in the Member States .
It is evident that the means are desperately lacking .
You responded to me by saying that you have no more than four inspectors at your disposal , that those four inspectors have carried out twelve inspections , only six of which covered animal welfare during transport .
That translates into less than five percent of the inspection assignments .
You will understand that we are not satisfied with this .
Nevertheless , this has led to results , for two infringement procedures have been instituted against Member States and , in three cases , there was a serious lack of animal welfare during transport .
I believe that those figures illustrate adequately that more inspections need to be carried out and that legislation needs to change , but , more than anything , that monitoring must be stepped up in terms of compliance with legislation , so that we can be certain that animals are no longer tortured during transport .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I greatly welcome the fact that the Council and the Commission are holding this debate today .
In my view , some progress has already been made in the past .
After all , we have been discussing this issue for a long time , and have addressed problems of animal husbandry , animal breeding and animal welfare on numerous occasions .
If we examine the process regarding the cage-rearing of hens , for example , we - Parliament and the European Union - have already made significant progress .
If I look at consumer behaviour following the debates in recent years , I can already see a change .
Nonetheless , I would caution against taking the Commissioner 's statement - that 85 % of consumers are prepared to pay more for food produced in accordance with the highest standards of animal welfare - at face value .
This figure is wrong .
If I asked any member of the public : ' Would you be prepared to pay more for animal welfare ? ' , naturally he is going to say : ' Of course I would ! '
However , when he is at the counter buying his steak , he has a rather different view .
Then it is quality and price that count , and nothing else matters .
Nonetheless , we must try to reconcile the status of animals as a means of production - we have to accept this , it is a fact - and animal welfare concerns .
There is no point in lashing out at the food producers and blaming them for everything . The only way forward is to do what the Council has suggested - I think this is very important - namely to concentrate on raising public awareness and fostering sensitivity to animal welfare issues .
This is a very important point .
This brings us to issues of education and training within the family .
In other words , a very wide sphere of activity must be included .
As regards animal health - an issue which has also been raised today - I am a little doubtful .
A healthy animal is not always one which has been reared correctly in optimal animal welfare conditions .
Animals can be healthy even without these conditions , as we know from practical experience .
I wish this House every success in the next few days , also in debating the new directive on the agenda .
I hope that this will take us a further step towards better animal welfare in Europe .
Mr President , I would ask to be allowed to comment on some of what has been said here in the debate .
Mrs Keppelhoff-Wiechert asked the very important question - not why , but how .
I still think that we must ask both questions - not only why , but also how .
For example , why do we dispatch animals to third countries ?
Why do we send calves from Sweden to Holland ?
Clearly there is an answer to these questions .
The answer to the first question is that it is profitable , because export subsidies can be paid when animals are sent from the EU to a third country .
Young calves are sent from Sweden to Holland , for example , because it is more profitable .
In Holland , they are reared by a different method than in Sweden .
We must also ask whether all this transportation really has to take place .
Fortunately , more and more people are now asking this question , and fortunately more and more of them are also answering ' no ' .
A number of speakers have mentioned the matter of price .
Naturally , we must realise that if we want to have good animal welfare - and if we are to have quality rather than quantity in future agricultural production and policy - then there will be a price to pay .
We cannot have the cheapest food in the world and , at the same time , have the best animal welfare and the best environment in the world .
Someone has to pay . The question is simply : who ?
There is also cause to think about this as we gradually draw up a new agricultural policy .
Who is to pay for animal welfare ?
Who is to pay for the countryside ?
Who is to pay for the wetlands , for biodiversity , and so on ?
Mr Kindermann spoke about the responsibility that man has .
I share this opinion .
We have a special responsibility for these matters precisely due to our status as human beings .
We have a special position in respect of animals and it is only we who can accept that responsibility .
Mr van den Bos provided the most far-reaching contribution of any of us here .
It is of course easy to put forward all these demands , but we must also remember that it costs money .
These things do not come about of their own accord .
For example , if we demand that international trade must not be in livestock but in meat , we must also remember that there is a connection with the economic system in agricultural policy .
In other words , we would then also have to reject all types of export subsidies for these animals .
Mrs Schörling , like several others , spoke about supervision .
Allow me to say that we cannot just demand that the Commission or the Council bring about improvements in respect of supervision , for the prime responsibility for supervision lies at national level .
I believe that each and every one of us must go home to his or her country and question that country ' s supervision , for it is only when a country is not taking care of matters that the Commission steps in .
The Commission has a responsibility to ensure that supervision in the various countries is good .
It does so through the office in Dublin .
Mr van Dam spoke of the restrictions on live animals , and I share his opinion .
Unfortunately , in the report , animals are defined as commodities .
Opinions may differ on this , and I think that we should have a different starting point .
Mr Maat talked about vaccination and exports .
Allow me to argue that it is not just because of exports that we have this non-vaccination policy .
The main reason is that there is not simply one single vaccine for one type of foot -and mouth disease .
The day we find a marker vaccine is the day we will be able to start mass vaccination with a view to prevention .
We have not yet got that far , but research is in progress .
A conference will be held under the Belgian Presidency , once the crisis is over , to allow us to draw conclusions from the policy that has been conducted in this area .
This will then concern not just vaccination but also other aspects which may even have encouraged infection with foot-and-mouth disease .
This conference will hopefully be held during the autumn .
Mr Whitehead spoke about the fact that animals are not just products and commodities .
In this respect , I refer to my earlier answer - animals are sentient beings .
He also addressed the matter of chemicals policy .
In this connection , I would remind you of the Commission ' s White Paper on this issue , which states , for example , that it is hoped to develop test methods that minimise the number of animals used in animal experiments .
I think this is a very good ambition .
Mrs Maes spoke about the inspection trips .
In this respect , I refer to what I said concerning the responsibility for supervision .
This responsibility devolves in the first instance upon the various countries themselves , and then the Commission supervises the countries .
Mr Schnellhardt gave the example of chickens and said that we had achieved something .
Yes , we have achieved something , but there still remains such an incredible amount to do .
He does not believe that people are prepared to pay .
No , perhaps they are not prepared to pay through higher prices .
This takes us back to the relationship between animal welfare and cost .
If we want to have good animal welfare and a good environment , it will not come free of charge .
We must then also design an economic system that ensures that those who provide good animal welfare and a good environment get paid for it , possibly in a different way than through higher prices .
Let me once again stress how important it is that the European Parliament produce an opinion in respect of a new directive on pig keeping , and I am very pleased to have Mr Whitehead ' s support on this matter .
It is important that we are able to make a decision as early as next week , because we have been working on this matter for a long time .
Although I understand the concern that exists in respect of the economic consequences , I nonetheless hope that good animal welfare will pay off , and I am really hoping for Parliament ' s support in this process .
Finally , I would like to thank you very much for the fact that we were able to have this debate .
It is important that it is kept alive so that the matter of man ' s relationship with animals develops over time .
We have a moral responsibility to treat animals well .
Cruelty to animals is unworthy of us humans .
Mr President , Mrs Winberg , ladies and gentlemen , I thank everybody for their contribution to this debate .
I have taken very careful note of the views expressed and will take them into account in the formulation of policy and in bringing forward legislation in due course .
Let me deal with a number of the individual issues that were raised by many of you .
First of all , there is the question of animal transport .
This is an issue that will get further attention from the Commission on production of the Scientific Committee 's report in October , when consideration will be given to the important issues of density and length of time of transport .
I should issue a word of caution to those of you who have a strong desire for , or who expect , the elimination of live animal transport . Some people made the point that carcass transport should replace live animal transport .
There is a very large trade in animals for breeding purposes and it appears that a very significant percentage of animals are transported for breeding purposes rather than for consumption .
I have asked for more details on this but I am told that is the position .
This issue will be considered in the light of the advice given to us by the Scientific Committee .
Another issue of considerable concern is the loading and unloading of animals .
I expect that the scientists who advise us will also focus on that issue , maybe seeing it as even more important than the length of time over which an animal is transported , so long as the conditions under which the animal is transported are humane .
I would remind you that legislation is already in the pipeline on the upgrading of the vehicles used for animal transport .
Mr Maat then asked me about the consequences for trade arising from the vaccination policy in the foot-and-mouth disease issue .
I would repeat what Mrs Winberg said , that there will be a conference on this issue during the Belgian Presidency .
It is an issue of particular complexity .
We were very clearly advised that the most effective way , certainly in the middle of the crisis , of eliminating further spread is the culling of the animals concerned rather than the use of vaccination .
Moreover there are at least seven strains of foot-and-mouth disease , all of which require a separate and distinct vaccination .
The vaccination administered is effective for only six to nine months .
If we were to vaccinate all of the animals in the European Union that are susceptible to foot-and-mouth disease , this would result in vaccinations being administered to 300 million animals every six months against seven different strains .
A really successful vaccination policy will only come about when science has developed a form of marker vaccination .
That means that where a marker vaccination has been administered , a subsequent test will be able to identify whether an animal is a vaccinated animal instead of an infected animal .
At present such a distinction cannot be made once a vaccination has been administered .
In those circumstances , the other trading blocs in the world are concerned about trading in animals which are vaccinated but may also be infected , thereby increasing the risk of spreading the infection in their own countries .
This is not an unreasonable apprehension .
We hope that science will develop this market vaccination for us and we will then be in a position to take further strides forward on this issue .
This is something that will be discussed , however , and considered in the context of the conference before the end of the year , together with other issues .
The importation of vaccinated animals and the exportation of meat from animals that are vaccinated is governed by the OIE rules .
They apply equally to exportation out of the European Union as they do to importation within the European Union .
It is quite incorrect to say that different principles apply or that some discrimination operates against traders within the European Union .
Mrs Maes referred to the resources available and it is correct to say that there are four inspectors involved in this work .
They draft reports , which are published of course , and forwarded to me for consideration as to whether infringement proceedings should be initiated or not .
The present position is that infringement proceedings have been initiated against Greece and Belgium in relation to the implementation of Directive 91 / 628 .
The opening of infringement proceedings against Italy is also being considered .
Furthermore , infringement proceedings are under consideration for the following Member States that did not comply with Article 8 of the directive , concerning the transmission to the Commission of their annual inspection report for the year 1999 : Austria , the Netherlands and Portugal .
I have given instructions to my staff to pay close attention to this issue .
If there is a clear and persistent failure to comply with the legislation on animal welfare , infringement proceedings will be initiated against the Member State in question .
On the question of price and standards and taking into account consumer concern for animal welfare , I am happy to tell you that Commissioner Fischler and I have initiated a debate at European Union level , and with all the Member States , on the question of food quality and the part that animal welfare plays in that context .
This initiative , draws together a high-level , round table advisory group made up of primary producers , food processors , retailers and consumers .
The group intends to visit all the Member States to discuss these issues .
We have already visited Sweden , Ireland and Germany and we are scheduled to visit France , Belgium , the United Kingdom and Austria in the very near future .
We held an Internet chat last Tuesday , where we were asked in excess of 2600 questions in a period of two hours .
By any calculation that is an extraordinary response which reflects people 's enormous interest in issues relating to food quality and animal welfare .
Many of the questions that were raised in that Internet chat were directed at the issue of animal welfare .
You can see from this that the Commission is taking this issue very seriously , it is constantly on the Commission 's agenda and I look forward to bringing further proposals back to Parliament in due course on these issues .
I would like to finish by quoting what Mr Whitehead said in his speech calling for a food system in which ' people matter but animals matter too ' .
I fully agree .
Information and communication technologies in developing countries
The next item is the report ( A5-0191 / 2001 ) by Mrs Dybkjær , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on Information and Communication Technologies ( ICT ) and developing countries ( 2000 / 2327 ( INI ) ) .
In May , the EU and UN held the third conference on the least developed countries here in Strasbourg .
It was a good conference in the sense that the right words were said , but there is also cause for some despair when we look at the realities .
These are , namely , that , since 1971 , when the UN recognised the term ' least developed ' , the number of the least developed countries has grown from 25 to 49 today .
Only one country , Botswana , has managed to struggle out of the ranks of the least developed countries .
The gap between the world ' s rich and poor has grown .
In 1960 , 20 % of the world population in the richest countries had an income that was 30 times higher than that of the 20 % poorest .
In 1997 , it was 74 times as high , and the figure is undoubtedly even higher today .
There are many reasons why the least developed countries are in such a poor situation : rising population growth , illiteracy , untenable debt , environmental destruction , natural catastrophes and diseases such as HIV / Aids , malaria and tuberculosis .
In addition , unstable political conditions and a growing number of violent conflicts make it difficult to create long-term development plans .
However , neither is it any use denying that , despite many resolutions to increase development aid by 0.7 % , the reality is that development aid is 0.23 % of gross domestic product .
It is slightly better in the case of the EU , where it is 0.34 % .
The removal of customs barriers in respect of the developing countries , which will help these countries , is progressing slowly .
This was most recently illustrated in connection with Commissioner Lamy ' s proposal , which was based on the Member States ' deferring the organisation of the market in sugar , especially with the support of the European sugar producers .
In connection with the transfer of technology , private enterprise was intransigent in the fight against Aids , private enterprises only entering into a compromise with South Africa following fierce pressure , and now we are seeing exactly the same thing with regard to malaria - namely that enterprises do not have enough incentive to produce a vaccine against malaria , and therefore no vaccine will be produced unless we intervene and do something extraordinary .
In addition to this , there is ICT .
This is a development that is creating great economic growth in the industrialised countries , but which also risks further marginalisation of the developing countries due to lack of access both to the knowledge created by virtue of this development and to the technology as such .
The opportunities that this technology can provide , as well as the risk of further marginalisation , form the background to this initiative report .
The main viewpoint - the sustaining argument of the report - is that ICT provides an opportunity for the developing countries to make a quantum leap .
In the report , I mention a number of sectors in which ICT can be used advantageously and in which other organisations such as the UNDP and the World Bank and some of the Member States have already had good experience .
I believe that Parliament here is in line with the Council which , back in 1997 asked the Commission to draw up a report on experience with ICT in development work and , in November 2000 , called upon the Commission to submit a communication on ' the digital divide ' .
The report on experience arrived here this spring , and the communication will hopefully arrive before the meeting of the Development Council in November 2001 .
The Commission believes that the ICT work must take place through mainstreaming , that is , through ICT being used in the individual projects .
This is a necessary but not a sufficient condition .
If this development is not just to help those who are already strong , it is essential that mainstreaming be supplemented with central work so that there is a place from which initiatives can emanate , from which good advice can be obtained and where experience can be gathered , so that one does not have to start from scratch all the time and , above all , so that the right social balance in the development can be secured .
Consequently , in an earlier report - namely the Gemelli report - in March of this year , the European Parliament also asked the Commission to give this area greater priority , possibly as part of the transport priority .
The Commission has stood by its previous approach , but I cannot emphasise enough that this is not sufficient .
This report therefore contains a proposal for an e-development unit .
Without such a unit , it will be impossible to ensure that there is knowledge to ensure that ICT is incorporated in the right way into the work of the Commission .
However , it is of course not only ICT that must be used in the context of the aid we provide .
There is also a need for private enterprises .
The shining example from other areas is the Grameen Bank in Bangladesh , which started micro loans for women - in the first instance in the agricultural sector , but later expanding to encompass other areas as well .
A similar commitment within ICT is imperative .
There are some that are in progress and more should be given further impetus .
It would be nice to see a global social commitment on the part of enterprises , and this can easily be combined with general earnings . Finally , Mr President : ICT is always emphasised as the technology that can liberate people .
It would be nice to be able to see that that also applies to people in the developing countries .
In view of our experiences with the oil and pharmaceuticals industries , it would be good if enterprises could become a shining example into the bargain .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur on this magnificent report on an issue which I truly believe to be of extraordinary importance . We have made many statements in this Parliament and have adopted many measures in favour of the least-developed countries , aware of the importance of removing the barriers separating the rich countries from the poor countries , but , as the rapporteur has reminded us , these barriers , rather than being reduced , are actually increasing .
If we bear in mind the great potential of the information technologies for the future development of our society , there is no doubt that this gap is going to increase .
We will thereby prevent the developing countries from overcoming the poverty threshold within which they live , and from benefiting from the numerous possibilities which the information society offers , not only for economic development , but also in the fields of health , training and many others .
Let us not forget that , according to current estimates , at the end of 2000 there were 700 million people ' on-line ' in the world while , on the other hand , 2 billion people had never spoken on the telephone .
Hence the need to ensure that developing countries have access to the information society and benefit from those future projects which it represents .
That is why this report is so important and above all why it is so important that the European Union adopts a vigorous initiative so that developing countries may really be included in the wealth society .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Europe goes online .
E-europe , e-learning , e-commerce , e-business are on everyone 's lips , and are increasingly setting the political agenda .
But what about ' e-development ' ?
There is no doubt that the targeted use of modern electronic information and communication technologies can open up completely new perspectives for developing countries in particular .
Of course , it would be wrong to raise false hopes by presenting ICT as a panacea .
However , there is no disputing that in many countries of the Southern hemisphere , there is the potential - and the will - to bridge the digital divide .
The developing countries themselves have an urgent interest in doing so , and I can only say that the response to my general report on this issue in the ACP / EU Assembly was extremely positive .
The task is to put the developing countries on the net as they move towards the knowledge and information society .
This requires a targeted strategy .
Our question is this : where is the European Dot-Force - similar to the agreement adopted at the G8 Summit - to promote the developing countries ' access to global communications ?
The European Commission gives its admittedly rather tentative support to one or two projects , but this cannot obscure the fact that there is still no targeted strategy to support the developing countries moving towards the knowledge and information society .
The purpose of the report before us is to remedy this situation .
I am confident that we will be able to engage in fruitful dialogue with the Commission on these issues .
Let me underline the following points . ICT must take on a key role in development cooperation as well .
We have therefore proposed to the Commission that an appropriately staffed ' development unit ' be set up to undertake continuous work in this area .
It is the Commission 's responsibility to ensure that qualified personnel are available so that we are equipped to deal with all future challenges .
Our aim must be to enable the developing countries to share fully in the opportunities afforded by the information society and utilise all available technical options for this purpose .
We have already moved closer to this goal : mobile telephony , for example , is ideally suited to cover Africa 's vast open spaces .
Solar powered telephone transmission cells on village squares , like Internet access , no longer need to be grid-bound and dependent on electricity .
New information technologies can also strengthen the links between the people and the state . They can help to improve healthcare , training and education , culture and the environment .
They are certainly capable of conveying detailed information on these issues .
However , this also requires rules , and I wish to conclude by making that quite clear . Here , too , we must work together with the developing countries to ensure that rules are adopted which enhance the social benefits of the new technologies and are not simply targeted to commercial gain .
Mr President , should the introduction of communication technology take priority in the developing countries ?
At first glance , the answer is no . After all , the fight against poverty is the main issue .
If one fights for one ' s daily bread , one will not be concerned with e-mail .
In order to develop , however , it is necessary to have economic growth , and hence competitiveness , and developing countries will lose this competitive battle if the digital divide with the rich countries is widening rather than narrowing .
That should not happen .
In addition , there is the threat that , in poor countries , the distance between the informed elite and the population will lead to greater power inequality than is already the case .
If anything could benefit the spread of information and power , or democratisation in a word , then it is the ICT revolution .
That is why a European strategy must be developed . Mrs Dybkjær has drafted an excellent report on this matter .
The public and private sectors are both crucial in this .
The government is vital for drafting sound legislation , for administrative guidance and promotion .
ICT will need to be included in the sector programmes , and a strategic selection of target groups will need to be made .
These are primarily the most important government bodies , but also education and health care could become far more efficient by using the new technologies .
In addition , ICT can contribute to better environmental management and to saving energy .
All of this will not be easy , and it will take some time but , ultimately , the new technology will prove to be vitally important in the fight against poverty and in making development possible .
Mr President , I have put the question as to whether this is a priority to a student from Peru .
He replied as follows : When I read that technological development and the information society need to be promoted , I have to suppress a smile .
First of all , because this will only benefit a minority and an ever richer elite .
Also , it is , in fact , absurd to talk about technological development and the information society in countries where even the most basic education infrastructure is not in place , especially outside the capitals .
But nevertheless , he states it is a necessity if the countries want to be able to compete .
In other words : the bottom-up and bottom-down strategy which Mrs Dybkjær proposes to pursue seems sensible to me .
Please let us not forget , however , that people who have not had any schooling , even with the most wonderful infrastructure at their fingertips , will always be hopelessly behind .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mrs Dybkjaer for an excellent report on a subject which is important to everyone .
At the Okinawa Summit a year ago in July G8 took the view that the most central challenge facing the world at the moment is the wide gulfs between north and south in terms of technical capacity and know-how , in other words the ' digital divide ' .
There are areas in the world in which a total 2 billion inhabitants have become isolated .
If this gulf in technical know-how cannot be bridged , globalisation will already have failed from the start .
The rapporteur wisely stated that the development of digital know-how must not be based solely on the private sector but that the EU and other funding bodies must focus on the public sector .
This is a realistic approach .
The issue does not merely involve a technical problem but the combined effects of geographical isolation , poverty and disease .
Therefore , the success of globalisation requires these isolated areas to be linked to the rest of the world as well as a real investment in the education and health of their inhabitants .
If the situation is allowed to develop solely on the basis of market forces , there is a risk that the digital divide will widen to an unbridgeable extent .
Although development cooperation in recent decades has largely been correctly targeted , the media has emphasised and public opinion has been influenced by a few sad examples of tractors rusting in the fields , in other words donations given on commercial terms without understanding the situation of the recipients or ensuring that they were prepared to receive them .
Precisely the same nightmare scenario may arise today if we don ' t take care that the information society of developing countries has a healthy foundation on which it can be based .
This foundation is a guaranteed right for everyone to have a basic education and a worthwhile existence .
The PPE-DE Group would like the European Union to work to ensure that , with its help , all countries in the world are able to take part in adopting information technology and develop their societies .
If it is possible to follow such an integrated and complementary policy in the field of information technology and telecommunications , there is hope that information technology will promote partnership and reinforce all other development cooperation carried out in these countries .
This approach is successfully reflected in the report now under discussion .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating Mrs Dybkjær on her report on information and communication technologies in developing countries .
It is a refreshing and stimulating report with a lot of insight and proposals .
I particularly appreciated the efforts to put the new technologies in the context of poverty alleviation and the need to ensure that poor people profit from it .
For the Commission , this is a fundamental point .
Indeed , the digital divide - that is to say the unequal access to information and communication technologies among and within countries - is a reflection of existing social and economic inequalities in both industrialised and developing countries .
ICT did not create inequality , but it may well fuel it unless we are conscious of its impact .
On the other hand. if applied with pragmatic realism , ICT can be a useful tool for economic development , and possibly even underpin the positive evolution of democracy .
Mrs Dybkjær 's report is well timed .
As we all know , the G8 leaders will be meeting in July in Genoa to consider , among other things , the reports and proposals by the DOT force .
MEPs will have a second opportunity to discuss ICT and development subjects at the October session of the EU-ACP Joint Assembly , on the basis of a report by Mrs Junker .
The Commission , for its part , is preparing a communication , to be submitted later in the year .
The report and motion for a resolution make several proposals on the role of Community development cooperation in respect of ICT .
We welcome the suggestion that we work closely with Member States ' aid agencies and define a division of labour in ICT .
It is indeed important to distinguish between what should be done and what the Commission needs to do .
Tasks and responsibilities can be shared with Member States ; this is work in which the Commission will participate , both within the G8 and with Member States , but it will not take the lead .
Likewise , we welcome the consideration of ICT in country strategy papers .
That will ensure that ICT is used in the context of a country 's overall development policy and that the choice of priority sectors remains country- and not donor-driven .
We have some difficulties , however , with the proposal to widen the development priority areas .
The joint statement of the Council and the Commission on European Community development priority policies was approved only last November .
This proposal would run counter to it .
The Commission has to focus its activities if it wants to deliver on its aid agenda .
Paragraphs 20 and 22 call on the Commission to play a greater role in ICT and development than seems reasonable or realistic at the present moment .
More fundamentally , the Commission is making a serious effort to improve its aid management and increase its poverty focus .
It will take some years for changes to take effect .
If we do not , however , make a serious effort to focus on a limited number of priority areas , we shall only succeed in perpetuating the current problems .
The Commission is ready to consider the use of ICT within the existing priority areas and cross-cutting themes - if and when they are cost-effective in achieving stated objectives , and indeed that is increasingly the case .
Adopting good governance , capacity-building , regional integration and administrative reform as focal points will , in many cases , accelerate the use of ICT as an important tool .
Making specific provision for ICT within thematic budget lines would not , however , be consistent with our approach of using ICT as an integral part of our work in priority areas .
The Commission has reservations about the proposal to create an e-development unit within EuropeAid Cooperation Office and has created a unit for innovation with a similar mandate in mind for cross-cutting themes across the various geographical directorates , and feels that this meets its needs adequately .
Finally , in paragraph 32 the draft resolution calls for a report in 2003 .
The Commission has promised to submit an annual report on Community development policy and therefore proposes to cover ICT , as appropriate , in that annual report .
The Commission looks forward to contributing further to debates on ICT when it presents its communication later in the year .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
Export and return of cultural goods
The next item is the report ( A5-0122 / 2001 ) by Mr Aparicio Sánchez , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the Commission report to the Council , the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee on the implementation of Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 3911 / 92 on the export of cultural goods and Council Directive 93 / 7 / EEC on the return of cultural objects unlawfully removed from the territory of a Member State ( COM ( 2000 ) 325 - C5-0509 / 2000 - 2000 / 2246 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , we are dealing with one of the few , but nevertheless serious , problems resulting from the removal of our internal borders .
From the very beginnings of the single market , it was established that the free movement of goods had to be compatible with the protection of the artistic and cultural heritage of each of the Member States .
It was , and continues to be , within the competence of each State to define its national heritage and its protection .
Since 1 January 1993 , however , measures became necessary , such as the harmonisation of requirements for sales and the uniformity of the control procedure for extra-community exportation .
To this end , in 1992 and 1993 , the Regulation and the directive which we are discussing today were adopted .
The philosophy of the Regulation can be summed up as follows : each Member State is obliged to control the exportation not only of its own heritage , but also of any heritage which is located within its territory , but which originates in one of the other fourteen Member States .
Nine years later , except for a few minor amendments , the text and the approach of 1992 are still in force .
It must also be pointed out that the problem of the illegal trafficking in cultural goods and its impunity are more serious than ever .
The forecasts are even more pessimistic if we bear in mind that , when the rich heritage of the candidate countries is incorporated into the single market , the current legislation may still be in force despite being shown to be insufficient .
In 1993 , the Commission committed itself to monitoring the progress and the degree of effectiveness of the two regulations in force every three years , as well as proposing corrections where necessary .
It tried to do so in 1996 , but , when it requested information from the Member States , it received no response from the majority of them .
In some cases , the delays in incorporating the Regulation into the legislation of each Member State were scandalous ; in four cases the Regulation did not enter into force until 1998 .
Finally , in 1998 the Commission obtained certain data , opinions and experiences and , on that basis , has produced the report which we are discussing today .
It is a purely informative communication , that is , it does not contain any proposals for new measures or amendments of the current ones .
It is a voluntary report , which lacks sufficient data to make objective measurements and also , in my opinion , lacks the criteria necessary to propose any improvement to the current procedure .
We can , however , draw certain conclusions .
Some of these conclusions , though fewer in number , are positive , such as the fact that the very existence of the two regulations has been sufficient to increase the awareness of administrations and public opinion and to bring about extrajudicial solutions .
There are , however , a larger number of negative conclusions which can be summed up in one : the general practice is still that a Member State authorising the export of a cultural item does not check with its State of origin whether the item ' s provenance is legal or illegal .
In the majority of cases , the administrations of the Member States have not properly cooperated with each other , in particular the police and customs departments , that is to say , the units that are part of the Interior Ministries .
It is here that I would like to point out one of the cruxes of the problem ; on the one hand , these units of the administration have other border priorities relating to organised crime .
On the other hand , this cooperation falls under the third pillar , which is so difficult to achieve , as you well know .
Therefore , the situation is serious in two respects ; the increase in the intra-community clandestine trade in historical and cultural goods , and also the increase in their exportation beyond our external borders .
The explosion in the activities of organised networks , the unrestricted proliferation of antique dealers without sufficient professional standing or control and the practically universal impunity of the people responsible , either because the crime has been only recently defined , just a year ago , or because the mere allegation that a buyer has acted in good faith is sufficient cause for a case not to continue , are some of the reasons for this serious situation .
For all these reasons , our report expresses the view that it is crucial that legislation is improved and that a qualitative change is made to the Community ' s approach .
We believe that this is a cultural issue , which the Council must deal with through the bodies responsible for culture in each Member State .
These are crimes or failings which must be detected by Community operational units specialised in artistic and historical heritage ; the Commissioner for Culture , rather than any of her colleagues , must make a diagnosis and propose a way of dealing with the situation .
All of this should go hand in hand with the integration of the various teams of the departments responsible for trade , the police and customs , but , I repeat , this must be done from a predominantly cultural point of view .
Our report also identifies certain difficulties , such as the existence of an unknown heritage in the possession of institutions such as the church .
We propose certain specific measures considered to be very urgent - such as the use of the Internet to publish pictures and details of stolen objects - and we request that the Commission , under the direction of the Commissioner for Culture , produce a Green Paper describing the current situation , assess the effects of the Regulation and the directive , carry out a comparative study of the definition of heritage in each Member State and , above all , propose specific measures to improve the situation .
The Commissioner for Culture , whom I have admired for years , has for some time adopted a lively and decisive approach to future tasks while remaining cautious and indecisive about the present ones .
She has sufficient capacity and resources for this not to be the case .
Through this report , Parliament seeks to express its anguish and alarm about the current situation which , despite being the result of the removal of internal borders , which is so beneficial in all other respects , is not being sufficiently addressed by the Community authorities .
Mr President , as we see in the explanatory statement that forms the basis of the report by Mr Aparício Sánchez , sufficient data are not available to make an objective assessment of the effectiveness of the directive and the Regulation on the export of cultural objects and their return when they have been unlawfully removed from the territory of one Member State to another .
We are unable to make such an assessment largely because of the delays in Member States transposing these instruments into their national legislation .
All the indications suggest that , in the meantime , the illegal trafficking of cultural objects has increased , particularly of those that find their way onto the art market . The whole situation calls for the Member States to obey the principle of strictly respecting the integrity of national cultural heritage and the whole situation calls for the measures designed to prevent and eradicate this form of trafficking to be made more effective .
We also face other problems , however .
Even here , within the very confines of this Parliament , not long ago , we all had the opportunity to see an exhibition of the wanton destruction of the cultural heritage of Cyprus , which was perpetrated under the complacent gaze of the authorities of a country which also happens to be a candidate for the Union ' s enlargement .
The measures now being proposed can , therefore , make a valuable contribution to improving the legal instruments available and the system as a whole .
Every nation ' s cultural heritage is of undeniable importance to national identity and to European identity .
There must be closer police and judicial cooperation in this field between Member States .
We must make it more difficult for cultural objects that have been stolen or unlawfully removed to move around freely . In this field , cooperation and the coordination of actions between the Commissioners responsible for culture , for the internal market , and for justice and home affairs are of fundamental importance .
The Commission ought to issue a communication on the illegal trafficking and trade in these goods , with an assessment of the current situation in this field , listing and identifying objects that are continuing to be recovered and studying the consequences of the way in which the 1992 Regulation and the 1993 directive have been implemented . The communication should assess the foreseeable effects of the candidate countries joining the Union and recommend a multilingual form with details of goods that have been unlawfully removed .
It should also conduct a public information and awareness-raising campaign , making all the necessary information available on the Internet . If we are to achieve all of this , Mr President , I feel that we must vote in favour of this report , and once again , I congratulate Mr Aparício Sánchez for having taken the initiative with it .
Mr President , Commissioner Bolkestein , ladies and gentlemen , since time immemorial , man has travelled in order to enhance his knowledge of other nations and to come into contact with other cultures .
And since time immemorial , the travelling man has - legally or illegally - taken souvenirs from those other cultures .
We only need to think of Lord Elgin or Napoleon , who both believed in the ' finders keepers ' rule of thumb .
It is evident that the cultural heritage of the country visited suffered damaged as a result of that .
It is therefore to be welcomed that Europe is curtailing this practice .
The important role which trade is playing in this cannot be underestimated .
If we consider that art thefts from museums and churches are often by order of traders , we should indeed devote attention to this .
Although , in my opinion , this is mainly a matter for the Member States themselves , coordination at European level in all fields is essential , particularly so , as Mr Aparicio Sánchez pointed out , in the field of police and customs cooperation .
A first step to prevent theft is to draw up an inventory and detailed description , possibly with photographs , of the artefacts which belong to public and private establishments .
But also the requirement to provide cultural goods with a certificate of origin has a preventive effect .
It is obvious that a universally accessible digital network at European level would be priceless .
I should therefore like to express the hope that this will be set up as soon as possible , especially in the light of the stolen goods and of those which have not yet been found .
We should not only restrict our catchment area to Europe , but should involve the entire world via the United Nations . That is , after all , quite possible via the Internet .
We need to start in Europe , however . I would therefore call on the Member States not just to protect their own cultural heritage , but also that of other countries .
I am pleased to say that the Netherlands has already taken a step in the right direction .
I hope that the other countries will follow suit , so that the illegal trade in cultural goods can be brought to a close .
Mr President , the report by Pedro Aparicio Sánchez deserves great appreciation and unconditional consensus because , for the first time , it deals critically and constructively with one of the European Union ' s most serious and dramatic problems : the preservation of a common cultural heritage unique in human history and the target of depredations and devastation for too many years , often through the culpable indifference of the European authorities appointed to protect it .
The debate in the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport on the implementation of the regulation on the export of cultural goods and the directive on the return of cultural objects unlawfully removed from the territory of a Member State was wide-ranging and exhaustive , although the absence of a direct personal contribution by the Commissioner responsible for culture , Mrs Viviane Reding , was regretted , as were the gaps and inconsistencies in the report from the Directorate-General for Education and Culture .
The bitter truth is that the defence of this immense cultural and artistic heritage has been left to the individual national authorities - in my country to one brave carabinieri officer , General Conforti - without any incisive coordination that really works being in place at Community level , thereby at least applying the general principles of the UNESCO Convention .
All this is in the face of a massive offensive by organised crime and the shadiest traffic , like money laundering and tax evasion .
All this damages the serious and honest antiques trade , a victim of unbridled competition from speculators and the great trading combines .
To mention only my own country , Italy , immensely valuable works of art have been stolen , illegally exported or simply vanished : The Nativity by Michelangelo Merisi di Caravaggio , La Madonna dell 'Orto by Giovanni Bellini , Ecce Homo by Antonello Da Messina , at least two masterpieces by Cima da Conegliano .
Meanwhile the plunder of the archaeological heritage advances at an increasingly rapid pace .
These days you only have to go to the Sablon quarter in Brussels to see , impudently displayed in shop windows , dozens of splendid second century oil amphorae , marble bas-reliefs recovered last year - actually last September - from the bottom of the sea by alleged scientific expeditions , almost always from the United States .
For these and other pressing reasons Mr Aparicio ' s report represents a historic change in direction for Union cultural policy .
This first thoughtful document will hopefully be followed by others and acceptance , if belated , of responsibility by the Council and the Commission .
Mr President , it is clear from both the Commission communication and the report by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport that some Member States are unwilling to apply the regulation on the export of cultural goods and the directive on the return of cultural objects unlawfully removed .
As far as I can see , the main reason for this is because the capitalist system commercialises culture and because huge interests , which may appear to be legal or which are downright illegal , are therefore involved in the sale of stolen cultural objects .
Culture is a collective creation by society and no one has the right to appropriate a work of art and deprive society as a whole of it , let alone remove it from the environment in which it was created .
It is not just a question of illegal trading ; renowned auction houses are also involved and many a reputable museum owes its wealth to illegally acquired exhibits .
Greece is one of the countries whose cultural heritage has been plundered on a massive scale and a host of works now reside in English , French , German and other museums , as well as in private collections .
I should like to take this opportunity to ask the Commission if , having merely indicated its serious intentions , it now plans to take action to facilitate the return of the Parthenon marbles .
The report by Mr Aparicio Sánchez contains numerous positive comments and interesting proposals and I should like to congratulate him on that .
I should also like to thank Mr Graça Moura for raising the problem of cultural objects plundered from occupied Cyprus .
However , I fear that , because of the commercialisation which I referred to earlier , it will be impossible to make any significant headway with this problem .
Mr President , the Commission shares Parliament 's concern regarding the protection of the cultural heritage of the Member States .
The Commission is devoting particular attention to this question in the enlargement negotiations .
I note that the motion for a resolution calls on the Commission to examine the problem of illegal trade in cultural objects .
I would point out that this goes beyond the scope of the Commission 's reports on the application of Regulation No 3911 / 92 and Directive 93 / 7 .
I would , however , underline the multidisciplinary and inter-pillar nature of this problem , as highlighted by Parliament 's Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
In view of the powers attributed to the Community by the Treaties there is a danger that focusing attention on the cultural policy aspects of the problem of illegal trade in cultural objects may reduce the effectiveness of any Community action in this field .
I should like to assure Members that the Commission has already taken measures aimed at improving administrative cooperation between the Member States with a view to protecting their cultural heritage .
Those measures are drawn up by the Advisory Committee on Cultural Goods and the Forum on the Prevention of Organised Crime .
The Commission would like to ask Parliament to give its backing to those moves .
As a collegiate body , the Commission will continue to examine the problem of illegal trade in cultural objects and accord it the priority which it deserves .
Lastly , in answer to the question put by Mr Alyssandrakis a little while ago , the Commission has constantly launched initiatives aimed at contributing to the fight against illegal trade in cultural objects .
Perhaps I may give some examples of initiatives launched by the Commission .
Firstly , financing of an Internet website project allowing information on cultural objects to be exchanged .
Secondly , the launch of a study on the traceability of cultural objects .
Thirdly , the creation of a working party within the Advisory Committee on Cultural Goods whose task is to draw up guidelines for administrative cooperation .
Fourthly , and lastly , an examination of the problem of cultural objects under the Forum for the Prevention of Organised Crime .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 8.55 p.m. )
I must start with a regrettable announcement .
You will have noticed that the attendance lists have not yet been posted at the entrance to the chamber .
There are technical problems with the computer through which they are printed out , so , unfortunately , I have to ask you to register later - perhaps during the vote at noon today , for instance .
There is no alternative , I am sorry to say .

( Heckling by Mr Ferber : " It ' s all the Vice-President ' s fault ! " ) Mr Ferber , in such cases the blame is automatically assigned to the official - in this case Mr Rømer , who is here beside me !
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , I would like to say that I was here yesterday .
I arrived at Parliament at 6 p.m. yesterday but unfortunately did not sign the attendance register because I was busy .
Mr Sacrédeus , our services will find out how that is supposed to be handled .
Mr President , yesterday , on behalf of our group , I talked about capital punishment , and I also said that , in our view , there is a clash between Europe ' s system of values and that which is currently being adhered to in America in this connection .
I also stated that this is of major importance , especially in the light of Mr Bush ' s visit to Europe this week .
These two elements , the clash between the two value systems , and the position of President Bush and his visit to Europe this week , are not mentioned in the Minutes in this connection .
I would like to see these included .
We have taken note of that too .
Mr President , I raised the matter of Question Time yesterday .
The President , as you will see from the Minutes , replied that too few questions had been received for two Commissioners , whose names were therefore removed from the list of speakers for Question Time .
I checked this out .
Mr Kinnock received only one question , yet his name remains on the list .
Mrs Schreyer took a question from me ; she is not on the list , even though other Members , such as Mr Trakatellis , addressed questions to her .
So something is very much amiss in this whole business .
I should like you to look into this matter and provide me with some clear information tomorrow as to why Question Time was shortened .
That will be investigated , Mr Posselt .
( Parliament approved the Minutes )
Vote on requests for urgent procedure
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . ( DE ) Mr President , a majority of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development voted for urgent procedure yesterday evening .
By adopting the report yesterday evening , we have paved the way for the vote to be taken this week , provided that the House approves the motion for urgent procedure .
( Parliament approved the request for urgent procedure )
Proposal for a Council decision [ COM ( 2001 ) 81 - C5-0138 / 2001 - 2001 / 0045 ( CNS ) ] on further exceptional financial assistance to Kosovo .
Mr President , the Commission and the Council have asked for urgent procedure .
We need to respond without delay , so that the appropriate assistance can be provided quickly in Kosovo .
The Committee voted on the report yesterday , and we can therefore commend this request for urgent procedure to the House .
( Parliament approved the request for urgent procedure )
Proposal for a Council decision [ COM ( 2001 ) 277 - C5-0231 / 2001 - 2001 / 0112 ( CNS ) ] granting macro-financial assistance to the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia .
Mr President , we in the Committee on Foreign Affairs - in agreement , I believe , with the supporting committees , namely the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Industry - wish to recommend rejection .
We did not receive early notification .
We have only had the texts since Friday .
We are being asked to approve this aid for the first time , and it is not entirely clear which other parts of the budget some of this money is supposed to come from .
For that reason , the matter requires due political consideration .
At the same time , however , may I say that we shall make every effort to ensure that a decision can be taken at the plenary part-session in July , and we shall make the necessary preparations to that end .
Accordingly , we recommend the rejection of this request .
( Parliament rejected the request for urgent procedure )
European Food Authority
The next item is the report ( A5-0198 / 2001 ) by Mr Whitehead , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Regulation [ COM ( 2000 ) 716 - C5-0655 / 2000 - 2000 / 0286 ( COD ) ] laying down the general principles and requirements of food law , establishing the European Food Authority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety .
Mr President , this is a moment of some importance for consumer protection in the European Union .
The institutions of the Union have come together to set out the principles of food law in the shape of a new authority which can safeguard the food we eat and the way it is produced .
You cannot have the one without the other .
To those who say we have gone too fast and that the Commission or the Council are urging us to move too quickly during this presidency , I would say simply that we are repairing the neglect of decades in which the very variety and self-sufficiency of our foodstuffs hid great disasters , from BSE , to dioxins , to some of the scourges of the present day .
It is the particular task of this Parliament to refine and specify the proposal from the Commission , that is , to remind citizens and stakeholders alike exactly what we are intending to do to safeguard all parts of the food chain , at whatever point we happen to be in it , from primary producers through to ultimate consumers .
We all have a stake in the kind of food that is circulated in Europe , how it is produced , how it is prepared and ultimately how it is checked .
This authority is primarily concerned with food safety .
That is why our committee strongly supported the change of title .
We believe it is necessary because there must be clear but also limited and targeted ambitions for this authority .
They must relate to what it is able to do in terms of its remit and also in terms of its budget , and not in terms of all of the other ambitions that might be piled upon it by those who wish it to do a variety of different things .
Everything has to be seen through this focus .
I would say to some of my colleagues in the committee who moved a variety of amendments aimed at the further restyling of the title of this authority : the priorities are set out in the report as amended .
If you want a proper reference to hygiene or to nutrition or to quality or to our affection for traditional foods , as some of the amendments have proposed , my answer would be : look in the report .
They are all there in due measure .
But they are not there in the title .
They are not in themselves the primary function of this new authority .
I owe a great debt to my colleagues of all parties in the committee .
The report was passed in the Committee on the Environment by 40 votes to 0 with 2 abstentions .
The large number of amendments which we shall put forward today in blocked groups reflects the degree of consensus that we ourselves reached .
Here I also owe a debt to the Commission for its help , to the Swedish Presidency , which has taken this through with a commendable sense of urgency , and most of all to my own parliamentary assistant , Michele Smyth who has laboured tirelessly on all of this .
I should like to raise some of the salient points about which there will still be argument and upon which a number of the amendments have been based .
Should the new authority be appointed on the basis of ability and merit , through a full process of scrutiny , or should it be by the old road of quiet nomination ?
We go for merit every time .
We go for openness .
We go for transparency .
The Member States will play a full role through the continuum of the advisory forum .
They do not need to be in a position where , proportionally , they plant their flags around every seat at the new authority 's table .
We do not think that the authority should be responsible for the rapid alert system .
We think ultimate responsibility must rest with the Commission .
The authority should be financed entirely from the budget , on which this Parliament can share the decisions .
The EUR 44 million envisaged is a fairly small sum , compared to other European agencies .
It is only one third of the budget which the British Food Standards Agency had at its inception .
There are amendments , including some from the Committee on Budgets , which I would support , suggesting that we take in hand the precise financing of this agency ourselves .
My final point is about the site of the new authority .
There are those who would like it to be determined by codecision involving this Parliament .
There are those who think it should be decided ultimately by the Council on a proposal by the Commission with the assent of this Parliament .
My own view is that we should have a free vote on this , because it seems to me that those in the House who wish to take the codecision route have a right to vote for it .
My own scepticism remains .
I think we should take the traditional route , on this issue at least .
I commend this report to the House .
This is an idea which has not so much found its time as found us at precisely the right moment .
I hope the House will support it in the vote .
Mr President , Commissioner , the European Food Authority is of fundamental importance to the people in our Community .
This is what we have been telling each other repeatedly for many months now - adding for emphasis that it is high time , after the many scandals of the past , to restore the confidence of the people of Europe in their daily bread , from whatever source it reaches their tables .
Every day that goes by without this new authority taking up its duties in the service of food safety is a day wasted , a missed opportunity to protect public health in the European Union .
This is why we must expedite our preparatory work .
We must ensure that the Food Authority is operational at the start of next year .
The need for haste , however , must not impair the quality of the legislative groundwork .
The European Food Authority requires stable legal foundations , so that it does not become the pawn of any special interests even before it begins its work .
For this reason , ladies and gentlemen , I ask you to vote with the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market and leave the whole Regulation in the realm of the codecision procedure .
The mechanism of restricting the European Parliament to a consultative role when it comes to deciding on the seat of the authority is a piece of shoddy workmanship .
It also betrays the intention of prompting a bout of horse-trading between interested parties with widely differing motives , which can only be detrimental to our Food Authority .
Let us therefore put paid to the plans of Mr Prodi , the President of the Commission , who has already let it be known through the press that he wants Luxembourg to be given the Food Authority as compensation for the loss of other European bodies .
Please vote for Amendment No 215 , which seeks to guarantee a uniform legal basis and to preclude the pursuit of extraneous objectives .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my group has tabled an amendment in plenary , in which we note that the establishment of this authority is not an anticipated expense .
We also note that it cannot be funded without a revision of the Financial Perspective or a reduction of other appropriations under heading 3 .
The amendment has its origins in the Committee on Budgets .
It is important for us to make the point that everything we do must be affordable .
Sadly , the Environment Committee has chosen not to embrace several of the amendments tabled by the Committee on Budgets .
One of these was the time-honoured amendment that the Committee on Budgets keeps tabling for the inclusion of a recital emphasising the indispensability of transparency , scrutiny and compliance with budgetary procedure .
Some agencies are still in a sorry state in this respect .
The Environment Committee has also decided that the authority should be financed from the general budget alone .
There is a desire to keep the authority independent .
This may be a noble aim , but it is unrealistic .
The fact is that we have agencies such as those on medicinal products and standardisation which are financed by means of contributions , and nobody would suggest that they have been infiltrated .
The Committee on Budgets did , however , see a great deal of sense in the proposal that an examination be undertaken after three years to establish whether it would be possible and advisable to levy fees .
This means , of course , that a decision to introduce fees was not taken .
The proposal that contributions to staff pensions be entered on the receipts side of the Commission budget has also fallen by the wayside .
Another amendment that was not adopted is our proposed requirement that the Member State hosting the Food Authority should make a financial contribution or contribute some of the land for its headquarters .
And the Authority is to present a draft budget each year .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to warmly congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Whitehead , on this report , which was far from straightforward , and Mr Bowis , who has done great work on the preliminary task of the report on the White Paper .

The report was not straightforward because , although the Commission ' s proposal is a good starting document and is full of good intentions , in addition to the enormous number of amendments tabled in it , it takes the wrong approach and contains many ambiguities .
For example , Article 5 should clearly define the objectives of food legislation and limit them to the protection of public and consumer health and food safety throughout the food chain , without hindering the free movement of agri-food products within the Community , as well as ensuring the competitiveness of the European agri-food industry within international markets .
Other objectives , such as the protection of the environment and the protection and welfare of animals and plants , are all very laudable , Commissioner , but if they do not affect food safety , there is other legislation which deals with them or which can potentially deal with them .
We have just voted , for example , under the urgent procedure , on the welfare of pigs , with the sole objective of increasing the legislative initiatives of the Swedish Presidency .
The Authority ' s work should focus on risk assessment and scientific advice , which is no small task of course .
Commissioner , you have said on many occasions that the new rapid alert system is part of crisis management , and that it would be the responsibility of the Commission .
However , in its proposal , the Commission proposes that the Authority should have this responsibility , in recital 35 , in Article 21 ( 2 ) , in Article 22 ( h ) , in Article 34 and in Article 49 .
With regard to risk assessment , it should be of a scientific and independent nature .
This is the true task of the future Food Authority and I am pleased that Amendment No 123 gives priority to its scientific opinions .
As for the communication of risk , this should be done by experts , because a communication which is inappropriate for public opinion may create social alarm , as has already happened , and cause significant losses and economic disasters for agri-food sectors throughout the European Union .
Lastly , I hope that the future decision on the headquarters of the European Food Authority will be preceded by a serious debate between our institutions and that it will finally be reached by co-decision .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy . ( EL ) Commissioner , Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the debate on the Commission 's proposed regulation gives us an opportunity to stress that , for the third time in the space of a few years , we are witnessing the very foundations of the internal market being undermined .
Three times we have seen consumer confidence in food safety shattered , which is why this debate is absolutely topical and the decision to proceed immediately with the creation of a European Food Authority is absolutely the right decision .
It is not just that consumer confidence was lost when these three successive crises occurred ; we also watched as consumers restructured their consumer habits , we watched as numerous companies which never imagined they would be excluded from the market folded and we watched as several thousand people who were in no way to blame lost their jobs .
So it is not just a question of the financial damage sustained by budgets which have to cope with destroying products and animals ; there is also a social cost and we must take very fast , very serious action here .
I should like to take this opportunity to say that it is imperative that we take account in food legislation of the special nature of traditional products , which are typical of certain areas and places in Europe and which form part of our culture .
Finally , the role of small and medium-sized enterprises in this area must be clearly and officially recognised , given that it is these enterprises that produce the high quality goods and create the jobs .
Mr President , Commissioner Byrne , from the point of view of the agriculture sector , the food safety legislation under discussion is an incredibly important issue .
It has a major impact on the working conditions of businesses and thus forms the basis of the entire agricultural sector .
On behalf of our committee I warmly thank Mr Whitehead for heading the preparation process so well that we other draftsmen were able to take part in the process .
I would especially like to thank him for taking into account the amendments of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development . I would say he has expertly covered everything and even improved the wording of some of the amendments .
He has done a great job .
However , I would still like to focus attention on one particular point .
The report proposes twelve representatives for the board of the new Food Authority , two of whom would be representatives of the food industry .
As directed by the committee , I would like to propose a minor correction to this , namely that one of these representatives should come from the ranks of primary producers .
This is addressed by Amendment No 208 .
Without going any further into the numerous , perhaps slightly technical , details proposed by our committee , I would like to thank Mr Whitehead .
I also hope that this legislative proposal is quickly adopted and implemented .
One part of this is starting the work of the Food Authority .
We can delay this no longer . The Gothenburg Summit must reach a quick decision on starting up this authority as otherwise the citizens ' faith in it will be undermined .
Mr President , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries I welcome the proposal wholeheartedly .
Whilst doing so I stress that it is imperative that the specific characteristics of the fisheries and the aquaculture sectors are taken into account .
These sectors present quite different questions from the general food industry categories and the challenges raised by recent problems in fisheries , including infectious salmon anaemia , amnesic shellfish poisoning and dioxins , require industry-specific measures .
Moreover , adequate consideration must be given to the special needs of the peripheral communities , such as those in Scotland and other fishing nations which fisheries support .
That is why the Committee on Fisheries supported my amendment introducing a new recital on traceability .
The very nature of fisheries has implications for traceability .
There are numerous potential difficulties which the Commission must ensure are catered for , taking into account different methods of catch , where fish are caught , where they are landed and also problems associated with black fish .
In addition , I felt it was essential that the composition of the management board ensures a balanced representation of expertise covering all relevant sectors involved in food production , distribution and animal feed and including , in particular , fisheries .
It is regrettable that neither of these priorities were taken on board by the committee responsible .
I would urge the Commissioner to take them into account .
Please note that I am not suggesting increasing the size or changing the method of appointing the board , merely that the relevant expertise should be included .
I welcome , however , amendments which follow the gist of my opinion , redefining the definitions of food unfit for human consumption and contaminated food in Amendments Nos 43 and 44 , as they are more in line with the policy the Commission has pursued in the wake of the outbreak of infectious salmon anaemia .
Finally , the Committee on Fisheries endorsed Amendments Nos 35 and 51 , which take into account the distinct needs of the aquaculture sectors and , in particular , the amendments that address concerns which have been voiced about the development of genetically modified fish , to prevent them from entering the food chain through the back door via third-country imports .
I would therefore urge the House to support these amendments .
Mr President , there are two key reasons for action in this field .
Firstly , we are mutually dependent on each other for the safety of our food and drink .
Food is a single market and food safety is a public health issue .
Each country cannot send its food and farming police to sample the corn , chew the cattle and spot-check the vines in every other country .
We rely on common standards upheld by consistent levels of inspection , assessment and enforcement .
Secondly , the public has lost confidence in the old national and European food safety systems ; after the scandals and scares about olive oil , wine , mineral water , beef , eggs , poultry , milk , e-coli , listeria , salmonella , dioxins , hormones and GM foods - and the list goes on .
The public wants to be reassured that the long road from seed or stable to market , supermarket , processing plant , oven , fridge and table is as safe as can reasonably be expected .
They want safety assessment that is neither conducted behind the closed doors of the Commission nor tainted by producer or pressure group interest .
So just as when my report , at the White Paper stage , demanded a system based on science and focused on safety , again we say right across this House : keep the food safety authority slim , transparent , independent and dedicated to assessment of food safety risk and to recommendations as to what action , if any , should be taken .
Do not roam down the lanes of healthy eating or comparative diets , however important in health promotion work such routes may be .
Keep the word safety in the title of the authority to give a clear signal as to its purpose and methodology .
Be , and be seen to be , independent of any one Member State and of the Commission , so do not have a board that allows each country to have a place on it .
Keep the number to 12 .
Do not place the EFSA in any building or venue that has close connections with the institutions of the European Union .
Appoint the director of the board after open competition and a parliamentary hearing .
Account to Parliament annually for the stewardship of the remit .
Publish without delay the conclusions and any minority conclusions of the board on any assessed risk , and hold meetings of the board in public .
Attach the food safety bodies of Member States to the authority through an advisory committee comprising the national directors of such bodies .
I commend this report and I commend the rapporteur for a job well done , not least because of the inter-party and inter-country cooperation and discussion throughout .
As a result the amendments in committee , which will in due course be largely subsumed in composite form , can nearly all be supported .
To the Commission and the Council I would say : note the strength of unity in this Parliament on these key issues ; cooperate with us in partnership and the beneficiaries will be the European consumers in every Member State .
Mr President , firstly I would like to congratulate Mr Whitehead , who has done an excellent job .
I would also like to emphasise the unanimity in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
We know that food crises within the EU have meant that people are worried about what they are eating .
At the same time this has led to a focus on food and agriculture policy .
Now we have to quickly get this new system up and running - this is incredibly important .
If we have open borders , which we are to have within the Union , and a free flow of goods , it is naturally important that food can also flow freely .
However , this must not of course mean that illnesses and disease also flow freely .
Naturally , a common system must not mean that regionally produced food is not permitted .
If we look at the entire chain of measures , we can see that we will need scientific advice , risk assessment , risk management and control , including control of the control bodies in the Member States .
Possibly in the future it will also be necessary to introduce sanctions .
This new authority will not be able to achieve all this but it will , above all , provide new , increased strength at the beginning of the chain in terms of scientific advice and risk assessment .
We already have the Food and Veterinary Office in Dublin , which plays an important role in terms of risk management and control .
It is now necessary for cooperation between these two authorities to be developed .
In the long run I do not believe that the European Union will escape , we must have a sanction system at EU level .
However , this can only be addressed by the Commission .
It is important that we continue the work such that it becomes even more efficient .
This is an incredibly important step towards obtaining safer food , which we must take quickly .
However , once this step is taken , the issue must not be forgotten . Instead we must develop it further and improve the system even more in the future .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report constitutes an important phase in the legislative process which is to provide an answer to the many crises which consumers have had to brave over the past few decades .
Mr Whitehead has managed , in a balanced report , to expertly combine the many opinions which are around in our Parliament on the establishment of a food authority .
I should like to thank him for this . I would thank him for his willingness to listen and his positive attitude .
The report is based on a whole set of keywords .
First of all , there is safety .
The title has been made more specific : the European Food Authority is now the European Food Safety Authority .
This immediately clarifies the key function of this new institution .
Secondly , quality .
The emphasis is placed on food production of higher quality .
Not quantity , but quality must from now on be of primary concern .
Thirdly , maintaining the cultural diversity of food within the European Union .
Local and traditional production should not fall victim to European legislation .
Fourthly , traceability , transparency of products and increasing producer liability .
Fifthly , independence .
That means that the European authority may only be financed by means of Community funding .
Sixthly , the precautionary principle must apply to any discernible risk .
The European Food Safety Authority will not become an unwieldy giant but will hopefully soon provide us with sound and reliable scientific advice .
With regard to the Management Board , my group insists , however , that a minor increase from 12 to 16 members be permitted .
Indeed , we are of the opinion that primary producers , farmers and fishermen , should be better represented on the Management Board .
Finally , my group also supports the view that the ultimate responsibility of a rapid alert system should be with the Commission .
After all , political responsibilities can never be shirked , as has unfortunately happened all too often in recent years , both within the EU and in the Member States .
Mr President , it is gratifying to see that the media coverage of BSE and foot-and-mouth disease has been focusing chiefly on scientific findings and facts .
The BSE situation in particular demonstrates how important it is to be able to depend on independent research into food resources , research that is geared to the long-term acquisition of knowledge .
Highly complex though the proposal for the creation of a Food Authority may be , the thing it lacks most is a wealth of ideas .
I am convinced that the selection of tasks for the new authority from the many sound proposals can only be made in accordance with the latest research findings from the national establishments .
Current food legislation is undoubtedly complicated and will surely not improve if its refinement is entrusted to lawyers alone .
For that reason , I believe that the necessary funds should be allocated to the budget on the basis of a scientific needs assessment .
The proposal for the creation of a Food Authority already has a head start , because the bodies representing the farming community and the food industry accept the need for such an authority and support its creation , which undoubtedly augurs well for the future .
Those who deal with livestock and the foodstuffs that are derived from them need a lobby which , in the context of the continuing globalisation of food markets , can make a convincing case for their products and , above all , can protect them from misguided policies .
Satisfying the exacting demands that society makes of its food producers is crucial to their success or failure .
The consumption of meat and meat products is rising slowly , and their prices are developing in line with production costs .
Consumers require comprehensive information about the processing and the nutritional value of meat and meat products .
I am one of those who believe there is still a great deal of work to be done here , for there are many who have relapsed into a blinkered supply-and-demand view of food policy and are unable to look beyond the shop counter .
Meat will play a major role in the months and years ahead - and rightly so , in my opinion .
The traditional planning of menus from a shopping basket of fruit , vegetables and meat provides a far greater volume of healthy nutrients than ready-made convenience foods .
But what is a fair price for healthy food ?
Two thousand years ago , Hippocrates said that food should be our medicine and medicine our food .
I believe his precept holds good today , and I would answer my question by citing the need for prices to reflect quality .
Issues of ecology and ethics play a part in the production of foodstuffs .
The ecological and ethical principles that will underlie the work of the Food Authority must be precisely defined .
Mr President , in relation to BSE , dioxins and concern about the safety of GM foods , this House has been vigilant and responsive to consumer concerns .
In this regard I compliment Commissioner Byrne - who is responsible for this specific area - and Commissioner Fischler .
I also extend my compliments to Mr Whitehead on the thoroughness of his report .
The publication of the Commission White Paper on food safety and the proposed establishment of a European Food Authority marks a new era in food production .
From now on every link in the food chain will become an integral part of the production process .
The end result should put beyond doubt the quality and safety of all food products , and provide the assurances consumers have been seeking and to which they are entitled .
Europe has a rapidly growing food sector .
The process of adding value to basic agricultural products is supplying consumers with a wide range of quality food .
New research in this area will contribute significantly to its future development .
As employment in the processing sector continues to increase , this welcome development contrasts sharply with the serious decline in family farming and the reluctance of young people to take up farming as a career .
You may say that this point is not relevant to this debate , but I put it to the House that unless we can ensure the conformity , viability and profitability of the production base of Europe 's food sector , we are unlikely to reach the standards to which we aspire . In this regard the unique role of farmers as guarantors of food security and quality is far too often taken for granted .
The Commission proposals concerning the development of food legislation and food safety are positive .
In order to ensure food safety , the whole food chain must be flawless and its supervision comprehensive .
I fully agree that food must be traceable through all stages of the food chain , from farm to table .
In conclusion , in our anxiety to safeguard the consumer interest - our main objective - we must also ensure that agriculture is allowed to benefit from the advances in modern technology .
Mr President , food from the European Union is among the safest in the world .
However , as a result of recent food crises , the European consumer has lost faith in food .
The key aim of setting up the European Food Authority is to regain that trust .
In the Netherlands , roughly the same amount of meat is currently being consumed as in the period prior to the said crises , whilst Germany and France are still facing much lower levels of meat consumption .
On the one hand , that illustrates that there is no such thing as a European consumer .
On the other hand , we can conclude from this that the consumer ' s trust is tied in more with national character than with the setting up of a European Food Authority .
The fight over the location of the EFSA , which various Member States would like to host , makes me wonder whether this is primarily a matter of prestige .
In this connection , I am not clear about the meaning of the criterion ' tradition in food safety ' .
There is the risk that the Food Authority might become a bribe to placate consumers , without offering any added scientific value for the national food safety authorities .
That is why it is of great importance that a link be established between food production and food safety .
As the problem lies with food production , that is where the solution should be found .
The upshot will be that European agricultural policy will need a complete overhaul .
An agricultural policy must be put in place which enables animal feed to be produced near the cattle reared for meat , so that animal feed and animals need not be transported over long distances .
This also reduces the risk of infection .
Such a policy ties in with the prevention principle and the proximity principle .
Moreover , there is integration , since this policy also benefits the environment and animal welfare .
A related problem which merits our attention is the export of food whereby lower standards are applied than those in the European Union .
In practice , countries outside the European Union often cannot afford the luxury of aiming for the safest food levels .
Needless to say , we should not simply export food which does not meet our safety standards to those countries .
However , exports of a kind which increase food safety in those countries should be permitted .
It would , of course , be ideal if , in the European Union and in third countries alike , food were supplied from within the countries ' own territories .
Only in cases where this is really impossible should additional trade take place .
In the outlined policy , there will be no need for the destruction of large batches since , without international transport , the risk of infection is much smaller .
In this context , the use of the holding ' s own animal feed within the holding can be permitted .
After all , a ban would imply the destruction of large quantities of usable food , whilst the chances of lowering the risk are hardly an issue , if at all .
I agree with the proposal by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy that risk assessment is a task for the food authority .
The political translation of risk assessment into risk management belongs with the European institutions .
The Member States need to ensure that the rapid alert system is effective and that the European Commission is informed in good time .
Under these conditions , there is no need for all Member States to be on the food authority ' s Management Board .
Not only is a food authority being set up , extremely drastic measures are also being laid down in legislation .
In my opinion , drafting new legislation is the wrong reaction to Member States ' not complying with existing legislation .
For that reason , priority should be given to setting up independent inspectorates in the Member States which enforce the law locally .
And on the basis of a reliable authority , all consumers can acquire confidence in European food .
Mr President , while complimenting the rapporteur on his work I venture to raise some doubt about the approach whereby , whenever a problem turns up , the response is to create an agency , a body appointed to deal with it or resolve it .
Unfortunately , that is the golden rule for the creation and proliferation of bureaucracies .
Naturally , we hope it will not be the case of this Food Safety Authority , but every appropriate measure must be taken and great care is needed , because that is precisely the mechanism usually operating inside the European Union .
As regards food safety , we know there are enormous political problems inside the Union , because we have seen them with our own eyes , particularly during the food crisis caused by mad cow disease , but not only then .
These are political problems that call for political responses about possibilities of intervention and the relationship of powers between the Union and the Member States , and these political responses cannot be discharged simply by creating an authority appointed to provide them .
That said , let us at least make sure the decision to be taken allows the Authority to operate properly , and for it to operate properly - as others have already said - I believe its purpose must be very precise : it must be clearly defined as food safety .
It seems to me less than prudent - and here I am referring to the speeches of some of my fellow Members - to start thinking about extending the purpose and scope of the Authority to include environmental issues and matters relating to traditional foods .
These are issues to be dealt with by the market and the Member States .
I am of the opinion that this Authority should first and foremost concern itself with issues of food safety and scientific opinions , not , as the text advocates , to avoid contrasting scientific opinions , but indeed , on the contrary , to ensure that all the different scientific opinions see the light of day and perhaps even to allow the democratic assemblies to consider , compare and debate the solutions proposed by science .
It would therefore be appropriate to consolidate Parliament ' s influence and involvement , from membership of the board of directors to the actual decisions relating to the Authority , both now and indeed later , when the Authority is actually in place .
I want to comment now on an amendment contained in the report , which states that : ' in order to encourage respect for EU law , it should only be located in a country within the top half of Member States in terms of the fewest cases outstanding in the ECJ for alleged breaches of EU law ' .
I think that is a real blunder , and a basic error in the interpretation of the Treaties as well .
There are rules laid down for imposing sanctions and monitoring respect for European Union legislation in the Member States , and it would really be an improper use of the Treaties and European legislation to use the location of agency offices as merchandise to be traded between one country and another , with more going to ' good ' countries and less to ' bad ' countries with a large number of cases pending before the Court of Justice .
The location of the Authority must be based on criteria relating to its activity - that is , the location should be the expression of an agricultural and food culture rooted in that territory - and to its scientific jurisdiction , which relates to foods and food products .
In general , locating agencies as prizes to be given to this or that Member State is a dangerous mechanism which binds the agency to the Member State , diminishes its independence and , above all , is a perverted use of European legislation .
Mr President , the plan to create a European Food Authority was a direct result of the very serious deficiencies which became apparent in the Commission ' s treatment of the issue of mad cow disease .
It was the White Paper on food safety which proposed the creation of the authority which we are discussing here today .
Mr Whitehead ' s report has the merit of pointing out a certain number of ambiguities contained in the draft regulation , but it does not propose how those ambiguities should be removed .
The rapporteur , quite rightly , emphasises the need to draw a very precise distinction between the advisory role of the European authority and the risk-management role which falls to the Member States and the Commission .
The rapid alert system should not , therefore , be placed under the control of the authority .
Why , then , has the word ' agency ' been replaced by ' authority ' , which causes confusion and appears to signify that this body plays an executive role , which should not be the case ?
The report also emphasises , rightly , the need for networking between the European authority and the agencies of the Member States , but it remains silent on the subject of how this close cooperation is to be achieved .
The consultative forum ought , in principle , to be the means of achieving this cooperation , but how will it work ?
No specific explanation has been given on this crucial point .
We have a remarkable level of scientific competence on food safety available at national level , for example the British FSA or the French FSA .
At all costs we must avoid creating a European structure which competes with these national bodies or is redundant in relation to them . The national bodies must continue to supply their input on the assessment side , since this is what will enable the European agency to play its coordinating role , since the European agency has certainly not been given any authority which is superior to those of the national agencies .
Finally , with regard to the need to work actively to achieve the proposed consistency between the raised European standards and existing international standards , a problem which this report mentions almost as an aside , I also regret the fact that Parliament has not really discussed this vital point in any more detail so as to ensure that our initiatives do not have the effect of penalising European producers .
Mr President , the European Commission proposals to set up a European Food Authority are a direct and long-awaited reaction to the food crises which Europe has had to face over recent years .
This debate is clearly of major importance to the European citizen .
Indeed , European consumers ' confidence in food safety must be restored , and the establishment of a European Food Authority is the first major step towards restoring that confidence .
Mr President , I am referring to the proposals as being " long-awaited " .
It is , after all , nearly two years since the President of the Commission , Mr Prodi , announced , on taking up office , that restoring the consumer ' s confidence in food safety was one of the key priorities .
Only now , in June 2001 , do we as Parliament get a chance to express our views on the plans .
I hope that , despite this , the Food Authority will be able to commence its activities at the start of next year , anyway .
The location in which the authority should be based is still to be indicated , in fact .
I expect the EP to re-confirm my amendment on that score .
The fact that there has been such a time lapse between the legislative process and the original date when the proposals were submitted , is not down to today ' s rapporteur , Mr Whitehead , nor to the rapporteur at the time , Mr Bowis .
They have both acquitted themselves of their tasks marvellously .
I would now like to make a few observations about the content .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has tightened up the proposal , with good reason .
Allow me to focus on the powers of the authority first of all .
A clear distinction should be drawn between its advisory role and its task of issuing regulations .
It is the Authority ' s task to outline the risks scientifically and to assess them .
That also means , therefore , that it should be the European Commission that ultimately implements the rapid alert system
Mr President , the legislation and the package of tasks that is before us are only a first step .
I would call for further development in the future .
Mr President , with today ' s vote , and thanks to the truly exceptional work of our rapporteur , we are taking a fundamental step towards responding to the expectations and , perhaps , the anguish of the European public .
For many citizens , eating is not just nourishment , it is much more : a conscious choice , linked to quality of life , an act deeply rooted in the cultural and culinary traditions of the regions .
The primary and absolute duty of the Union is assuredly to guarantee maximum food safety throughout every link of the production and distribution chains , but its duties also include the protection and promotion of typical regional products , as well as providing accurate information on foodstuffs present on the market , so that the consumer can exercise choice in full critical awareness .
From this point of view , I feel it is important to stress the major improvements made to the Commission ' s proposal by the amendments adopted in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
This applies both to the section on the general principles of the legislation and to that devoted to setting up the European Authority , highlighting the role small- and medium-sized enterprises should be able to play in the promotion of quality production .
In conclusion , I want to mention the choice of location for the future Authority .
We all have our own idea of the perfect location , and drawing up a set of more or less binding criteria is certainly not going to help us resolve the problem , far less deciding on the basis of a league table of good environmental practice .
After ensuring the independence and logistic accessibility of the Authority , I think it is important for the location to be chosen on the basis of closer consultation , following the approach used for the European City of Culture .
In voting for Amendment No 215 , therefore , we call for the co-decision procedure to be applied .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , with this decision , Europe is responding to the concerns of its citizens about food safety , in its widest sense , prioritising the protection of health against disease , poisoning , swindles , scandals , and the new frontiers of science .
However , in creating the Authority two precautions must be taken : first , bureaucratisation and centralising tendencies must be avoided ; secondly , Europe has already been accused of wanting to wipe out typical and traditional products by applying rules on hygiene and health , processing and conservation , right up to the moment of consumption , which are unsuitable , rigid and excessive , valid for the sterile , standardised products of big business but not appropriate for quality products linked to a locality , like those of my own Aosta Valley and the rest of the Alps - cheese , sausages and so on .
To suppose that it is possible , in the mountains , to imitate the big dairies and slaughterhouses of the lowlands increases mistrust of Europe .
Let that be a warning to the Authority !
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Whitehead ' s report on the setting up of a European Food Authority to be responsible for food safety appears to us to be moving in the right direction , both in its analysis of the situation which led to the proposal to create this authority and as regards the tasks that will be assigned to the authority and the proposed method of ensuring that it operates in the best possible way .
We must remember that this initiative is the result , unfortunately , of a series of repeated scandals connected , on the one hand , with the desire to increase agricultural productivity and , on the other , with the monopoly enjoyed by the major distributors , which have led to health-conscious , industrial farming but have not prevented the development of scandalous trends such as chicken containing dioxin , trafficking in veterinary products of all kinds , and in particular the fundamental crisis of BSE .
Putting all these things right is one of the main objectives of this agency , in order to safeguard the health and safety of the consumer all the way from the farm to the fork .
It must play a double role , on the one hand ensuring safety along the whole length of the food chain , and on the other hand guaranteeing the quality of all products intended for the consumer .
In order to do this , it will operate at an earlier stage in the process than the institutions , because every citizen must have the right to healthy , safe food .
Moreover , like those in the industry itself , it must be aware of the rules that this implies and of the costs that it represents .
At the beginning of next year , in order to apply the principles of transparency and completely independent monitoring , the Food Authority will have to propose the principles which this document correctly sets out .
It must be able to provide analytical input on any product , including any genetically modified organisms , vaccinations and pesticides which might at any moment enter the food chain .
The failure of public health awareness as the only reference criterion has been proved following the scandal of animal meal .
Such an agency must be able to set out a list of measures constituting good practice , of labels for products having special local characteristics , and of farm-type qualities , rather than merely industrial standards which cannot prevent either salmonella or alarming epidemics .
Its main mission is above all to serve as a coordinator for the national agencies , so as to ensure that they all recognise the same references and so that their role in providing scientific evaluation and preventing risks is sufficiently well publicised .
Of course it will have to require the same controls and traceability rules for all the countries of the Union , whether for their exports , their imports or their own consumption .
As for where it should be located , this is of little importance provided that transparency and traceability are observed by everyone concerned .
Mr President , our rapporteur has done an excellent job and I should like to congratulate him on behalf of my group .
However , I do have a few comments to make .
I do not think we seriously appreciated just how complicated the circumstances culminating in the scandals which have resulted in today 's debate on this new legislation were .
We did not seriously evaluate the attitude towards events and developments on the part of senior politicians , technicians and technocrats and high-level departments in the Member States , with their silence , their cover-ups , their misunderstandings , their failure to act and their calculated recourse to free trade .
Have we forgotten all this ?
All this has been noted in Parliament 's reports and we need to counter it with strong political intervention , with common objectives , common measures and a common policy .
And in today 's debate you are taking a few steps forward by adopting a few principles and introducing a service .
This service is not an authority , it is a sort of intergovernmental consultancy service .
Rather than the food " Interpol " which we wanted , all we shall have is advisors .
It is not a bad thing , but it does not amount to much .
In any event , it is in keeping with the intergovernmental nature of the Union .
However , when it comes to international trade and free trade , then the discussion becomes somewhat obscure .
It is not just a question of what we export , it is also a question of what we import when it comes to food safety .
We have not yet approved the convention on biosafety and cannot therefore legally counter free trade arguments by citing the principle of prevention without being under constant threat of being taken to the World Trade Organisation .
Unless I am mistaken , we are shortly due to debate meat containing hormones from the United States .
So all this restricts the role of the service under discussion .
Despite which , it will be a valuable service .
But we need to ensure that it has an opinion , its own opinion , and that it is able to provide information and publish its opinion even when no-one asks for it , especially when it disagrees with those in charge of managing the risks .
This could bring a breath of fresh air by improving discussion and public information and will , I think , make those who want a repeat performance of what happened during previous scandals think twice .
However , I have one reservation .
What will this service be able to do in relation to its national counterparts and in relation to the action programmes introduced to deal - God forbid - with the next crisis which comes along ?
Mr President , Commissioner , bovine spongiform encephalopathy , dioxin , foot-and-mouth disease , these are scourges which have fallen upon Europe , each one following so closely upon the heels of the previous one that they have caused panic among consumers in Member States .
The negligence of certain Member States has encouraged , if not aggravated , the impact of these disasters .
How can we oppose the creation of a European food agency in the face of the growing concern on the part of consumers , a concern which is exacerbated by the sensation-seeking attitude of the media ?
However , this proposal for such an agency is already talking about a Food Authority , and that is where I start to have misgivings .
Will it be yet another European technocratic unit ?
Will this authority prevail over the national food safety agencies , with the tendency to sprawl all over the place , which is what usually happens in such cases , or will it operate only as a coordinator , which is what I hope it will do , leaving it to the Member States to manage their own food safety ?
In this respect , it would be too easy to dismiss the Irish vote , because it is a sign of the aspirations of the people of Europe , and we must not forget that Europe , if it is to survive , must be constructed only with the assent of those people .
Mr President , Commissioner , a strong Authority that can avail itself of all the wealth of Europe ' s experience , ability and professionalism : if that is the accepted and agreed principle underlying the European Food Authority , the principle of separation between risk assessment and risk management is not , in my opinion , likely to apply very much , in terms of either timing or purpose .
From this angle , the establishment of a European Food Authority represents the base line , the first step towards bringing protection up to speed and responding to consumers ' demands and also their fears .
To make that concrete , the European Food Authority ' s operations and mission must cover real detailed knowledge of all the farms scattered across the European Union .
Hence a close and positive link with appropriate structures inside the countries of the Union seems essential and fundamental .
Furthermore , it is becoming hard to believe that animal health is in any way remote or separate from public health generally .
Animal health is therefore a vital issue , but so are healthy vegetables , genetically modified organisms and , last but not least , labelling .
In my opinion , it is precisely through the action of the European Food Authority that the European concept of traceability must become reality , and a thread running through every link in the food chain : production , industrial processing and marketing .
If we fail to impose this traceability in the service of the citizen , we will inevitably lose a great opportunity for transparency and political action to demonstrate that we are indeed responsive to the demands of our fellow European citizens .
Mr President , like the others I would like to give my sincere support to Mr Whitehead for his excellent work .
I would also like to support Mr Whitehead on the Council deciding the location having heard the views of the Commission and Parliament .
This decision should be made immediately at the Gothenburg Summit .
Several wishes have been presented here that the authority should begin immediately at the start of next year .
If we want this authority to be an authority which really gets into the work expected of it , we also have to sacrifice preparation time to the founding of the authority .
The location is not the most important thing about this authority but I sympathise a great deal with the ideas put forward via the committee that , regarding this authority in particular , attention should be paid to where it is located .
Nor is it a bad criterion that the location should represent a country which has the fewest food safety cases before the European Court of Justice .
These matters are important to citizens .
We must also take care that the authority receives sufficient resources , not only financial resources but also scientific and in terms of expertise .
The authority must be independent and it must have good contacts with the scientific community .
Openness and appointments based on merit are essential .
It must be an expert body on which we in Parliament can rely , which citizens trust , which provides information about threats and risks as well as progress achieved in the area of food safety .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am in favour of establishing this Authority as described in Mr Whitehead ' s excellent report as soon as possible .
It is to be hoped that we will then enjoy sound cooperation between the Union and the Member States .
With regard to risk analysis and deciding what is and is not safe , we will have a better scientific basis for solutions .
Inspections will then be monitored by the agency based in Dublin .
What remains is the policy , which is what we have reserved for ourselves , and risk management , in which the European Commission and Parliament must join forces .
There is a great deal yet to be done on that front .
We must have clear European standards and European measuring methods .
The Member States and the Union must have a common system that works .
Crises have shown that that is not the case and that the Commission has far too little power on that score .
I assume that we will get the Authority on track under the Belgian Presidency but , under that Presidency , we must also take a crucial step forward towards a truly common European policy on food safety .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , hats off to the rapporteur and to the shadow rapporteur !
They have worked unstintingly and single-mindedly to present this marvellous document .
I believe that , with this report , we have fired the starting signal for the enhancement of food safety in the European Union .
As the rapporteur for the specific hygiene provisions , I could only proceed on the basis of clear and firm views , one of which is reflected in the fact that Parliament has never questioned the use of a regulation as the legal instrument .
I lay particular emphasis on this , because there are different perceptions within the Council .
That is why I wish to re-emphasise that a regulation is the only legal instrument for this and the other five sets of provisions .
Nothing else would be acceptable to us .
Regulations naturally require extensive amendments to national food legislation , but that , I believe , is the only way to remove inconsistencies and close loopholes .
The approach taken in the draft regulation , whereby food producers are to be made more responsible for the safety and quality of their products , is certainly right and proper , but to the same extent more onerous verification duties must be imposed on governments too .
This applies not only to the scope and frequency of inspections but also to their quality .
The professional competence and background knowledge of inspectors must be improved .
This is no job for auxiliary staff , and recent cutbacks in this domain must be reversed .
As for the Food Authority itself , I must stress the importance of a clear definition of its responsibilities .
Food safety must be its main concern , and its role must be confined to risk analysis .
For this reason we should not include in this regulation extraneous issues such as quality , nutritional value and so on .
The seat of the authority has frequently been discussed .
Parliament , whether or not it has codecision rights in this matter , has laid down clear criteria that should be applied , and let me say that we must not allow another dilemma to arise like the one in Dublin , a situation in which an authority cannot operate because the basic conditions are not right .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to thank our rapporteur and congratulate him on the importance and the quality of the work he has done .
This regulation setting up a European Food Authority will , I hope , help to restore the confidence of European consumers .
It therefore seems to me to be extremely important that this authority , which should constitute the mainspring of the Union ' s strategy on food safety , can become operational as rapidly as possible , and in any case by the beginning of next year .
The rapporteur is right to emphasise the need to make a clear distinction between the tasks and responsibilities which will fall to the future authority and those which are the responsibility of the Commission .
Thus it must be quite clear that , although the authority is responsible for the day-to-day operation of the rapid alert system , in other words that tool which is so essential in risk assessment , it is the Commission , in other words the political decision-making body , which has to retain the responsibility for risk management , in other words it must be in control of the measures to be taken .
In the same way , it is necessary to state that , although one of the characteristics of the authority must be the scientific competence and independence of its experts , it does not actually have any political legitimacy of its own .
In this respect , there are perhaps good grounds for regretting the fact that the name ' agency ' has been dropped , because it was a better name to describe such a structure , whose powers must be of a technical or scientific nature and must on no account become regulatory or executive .
This is why it seems to me relevant , as the Commission proposes , to place this authority under the triple tutelage of the Commission , the Council and the European Parliament .
Finally , and in spite of everything , I should like to emphasise , as other Members have done before me , that unless we rethink our options and our common policies concerning agriculture , no authority , however effective , will ever be able to stem the tide of major crises like those that we have experienced recently .
Mr President , food safety and public health are rarely out of the headlines and are key political priorities for all of us in Europe .
Today 's proposal aims to clarify the EU-wide general principles of food law and I would like to compliment the rapporteur , Mr Whitehead , both on his excellent report and on the consensual style with which he has carried out his duties in the Committee on the Environment .
I also welcome Commissioner Byrne .
The integrity of a European food authority will be based on independence and strong scientific leadership in the field of food safety .
We must be able to trust those who set out to advise us : Farmers , fishermen , food manufacturers , processors , retailers , government , consumer advisory groups , scientists and ultimately the food safety authority .
We must be able to trust them .
It is essential that we have a body of science as a reference point , whether we are consumers , policy-makers or even contributors to the food chain , and that we know what is an acceptable balance between risk prevention and informed consumer choice .
It is all about balance .
I would like briefly to refer to some of amendments that I have tabled to this Commission proposal and I hope they will be accepted here .
When we talk about the requirements for food safety it is imperative that we also talk about the responsibility of food producers for this food chain .
The Commission has omitted from the legislative text the key first link in the food chain : the farmer or the fisherman .
I have tabled Amendment No 72 to Article 40 which deals with responsibility of farmers for food safety and adds a force majeure defence for phenomena over which farmers have no personal control , for example natural disasters and major environmental pollution .
This is not , however , to diminish the primary role of farmers in ensuring the safety of their produce .
I also firmly believe that for the FA to have the confidence and backing of the people of Europe it is imperative that it operates and communicates in a wholly transparent and independent manner .
Risk communication will be a key element of the FA .
One only has to look at the BSE inquiry in the UK and the Lord Phillips report which stated that breakdown in risk communication was a major factor in exacerbating the crisis there .
I have tabled Amendments Nos 147 and 148 to Article 39 in an effort to ensure that the authority explains its scientific risk assessments to this House , to consumers , to businesses and the academic community .
The authority should also meet regularly with the Commission and the Council in order to explain the risk assessments to these bodies and help them make more informed risk management decisions .
In conclusion , in relation to risk management , the measured and proportionate use of the precautionary principle is a key principle when Europe deals with food scares .
I welcome the Commission 's balanced proposals on this issue .
Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would firstly like to thank Mr Whitehead for his good work and for his contributions to the Regulation .
I would like to refer to two of the controversial issues of the Regulation : the procedure for the choice of headquarters and the criteria for it .
The proposed regulation does not name any headquarters or any candidates .
Article 63 lays down the criteria to be met by any nominee and also establishes a procedure for that choice .
I believe that the rapporteur is right to propose that the decision on the headquarters of the authority should be taken by the Council after consultation with the Commission and the European Parliament .
However , it seems to me inappropriate that , to the criteria of independence and integrity , scientific standards , adequate infrastructures and easy access , from a communication point of view , we should add the criterion that as an essential condition for election as the headquarters the number of outstanding cases of a Member State before the Court of Justice should be taken into account .
I would like to know , Commissioner , what you think of this new criterion , which I believe to be discriminatory .
It would rule out the candidatures of France , Italy and Barcelona from the outset .
I believe that this new criterion makes no sense and is not in accordance with the objective of the future Food Authority which is , above all , health and consumer protection .
Mr President , I would first like to join in thanking Mr Whitehead for his excellent work .
He has continued along the wise line adopted by Mr Bowis in his own report .
In their proposals the European Parliament has clearly taken its own share of responsibility for restoring the faith of the European consumer and guaranteeing food safety .
The most important part of the regulation now under discussion concerns setting up the Food Safety Authority .
I am particularly pleased that the Committee , on Mr Whitehead ' s proposal , decided to repeat the criteria I initiated , which were accepted back in October last year during the reading of Mr Bowis ' s report .
It should have a long standing tradition in food safety in order to lend credibility to the authority in the eyes of over 300 million European consumers .
It should not endanger the authority ' s independence and integrity , it should provide a good scientific infrastructure and facilities in the field of food safety .
It must have good transport and communications connections .
This has a particularly great impact considering that even in October the Social Democratic Group was opposed to the setting of these criteria .
Now , headed by Mr Whitehead , they too appear to understand that it is important to establish what we expect of a Food Authority and what kind of criteria we will set for its location .
For the benefit of all the citizens of Europe we must hope that these criteria will also be met when the Council reaches its decision on the issue .
According to the agreement already entered into by Parliament , proposed amendments which directly support a particular location will not be accepted .
This policy should be maintained .
Mr President , I would finally like to express my deep regret that the Council does not appear able to reach a decision on this matter sufficiently quickly . This being the case , setting up the authority is at risk of being delayed compared with what was planned .
Setting up the Food Authority is a matter in which the confidence of the citizens must not be any further shaken by creating political deals on solutions that have nothing in common or - even worse - by creating the impression that political horse trading is taking place in the Council , which should clearly be an area of politics belonging to the past .
Mr President , I should first of all like to congratulate Mr Whitehead warmly on what turned out to be an excellent report .
Food must be of a certain quality , but it should first of all be safe .
Consumers must be able to rely on the inspections being adequate .
These days , confidence has increasingly become a matter of national concern , and that is , in my view , a step backwards .
The internal market is a great good , but it can only function on the basis of common standards and rules , and today sees the laying of the foundations for this .
Traceability , liability , responsibility , precaution ; they are all essential principles .
Producers must be responsible for the highest quality at every stage of the food chain .
But responsibility should also be clearly defined .
The rapid alert system must remain a political instrument .
We must guarantee that food imported from third countries is just as safe as food produced over here , but food safety must not be a cover for protectionism .
That requires sound and fair inspections , but also a common and global approach .
Emotions can run high where food is concerned .
Politicians cannot and may not ignore those emotions , but do need to weigh the facts .
The European Food Authority must be a beacon of objectivity , and it must join forces with national authorities , that is obvious .
But we should not render the European Authority powerless right from the outset .
We do not want a stalemate between the national and European authorities .
In the event of a difference of opinion with one or more national authorities , the European Authority must still produce unambiguous recommendations on scientific grounds .
The general principles of foodstuffs legislation constitute the building blocks for quality , and that is what we will be further developing in the years to come .
Animal welfare should also be brought into the equation , and the quality of our production methods must improve .
We should have the courage to bring about true reform of our agricultural policy .
Quality and food safety must occupy centre stage in that connection .
Mr President , today we are debating the framework Regulation which , for the first time , lays down a definition on foodstuffs , lists the principles for the foodstuffs policy and , at the same time , sets up the Food Safety Authority that is to underpin this policy with a sound scientific foundation .
This report met with the unanimous approval of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , something on which I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , for it proves that he has managed to separate the main points and subordinate points convincingly .
I should also like to congratulate the Commission , for it has put us on the right track with a very sound proposal .
The stakes are therefore high .
The objectives are to offer maximum guarantees of food safety and of fair play within the internal market and with regard to imports and exports and , as the previous speaker rightly pointed out , to restore consumer confidence in all products offered within the internal market .
The consumer has lost a great deal of confidence .
We owe it to the public to provide objective reasons why they should again have confidence .
A major factor in that connection will be the authority which the Food Authority acquires , for we can easily call it an Authority but , in the final analysis , it will be up to that Authority to ensure that it can command authority in the eyes of consumers , producers and the national authorities .
This must be facilitated by the structure of this establishment , its working methods , the quality of its staff and its independence , but also by its skill at establishing networks .
I hope that this project will be a success .
I hope that the Belgian Presidency manages to complete it , as best it can , and I hope that we in Parliament will also have the courage to subject our amendments to the scientific test of this Food Authority .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , not only today is the food inspectorate the focus of public attention ; it will have to endure public scrutiny again in the near future when it starts to pursue the ambitious aim that has been set for it .
We cannot expect it , however , to eradicate criminal practices , slackness and black sheep ; that goes beyond its remit .
I have sometimes had the impression in the course of the present discussion that the wheel is being reinvented in the realm of food safety .
Not so ; let me counter that view by putting it to you that no previous generation in our Member States has ever been able to choose from such a rich variety of good and safe foods .
Inspections cannot turn unsafe food into safe food .
Safe food must be produced .
That is why I am in favour of unequivocal and stringent measures .
From producer to consumer , from byre to buyer , from pitchfork to table fork , if you like - every link in the food-production chain , be it the initial input by the farmers , the processing of farm produce by the food industry or retail food sales and the preparation and serving of food in restaurants and canteens , etc . , should be subject to far stricter control .
The traceability of foodstuffs must be guaranteed throughout the entire production chain .
This morning we are discussing the subject of the food inspectorate , and perhaps we shall be doing so again in the future .
We are wondering whether it should be an agency or an authority , where its headquarters should be , where the line should be drawn between its sphere of responsibility and that of the national authorities or how the two can interact .
Last but not least , we are discussing the powers of this new authority .
My constituents will be hoping that this is not just another paper tiger .
Let us hope that the rich cultural diversity which is reflected in our European menus will manage to survive intact in conformity with the safety and hygiene rules .
I truly wish success to this new institution ; may it ensure that we are not caught empty-handed again in the not too distant future when the next scandal comes along .
Mr President , Commissioner , in the not too distant past , the Europeans ' greatest fear was hunger .
Hunger was , along with war and the plague , one of the three apocalyptic fears that had dotted the history of Europe since the Middle Ages .
Times have changed dramatically where hunger is concerned , not for the whole world , unfortunately , but certainly for the Europe of the Fifteen .
An abundance of food is one of the great achievements of modern times in Europe , as is much more hygienic food than was available until relatively recently .
Nevertheless , the safety and quality of food have suddenly become one of the main causes for concern , fear and uncertainty amongst the sophisticated European consumers .
Appalling incurable diseases , against which medicine is helpless , such as bovine spongiform encephalopathy , are a consequence of the indiscriminate industrialisation of food production , which goes against nature .
We must put an end to situations like this , mainly by making crucial and far-reaching changes to the European common agricultural policy .
The legislation and the strategy that are adopted in the field of food safety are vital for the European Union and for its credibility .
These must be one of its main political and legislative priorities .
The proposal for a Regulation that we are now considering represents the main pillar of a legislative structure , which is designed to guarantee a high level of health protection and to restore consumer confidence .
The most important aspect of this legislation consists of creating an operational European food authority with a high degree of scientific skill and considerable independence .
In order to guarantee food safety , it is crucial that there are no weak links in any part of the food chain and that risks are detected in good time .
It is crucial that there is rigorous monitoring , from the farm to the consumer ' s table .
Hence the need for a food safety authority which is prestigious and well respected .
The Commission ' s proposals are , admittedly , well formulated .
They are positive , useful and well structured and simply require some clarification , as has already been said .
We must adopt them as a matter of urgency .
There is no sense in maintaining a divided approach , and nor would this do us any credit , for example , on the composition of the management board , on the appointment of the executive director or on its headquarters .
Mr Whitehead ' s report is balanced and sensible , which is why I shall be supporting it .
Mr President , in his eloquent introduction the rapporteur referred to the importance of focus and reasserted the importance of the word " safety " being in the title of this authority , which I very much support .
I would like to stress a different word in the title and that is the word " authority " , because it is vital that this is a body to which the rest of the EU can look up .
That is why I tabled an amendment in committee about the location of this new authority , saying that " in order to encourage respect for EU law , it should only be located in a country within the top half of Member States in terms of the fewest cases outstanding in the ECJ for alleged breaches of EU law " .
This went through committee without opposition and I am surprised and a little disappointed that some colleagues today should be upset about this amendment .
The point is that certain countries vote for EU laws and then quite simply ignore them .
This hypocrisy has to stop .
By voting through this amendment now as part of Amendment No 188 , Parliament would make clear that such Member States could not expect the benefits of hosting such new agencies if they are not prepared to exercise their responsibilities .
This is not proposed out of malice . This is not proposed out of mischief .
It is proposed out of principle . European agencies are there to be upholders of EU law and to be an example to others , to command respect and inspire confidence .
This role would be undermined if the Member States themselves are not seen to be champions of the EU laws they are supposed to uphold .
We have a chance today , and in the vote tomorrow , to give a very clear signal .
What signal do we want to give ?
Do we want to say that upholding EU laws does not matter or do we want to say it actually matters a very great deal ?
I urge the House to give a very clear signal , a very positive signal , to vote " yes " to this amendment and for this vote to be clear and unambiguous .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Philip Whitehead and the draftspersons Messrs Pesälä , Folias , Hudghton , Kuckelkorn , Pomés Ruiz and Mrs Gebhardt , and their committees for their report on the proposal for a general food law and the establishment of the European Food Authority .


I appreciate the excellent work that has been done and would also like to thank all those involved , including my own staff , for the speed this complex proposal has been dealt with .
I would also to thank the Members here this morning for their generous remarks in relation to the work undertaken by the Commission .
This proposal is the cornerstone of the European food safety strategy , providing the basic principles , requirements , procedures and organisational structures for the future development of food law and , in particular , food safety .
As you will have seen from the proposal , the Commission took careful account of the Bowis report from Parliament on the White Paper on food safety .
The draft Whitehead report supports the Commission proposal in general , despite the great number of amendments .
A significant number are editorial and do not change the overall meaning .
However , on some important issues , the report does not support the Commission 's objective in relation to the following : the scope of the Authority ; the composition of the Management Board ; the rapid alert system ; procedures in case of diverging scientific opinion ; amendments that could prove detrimental to the Community 's ability to negotiate in international fora ; and some amendments that deviate from the horizontal nature of this proposal .
There are a large number of amendments , so without further delay I will address them .
Of the 189 amendments in the report of the Environment Committee and the 26 tabled in plenary , the Commission is able to accept well over half fully or in principle .
It would be impractical to give you a detailed analysis of each amendment , and so I will focus on the most important issues , particularly those on which the Commission cannot accept the proposed amendment .
The Article 95 legal basis for this proposal , which fully engages Parliament in the codecision procedure won my strong backing during the debates here , has received the full support of the Commission and Council 's legal services .
Hence the Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 4 or 209 changing or expanding the legal basis .
A number of amendments refer to food hygiene .
We cannot accept these in this broad , horizontal context , which covers not just hygiene , but also contaminants , additives , materials in contact with food and much more .
Similarly , Amendments Nos 59 and 72 are too detailed for a horizontal text .
We cannot accept Amendment Nos 11 and 202 on concessions for SMEs , as consumers should enjoy the same protection as regards food from SMEs .
Nor can we accept Amendments Nos 26 , 40 , 50 and 193 , which extend the scope of the regulation to food quality .
This is not the correct legal instrument and other work is being undertaken in this regard .
The scope of the regulation covers misleading and deceptive practices but not financial fraud between traders .
Hence we can only partially accept Amendment No 49 .
We have kept food safety requirements apart from other consumer interests .
Therefore we can accept in principle Amendment No 57 - not in Article 8 on consumer interests , but in Article 12 , which covers the food safety requirement .
We cannot accept Amendment No 214 to Article 12 , requiring that the calorific value and composition of a food become part of a safety assessment .
We do not accept a range of amendments on definitions .
Either the horizontal nature of the text is compromised , the proposed change is redundant or inaccurate in relation to the usage of the term in the text , or it is already contained in another definition .
We can accept the part of Amendment No 38 introducing distribution , but not the part on placing in circulation .
On Amendment No 45 we can accept the change to the definition of primary production , subject to editorial review .
There are a number of amendments which could prove detrimental to the Community 's ability to negotiate in Codex Alimentarius or cannot be aligned with international agreements to which the Community is already committed .
This is the case particularly with those amendments which attempt to rewrite internationally accepted definitions which we have fought to have accepted , or where changes are not in line with the Commission communication on the precautionary principle , as endorsed by the Council and Parliament .
For example , Amendment No 53 attempts to rewrite what exists in WTO agreements on those instances warranting a full risk analysis .
Neither can we accept Amendment No 54 , which would oblige us to accept other international legitimate factors .
There are no such factors at this time .
Amendment No 52 is also unacceptable , owing to its impact on our international obligations ; it is contrary to WTO rights and obligations .
Although we can accept the concept in Amendment No 84 , it needs to come under Article 5 .
Similar problems are raised by Amendments Nos 55 and 56 on the precautionary principle .
We cannot accept Amendment No 55 , as it is appropriate to retain some discretion without a mandatory requirement to act and , perhaps , for no measures to be adopted as a satisfactory risk management action .
This was part of the Commission 's communication , as endorsed by Parliament and Council , and therefore contradicts positions adopted previously by this House .
Although many of the points in Amendment No 56 reflect these positions , the text is too detailed and our legal advice is that this would cause problems in a legally binding regulation .
We cannot accept Amendment No 63 , which requires food control work and surveillance to be kept confidential .
Any necessary confidentiality will be covered in the horizontal control text to be proposed in the near future .
There are several other amendments relating to general food law which we can accept in principle and , once reviewed , align with the general principles and orientation of the text .
We can only accept the first part of Amendment 61 , which makes the legal responsibilities of feed businesses more precise .
In Amendment No 69 we can only accept the reference to transport .
We can accept the concept in Amendment No 80 that dangerous foods and feeds should not be exported , but I will need to review how this should be drafted .
This concept is also found in Amendment No 82 , but we cannot accept the part of this amendment which refers to the supplier taking products back , as this confuses the legal meanings of import and export .
Amendments Nos 70 and 75 on whistle-blowers are acceptable in principle , but we will consider a more appropriate text .
We cannot accept Amendments Nos 48 and 189 , which are inappropriate for the date of application of different parts of the text .
As regards Amendment No 185 , it would not be possible to have a report on the application of the principles of food law , as these will not have an impact for a significant period of time .
We can accept , in principle , Amendment No 47 , by extending the definition of the status of production and distribution covered by Chapter II of the Regulation .
We can accept , in principle , Amendments Nos 85 and 207 on transparency , while ensuring that the text is fully aligned with the Amsterdam Treaty Protocol on subsidiarity and proportionality .
In relation to the EFA 's scope , Amendment No 87 and related Amendments Nos 88 and 187 are not acceptable , because they reduce the its remit to fields known to have an impact on food safety .
A wide remit is necessary in order not to repeat the failure to identify BSE as a risk for humans at an early stage .
However , Amendment No 86 , which makes it clear that the primary mission of the Authority is food safety , is acceptable .
I would like to stress here that the extent of the work of the Authority that is not linked directly or indirectly to food safety was circulated for the financial statement and , in fact , is less that 5 % .
This brings me to Amendment No 1 .
At this time , we are not in a position to accept the proposed amendment to include the word ' safety ' .
However , given the strong views expressed in Parliament this morning , this is something that we are prepared to reflect on , reconsider and perhaps take on board .
We cannot accept Amendment No 91 for operational reasons .
Amendment No 195 is acceptable in principle , subject to changes in order to include the plant health issues in relation to harmful organisms in the Scientific Panel on plant protection products .
The Commission now considers that it should remain responsible for operation of the rapid alert system , with the Authority acting as a member of the network , so we are not able to accept Amendments Nos 15 , 89 , 94 , 158 , 159 , 161 , 162 , 163 and 169 .
Subject to editorial review , we can accept Amendments Nos 160 , 164 and 166 .
The Commission maintains its original proposal , on the composition of the Management Board of the Authority , which very carefully laid down a balanced share of representatives from the European institutions : four from the Commission , four appointed by Parliament , four from the Council and four representing consumers and industry .
Our main objective was , and is , to have a small , functional Board which , through the balance of its membership , can be seen to be independent , yet accountable to the Community institutions .
For this reason we cannot accept Amendments Nos 17 , 18 , 101 , 194 , 208 and 213 .
Neither can we accept Amendment No 102 , which removes the possibility of alternate Board members , or Amendment No 143 , which insists that the Management Board shall meet only in public , since this should left to the Board 's own discretion .
We can accept Amendments Nos 103 and 105 on the Board .
We can also accept Amendment 106 , which enables the chair of the Scientific Committee to participate in Management Board meetings provided that the text reads ' may participate ' , in order to allow flexibility in the administration of the EFA .
Amendments Nos 219 , 221 and 222 in relation to the renewal of the mandates of the president of the Management Board and of the members of the Scientific Committee are not acceptable , because they are unnecessarily restrictive .
Amendments Nos 107 and 220 on the open and transparent appointment of the Executive Director by the Management Board with a hearing in Parliament , is acceptable in principle .
I must stress the need to be practical and to ensure that the parliamentary process does not cause delays .
In addition , we can accept a number of amendments in principle , subject to editorial review and alignment with other articles .
We can also accept the part of Amendment No 134 that makes public the list of scientific bodies competent to help the EFA in its work , although without the suggested deletion that requires the Member States to designate these bodies .
The rest of Amendment No 134 , which deals with EEA / EFTA countries is acceptable in principle , but should come under Article 48 on the participation of third countries .
We can accept Amendment No 113 in part , but the Advisory Forum should not be compelled to meet six times a year .
Amendment No 118 is not acceptable , as it removes the possibility for the Authority to refuse or modify requests for scientific opinions .
Such flexibility is a critical operational requirement of the Authority .
Amendment No 13 is unacceptable , since a request for a scientific opinion during the legislative process should be limited to justified cases - new scientific information - for example - in order to avoid repeated requests on the same topic .
Risk managers need to be clearly responsible for taking decisions and risk assessors for assessing the risks .
For these reasons , Amendments Nos 21 and 212 are not acceptable .
Amendment No 92 is , however , acceptable , if modified to ensure that the authority can make recommendations on management options at the request of the risk managers .
Amendment No 93 would be acceptable with the deletion of ' for the measures necessary to be taken ' .
Amendment No 98 is acceptable , in making clear that the authority can express ' independently ' its own conclusions and orientations .
The rest of Amendment No 98 is covered by Amendment No 92 .
Finally , Amendment No 97 is not acceptable , since it would involve the authority in risk management .
Amendments Nos 23 , 153 and 157 are not acceptable , because they remove the possibility for the authority to receive fees .
The Commission wants to review this within three years of operation , even though if we agree that it is inappropriate for the authority to charge fees at present .
Amendments Nos 121 , 122 and 123 are not acceptable .
They remove the procedure applied in the event of a divergence between the Authority 's scientific opinions and those of a national scientific body , thereby making the Authority the final arbitrator in science .
This is a legal impossibility .
In any event , the Article 29 procedure is designed to achieve a result through transparency , and the decision is the risk manager 's .
Subsequent failure by Member States to comply with any measure brought forward by the risk manager or the legislative authority will lead to infringement proceedings .
That , in my view , provides the degree of clarity and sureness that Parliament requires .
We can accept Amendments Nos 135 to 142 , 144 and 206 , which would improve the transparency of the Authority ; however , we cannot accept Amendment No 145 for legal reasons .
I cannot accept Amendment No 125 , which removes the ability of the authority to collect food consumption data .
This is a basic requirement , enabling scientists to assess the exposure of consumers to substances through their diet .
Amendment No 126 is acceptable in principle , if changed to ensure that all biological risks that may have a direct or indirect impact on the food production chain are covered .
Amendment No 174 is not acceptable , since the crisis unit will not be a permanent structure .
Amendment No 24 on the emergencies procedure is not acceptable , as a ' serious risk ' is the precondition for emergency measures in all existing Community legislation .
However , Amendment No 178 is acceptable in principle , in that it takes into account the fact that food aid is already covered by the term ' food ' .
Other amendments are not acceptable , because they are incompatible with existing Community procedures or important legal aspects , or because they are covered by other legal provisions either in this text or in other Community texts .
For these reasons , only paragraphs 6a and 6b in Amendment No 154 are acceptable .
Amendment No 155 is acceptable in relation to ' the recommendation from the Council ' , but not in relation to the discharge given to the Management Board .
Amendment No 19 and the part of Amendment No 20 containing the word ' authorised ' are not acceptable .
Amendments Nos 172 and 173 propose involving Parliament in practical crisis management .
This is not , in my view , compatible with its institutional role of control and supervision .
Amendments Nos 175 , 179 , 180 , 181 and 182 are not compatible with the comitology procedure and therefore are not acceptable .
Neither can we fully accept Amendments Nos 183 and 184 .
The evaluation commissioned by the Authority cannot address the whole regulation , as it can only be relevant to the Authority .
Amendment No 205 is not acceptable , since it is already clear that the authority has right to change its own internal rules .
I cannot accept Amendment No 191 , as the delay that this may cause would be impractical and may have a detrimental effect on the start date .
I cannot accept Amendment No 192 , as the Food Authority will not affect the ceiling for heading three of the financial perspective and I draw your attention to the provisional draft budget for 2002 , reference PDB 2002 , currently under review in Parliament and the Council .
Finally , I would like to address the question of the location of the Authority .
Amendments Nos 188 , 190 , 216 , 217 , 218 and 223 are acceptable in part .
The Commission can agree and accept that the location should be based on the following operational criteria : reasonably rapid and convenient physical access ; effective contacts between the authority and the Commission services , especially during food safety crises ; cost-effectiveness ; and necessary social infrastructure for staff .
The other criteria are not acceptable .
Neither is the part of these amendments relating to the procedures for choosing the location acceptable .
Amendment No 215 is not acceptable .
Before I conclude , I would like to say something very briefly about references made by a number of Members to traditional foods .
This is an issue that I regard as being particularly important .
It is dear to my own heart as well as to yours , and is addressed in the upcoming hygiene regulations , where specific reference is made to special treatment in relation to traditional foods .
So to conclude , I wish once again to thank especially Mr Whitehead for his excellent report and , indeed , for his support .
In summary , the Commission cannot accept 100 amendments and they are 1 , 4 , 11 to 13 , 15 , 17 to 19 , 21 , 23 , 24 , 26 , 28 , 29 , 32 to 34 , 36 , 37 , 39 to 41 , 43 , 44 , 46 , 48 , 50 to 56 , 59 , 63 , 68 , 72 , 74 , 77 , 78 , 81 , 87 to 89 , 91 , 94 , 95 , 97 , 99 , 101 , 102 , 117 , 118 , 121 to 123 , 125 , 133 , 143 , 145 to 148 , 153 , 157 to 159 , 161 to 163 , 169 , 172 to 175 , 179 to 182 , 185 , 187 , 189 , 191 to 194 , 202 , 205 , 208 to 215 , 219 , 221 and 222 .
On the other hand , the Commission can accept fully the following 44 amendments : Amendments Nos 3 , 6 to 8 , 14 , 22 , 25 , 30 , 31 , 58 , 64 to 66 , 71 , 79 , 86 , 90 , 103 to 105 , 109 to 111 , 116 , 119 , 124 , 127 to 130 , 131 , 135 to 142 , 152 , 164 , 176 , 186 and 206 .
The Commission can accept in part and / or principle 64 amendments , and they are Nos 2 , 5 , 10 , 16 , 20 , 27 , 35 , 38 , 42 , 45 , 47 , 49 , 57 , 60 to 62 , 67 , 69 , 70 , 73 , 75 , 76 , 80 , 82 to 85 , 92 , 93 , 96 , 98 , 106 , 107 , 108 , 112 to 115 , 120 , 126 , 132 , 134 , 144 , 149 , 150 , 154 to 156 , 160 , 161 , 170 , 177 , 178 , 183 , 184 , 188 , 190 , 195 , 207 , 216 , 217 , 218 , 220 and 223 .
Thank you , Commissioner .
You have naturally given us very useful information on the Commission ' s attitude on the many amendments that have been tabled .
As regards the last part though , perhaps next time your department could print a copy of your summary which we could then distribute to all the Members .
Actually I saw that none of them were in a position to follow the final list you read out , though of course the reasons you gave before that have been very useful .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Animal by-products
The next item is the joint debate on the two reports by Mrs Paulsen , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy :
( A5-0185 / 2001 ) on the Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directives 90 / 425 / EEC and 92 / 118 / EEC as regards health requirements for animal by-products [ COM ( 2000 ) 573 - C5 ­ 0538 / 2000 - 2000 / 0230 ( COD ) ] ;
( A5-0200 / 2001 ) on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation laying down the health rules concerning animal by-products not intended for human consumption [ COM ( 2000 ) 574 - C5 ­ 0539 / 2000 - 2000 / 0259 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner Byrne , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission ' s proposal on animal by-products involves strict separation into three categories .
I would like to remind you that category 1 includes the risk material and is primarily covered by the regulation on TSEs recently adopted by Parliament for the third time .
Some proposed amendments contradict the regulation on TSEs which we have recently adopted .
Category 1 covers risk material .
Category 2 includes animals which have died a natural death .
The third category includes material classified as by-products from animals slaughtered which passed the health inspection .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has chosen , as I myself have , to support the approach of the Commission and attempted to improve the practical regulatory framework and , above all , to make it more stringent , for the principles in this report are simple but things are considerably more difficult in practice .
Implementation in particular will be difficult .
As such , we require strict separation of the material from the three categories .
There is also a need for strict separation of facilities , transport routes , etc .
I can add that it is likely that , in future legislation , we will have to require the same separation of feed plants or lines for different types of feed .
It is important to mention that all material in categories 1 and 2 is to be marked with an indelible dye and odorant so that they cannot , either deliberately or through negligence , re-enter the feed production chain , for example .
Naturally , the same rules which apply to domestic production are also to apply to export , re-export and import .
Together with the committee , I am very pleased that ' cannibalism ' has been put a stop to in this way .
This means that pigs can no longer be fed on their fellow species .
However , I would ask you to note that the total ban on feeding ruminants on all forms of animal protein remains and is regulated in the regulation on TSEs , not here .
Personally , I am also very pleased to see that , from today onwards , fat from category 2 may only be used as fertiliser or ideally as fuel oil .
In my opinion , it is vital that , at some point , we break the enrichment of heavy metals , PCBs and dioxins .
It is now my hope that Parliament will adopt these principles laid down by a strong majority .
I must therefore turn to Amendment No 100 from the Group of the European People ' s Party and European Democrats .
This proposal , which was presented in the committee and voted down , seeks to permanently ban all meat and bone meal , with the exception of fish meal , in all animal feed .
I would ask you to think this through .
We know the catastrophe we caused when we turned ruminants into omnivores .
Even now we can see problems in attempting to turn omnivores into vegetarians .
I appeal for humility in the face of nature ' s own system .
We must not manipulate it a second time .
Instead , a better way is to vote in favour of the proposal from the Green Group , Amendment No 64 , which enjoins Member States to submit , before 1 February 2003 , a report on the uniform implementation of the provisions laid down in this new regulation .
After that , we will discuss lifting the temporary ban on meat and bone meal which is now in force .
I would also like you to vote against Amendments Nos 22 and 33 .
These would in fact sabotage part of the categorisation and complicate it .
There is no great need to test whether a chicken dead of natural causes should be placed in category 2 instead of category 1 .
When it comes to new technology , I strongly advocate trying new technology , never preventing development .
I therefore submitted a proposal myself , which was adopted by the committee and which permits the use of new methods approved by the scientific committees .
This Amendment No 43 opens up every opportunity for different types of new technology once we obtain them and once they are approved .
I would therefore like to see us voting against Amendments Nos 20 , 25 , 26 , 35 and 43 where these address a particular new technology , namely alkaline hydrolysis .
This may be an excellent technique , but I do not think it should be included five times in a regulation .
That would be legal overkill , to put it mildly .
I also appeal to you to vote against Amendment No 36 , as this is far too narrow compared with the Commission ' s original proposal .
As the text is now worded , serious zoonoses , i.e. diseases which affect both animals and people , would be exempt from this legislation .
In other words , it would only concern animal diseases .
This means that serious infectious diseases such as salmonella , listeria and even tuberculosis , would be exempt from this regulation .
This would be devastating for public health .
Amendment No 23 exempts , for example , sheep and goats which have died of natural causes from the specification risk material .
This clearly conflicts with the regulation on TSEs and is probably impossible in practice .
I have chosen to support the amendments on control of household waste in terms of the risks of foot-and-mouth disease and swine fever submitted by the Green Group , i.e. Amendments Nos 102 and 103 .
It is good if we obtain clear rules , but these amendments might not properly resolve the main question in this context , namely the clash in terms of cannibalism and household waste .
I will end - not before time - by thanking the Commission and the Council ' s working party for a very constructive , creative and valuable dialogue and my shadow rapporteurs for their assistance and help .
Mr President , if we had had this regulation ten or fifteen years ago and had adhered to it , if the Member States had applied it , there would have been no BSE .
That would have saved us billions , and it would have prevented a great deal of animal and human suffering .
After that introductory comment , may I also hand out a few bouquets .
First of all , let me thank Mrs Paulsen .
In my long years of parliamentary work , I have seldom experienced such close and constructive cooperation in a specialised political field .
It always gave me great pleasure to engage in the discussions about these amendments and proposed improvements to the text .
And let me also thank Commissioner Byrne .
Although his institution was somewhat slow to act , he himself then set to work vigorously and presented a good proposal .
But I must also thank the European Parliament , which has been very consistent on this issue - from the preparatory work of the Committee of Inquiry to the resolutions we have drawn up here ; not least among the results of this consistent approach is the fact that we have now secured codecision rights in this domain .
I have the impression - and this is not meant to detract from your invaluable contribution , Mr Byrne - that , whenever the codecision procedure is applied , the Commission ' s proposals are more concrete , more punctilious and better adapted from the outset to the wishes and the working methods of the European Parliament ; these proposals serve as an example of the way we should be working here all the time .
In closing , let me say that the Agriculture Committee will take special care to ensure that imports to and exports from the European Union are subject to these strict safety precautions and that we obtain a funding system which will guarantee equal treatment for all farms in the European Union when it comes to disposing of high-risk substances .
Mr President , there have been two disasters in British agriculture in recent years . These are BSE and foot-and-mouth disease , which is still raging in my region .
Both have had a devastating effect on individual farmers and the industry as a whole .
Public confidence has been destroyed . Our markets have been destabilised and the taxpayer has had to fork out billions to compensate farmers for infected and suspected animals .
Many have seen generations of work literally go up in smoke on the funeral pyres , which are still burning .
Most disturbing of all , it is a fact that because of BSE people have died , not the large numbers forecast by some scientists , but even the death of one young person is one too many for a family .
We still do not know the final death toll of variant CJD .
These two epidemics have one thing in common : they can both be directly linked to feeding animal waste back to animals .
There is a debate as to how the BSE epidemic started .
The latest theory is that it came from deer ; but it could have been a mutation or it could have been around for years .
The fact is that it was multiplied by the recycling of waste into meat and bone meal .
Our initial reaction in the United Kingdom was to introduce a ruminant ban on meat and bone meal .
That did not work because of cross-contamination .
Feed was contaminated in the mills , in the transport system or on farms containing different classes of livestock .
So in the UK we opted for a complete ban .
Mrs Paulsen wants to fine-tune the partial ban to include the non-cannibalistic reintroduction of meat and bone meal from category 3 material , that is , material which is suitable for human consumption .
She wants to feed chickens to pigs and pigs to chickens .
I know that chickens are omnivores but I am sure that they do not naturally live on pork .
If the rules were obeyed we would have no problem .
My worry is about cross-contamination .
We have already had specified risk material found on beef carcases imported into the UK on 15 occasions since January : beef from the Netherlands , Spain , Ireland , Italy - and Germany , which accounted for seven of the cases .
If we cannot get it right for the beef for human consumption , if we cannot get it right in Germany , which has one of the best records in the EU , how can we expect that the waste will be correctly segregated in Greece or Italy or Spain ?
We should therefore keep to the ban on meat and bone meal .
Amendment No 100 facilitates this continued ban .
The same applies to foot-and-mouth .
We had an epidemic in the UK in 1967 that was linked to the feeding of swill .
We introduced strict controls .
Those strict controls have not been implemented correctly on every farm , otherwise we would not have the massive epidemic that we have at the moment .
It is important that catering waste is included in these proposals .
I should like to pay tribute to Mrs Paulsen on the inclusive way that she has approached the other groups on this issue and in particular the practical improvements that have been suggested .
They include those on waste incineration , allowing small-farm incinerators to continue ; on allowing burial on farm in remote areas ; on the exemption of manure produced on farms ; on the uses of meat and bone meal as fertilizers , given the safeguards that exist ; also , on the alternatives to rendering , such as alkaline hydrolysis .
We cannot lower our guard , because by recycling animal by-products as feed we risk also recycling the pathogens that cause BSE , foot-and-mouth and other diseases .
The economic advantages of doing this pale into insignificance compared with the devastation that has been the direct result of this risky practice .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mrs Paulsen on the way she has handled this complex matter and , as Mr Goodwill said , has brought the committee once again to a consensus .
My group commends her approach and will support the bulk of the amendments which have been tabled in the Committee on the Environment .
I should like to make one or two points on the nature of the scourges we face .
Mr Goodwill said that we have had these two great disasters but there is a third disaster which produced them .
That was the indifference , and sometimes the greed , of those who stood by while the methods of rendering animal waste and feeding it back to animals became more and more extensive and the potential for disaster therefore even greater .
So this is not a moment when we can happily contemplate the intra-species recycling of animal protein or indeed anything which brings about a further degree of risk in our agricultural system .
We are still learning from the foot-and-mouth epidemic in the United Kingdom .
In regard to the disposal of animal waste we have found that one attempt to avoid risk has faced us with another risk .
When we look at incineration , when we look at burial and look at the hazards , created by the 1 % of farms that have still been using swill for pigs , we see additional risks on each side .
That is why I too support the idea of looking at alternatives which minimise risk .
Alkaline hydrolysis is one such method .
We need to be able to show that we are ahead of this particular scourge .
The problem in the past was that we were like countries preparing for the last war and not the next one .
We are constantly struggling with the element of unknown risk .
Mrs Paulsen 's proposals have gone a long way towards improving what the Commission has tried to do in relation to the disposal of TSEs .
Mr President , Commissioner Byrne , the issue under discussion is the directive on the use of animal by-products .
My view on this matter is , on the one hand , that of the producers and , on the other , that of a country with small volumes and long distances .
Initially I want to say that Mrs Paulsen has done a thorough and good job .
I would particularly like to thank her for also having taken into account the problems of less densely populated areas , which I represent , in Amendment No 69 , in which local disposal is permitted in exceptional circumstances .
My problem in relation to the proposal is why the precautions are identical for the entire area of the EU if the risks in some areas are non-existent .
This will cause these areas unnecessary costs .
Already now , for example , costs are greater for producers in the northern area due to natural conditions .
I propose that instead of only following principles , we should combine them with common sense .
In my country ' s only animal waste plant different categories of waste can still be separated from each other , but separating waste from different species of animal seems extremely difficult as we are looking at such small volumes .
Therefore , the goal of stopping cannibalism , good in itself , should be taken as a guideline and a common sense solution should be sought .
After all , natural cannibalism does exist as a phenomenon in the animal kingdom .
How will these kinds of animal be treated in the future ?
Directives do not prevent natural cannibalism in animals .
Although we are now accepting Parliament ' s opinion on the directive proposal , we still need to think about these things .
Here I am not defending intensive farming but I would like to see the different conditions in different areas better taken into account .
Mr President , if the Belgian dioxin crisis , the BSE crisis and the foot-and-mouth epidemic have taught us anything , it is that there is a need for strict regulation on the trade in , and storage and processing of , animal waste .
Some 16 million tonnes of animal waste have to be disposed of every year .
Since 4 December 2000 , a total ban has been in place on feeding farm animals animal protein .
The proposal for a Regulation which we are debating today describes how we must deal with animal waste from now on , and how undesired products must be prevented from ending up in the food chain .
The proposal is creating order in the sector , as well as clearly separated waste streams which must under no circumstances be mixed together .
In her introduction , Mrs Paulsen very clearly pinpointed all bottlenecks .
This Regulation is of crucial importance .
If it transpires that the subdivision into three categories , the compulsory separation of waste streams and the prevention of cannibalism in the sector are not , or not sufficiently , being complied with and that fraud is , or remains , too prominent , we can assume that the political pre-conditions for allowing the use of meat and bone meal in animal feed for pigs and chickens have not been met .
Then an appeal to enforce a total ban will rightly ensue .
That is why , ladies and gentlemen , I would ask for your massive support for Amendment No 64 to Article 26 , which states that the interim ban on feeding animals all kinds of animal by-products must not be extended to the date on which this regulation enters into force , as is the Commission ' s wish , but to the date on which this regulation is fully implemented in the Member States .
In the light of this , we want a report from the Member States , before 1 February 2003 , on the uniform application of this regulation , and only upon receipt of this report can the debate on the lifting of the total ban begin .
We must be certain that the regulation works , that fraud is practically ruled out and that the sector has drawn the necessary lessons from the crisis .
I believe that this regulation offers the sector a fair chance .
The sector will hopefully take that chance .
Mr President , as I did in the debate on the previous item on the agenda , namely on food safety , I should like to underline once again the crucial importance of a new agricultural policy .
An agricultural policy in which animals are fed in a responsible manner .
Both on ethical and scientific grounds , we must abandon cannibalism .
Moreover , I should like to emphasise that ruminants have not been created to eat animal , but vegetable , proteins .
I welcome the fact that at the moment , a large majority is in favour of strict measures , but we will need to keep our finger on the pulse during implementation too .
If we want to see the impact of these measures , the Member States will also need to closely monitor compliance with them .
Finally , I am pleased to observe that a loophole in the legislation on incineration plants is being plugged .
Unfortunately , during the recent foot-and-mouth crisis in England , we have had to witness huge funeral pyres of dead animals .
Such a method of destruction is certainly no guarantee against infection , and does not benefit air quality .
I hope that these pyres will no longer be needed in future .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in our quest for openness , clarity and transparency in relation to animal feed , we are gradually edging closer to the heart of this entire matter , namely the question of which substances are ultimately permissible in animal feed and which are prohibited .
Commissioner Byrne , in connection with the BSE crisis , you hit the nail on the head when you stated that animal material which is not fit for human consumption must not be authorised for use in the production of animal feed either .
Anyone who is familiar with the functioning of the food chain will surely see the logic of this principle .
I thank the Commission for its firm proposal dividing animal by-products into three categories .
It would have been far simpler to prohibit them all without further ado .
That approach has been adopted by the German Federal Government , for example .
The EU , however , has taken the more prudent path , in my opinion , even if it is the more difficult path , as we are all aware .
This difficulty lies in the fact that the materials in the three categories must be registered , stored , processed and marketed separately and that evidence of these operations must be kept .
In our experience , such a requirement presupposes the establishment of an inspection system .
The rapporteur has reintroduced the formulation from the Directive fixing the principles governing the organisation of official inspections in the field of animal nutrition in the EU , and there is a minimum standard here that we must not undercut , namely the principle that experts from the Commission may conduct on-the-spot inspections in cooperation with the authorities in the Member States .
The end justifies the means , the end being that valuable nutrient sources are not simply destroyed but used for a useful purpose - this applies to kitchen waste too - while anything that has no place in the food chain is rejected and destroyed .
One thing is clear : we must ensure that appropriate feed mixes are used for each species ; in other words , we are opposed to cannibalism .
This is also something that inspections will have to prevent .
My thanks are due to Mrs Paulsen for her report , which makes the Commission proposal even more specific on several important points , and I hope that the ladies and gentlemen of the House will give it their emphatic support .
Mr President , animal by-products which are suitable in principle for human consumption must also continue to be available as animal feed once they have been properly processed .
I cannot understand why anyone would want to impose a permanent ban on this valuable source of protein .
I do , however , support the present temporary ban on the use of meat and bone meal in animal feed .
The current rules and checks must be strictly applied .
Once this is guaranteed , it should be possible to use meat and bone meal once again .
Another specific point concerns the use of leftovers from large restaurants and catering establishments .
For decades these leftovers have been used to produce a highly nutritious pig feed .
This must remain possible in future , which is why I support Amendment No 102 as tabled by the Greens .
Finally , let me say a few words on the avoidance of cannibalism in the feeding of animals .
I believe that the separation by species of material for processing into meat and bone meal would be very difficult to achieve .
Pigs , hens , fish and so on have no scruples about eating their own kind .
I am at a complete loss to understand why animals are now being expected to comply with human ethical standards .
I hope we shall remain realistic on this point , because the proposed compulsory separation of by-products by species will not enable us to prevent cannibalism among animals .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in view of the BSE and foot-and-mouth crises , the present Paulsen report on the health rules governing animal by-products not intended for human consumption has its place under the broad and essential umbrella for the protection of food safety and animal health .
The term ' by-products ' as used here refers primarily to meat and bone meal .
In its proposal , the Commission formulated a conditional ban , in other words a graduated ban , on the use of meat and bone meal in feeds and fertilisers .
Mrs Paulsen has developed very effectively the ideas presented by the Commission .
The division into three categories is to be welcomed , as is the fact that the Commission only authorises the use of Category 1 meal in animal feed if it has been sterilised for 20 minutes at a temperature of 133ºC and a pressure of 3 bar .
The Commission proposal , as amended in committee , is therefore consistent with the demand of the Committee of Inquiry into BSE for strict separation of animal waste products into those that are basically fit for human consumption and those that come from infected and sick animals .
Healthy waste products from the abattoir are valuable providers of protein which we should not discard .
Omnivores really will eat everything .
We should not try to re-educate them .
As far as ruminants are concerned , it goes without saying that meat and bone meals are taboo .
We need responsibly applied and controlled technology for the production and processing of meat and bone meal , and we need still more research .
If we proceed on the basis of this regulation and transpose it in our Member States , we shall have built firm foundations from which we can go on to guarantee the safety of our foodstuffs and to ensure that our consumers are well supplied with good food .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I should like to congratulate Mrs Paulsen on the quality of the two reports that she has presented to us .
Mr President , the Group of the Party of European Socialists wishes to express its agreement with the terms and conclusions of these reports , and with the proposals , as amended .
We all remember the dioxin crisis which , in 1999 , hit my country , Belgium .
This dioxin contamination of foodstuffs of animal origin called to account those who were responsible for public health , and greatly shook consumers ' confidence in the system of inspecting animal feedingstuffs .
It also called into question the quality of the meat produced .
At that time , fats and oils were at the centre of the dispute .
It was therefore necessary to take strong measures to protect public health and also , not least , to restore confidence .
The provisional ban on all feeds derived from animal products for animals intended for human consumption , as ordered by the Council in December 2000 , was necessary , but the problem of by-products of animal origin must be addressed .
The proposed regulation , as amended so as to strengthen food safety , is aimed at achieving this public-health objective .
We paid very close attention to the opinion of the Scientific Steering Committee , which stated that products derived from animals which are found , following a health inspection , to be unsuitable for human consumption , must not enter the food chain .
We are therefore in full agreement with the principles defined in the explanatory statement to the regulation , according to which only the by-products of carcases authorised for human consumption can be used as raw materials for animal feedingstuffs or human food .
The separate treatment of by-products , fats and domestic refuse is likely to consolidate the desired safety objective .
The classification of by-products , the separation of categories and the labelling of substances falling within Categories 1 and 2 are measures intended to consolidate the objectives being pursued .
Moreover , product traceability , storage in transit , controls on the processing industry and derogation systems are likewise provisions which support those objectives .
Finally , the solutions proposed regarding substitution , utilisation and elimination also contribute to the clarification that is awaited in this sector .
To sum up , Mr President , the voluntarist action adopted by virtue of the proposed regulation is in line with what the public expects .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am pleased to discuss our proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on animal by-products not intended for human consumption .
This proposal is the second major component in our defence barriers against BSE .
The other is , of course , the regulation on TSEs , which enters into force on 1 July .
I cannot overemphasise the importance of this proposal .
We are faced with a very stark choice .
Over 16 million tonnes of animal by-products not intended for human consumption are produced each year in the EU .
These 16 million tonnes do not disappear into thin air .
They have to be disposed of and processed .
This can be done in a manner which is safe , economic and effective for health and the environment , or it can be done in an unregulated manner , which puts public health and the environment at risk .
All Community institutions would be collectively responsible if we did not insist on the first method of disposal .
That is exactly what the Commission proposed in October 2000 : a framework which will allow these 16 million tonnes to be processed safely and effectively .
This proposal is linked very closely with the issue of BSE .
The reason is obvious .
A significant part of the animal by-products of which we speak is specified risk material .
It is essential that these products in particular are collected , processed and destroyed effectively .
The proposal will achieve this objective .
I have been hugely encouraged by the very constructive approach of Parliament to this proposal .
There has been a very healthy discussion which has focused on improving the text .
I am satisfied that the emerging text gives overriding priority to the need to protect public health and the environment . And it does so in a manner which can work .
When this regulation enters into force , we will have a system that is state of the art .
I would like to single out the role played by your rapporteur , Mrs Paulsen , who made enormous efforts to bring this proposal to this stage so quickly .
Due to her and your efforts , I am in a position today to agree to the spirit and principles of the vast majority of your amendments , subject to some editorial changes .
I shall also briefly mention the proposal for a directive amending Directives 90 / 425 and 92 / 118 .
Clearly time does not allow me to discuss in detail the Commission 's position on all the amendments , so I will focus on the key issues .
First of all , we can accept amendments on recitals which match provisions in the text and those which highlight the historical background , including previous Parliament resolutions on the safety of animal feed .
I agree to remove the reference to increasing productivity in a recital , but the original reference to the Treaty should be retained .
However , we must reject amendments introducing recitals which are not matched by provisions in the text , or deleting recitals referring to the text , as this is contrary to correct legal practice .
I cannot accept bringing genetic material in the scope of the proposal , although I would clarify that it covers only the disposal of genetic material when it is no longer needed for reproductive purposes .
I can support amendments aimed at extending the prohibition of intra-species recycling to animal species other than ruminants ; for these species cannibalism has been prohibited since 1994 .
As we learned from the development of the BSE epidemic , the practice of intra-species recycling may increase the risk of recycling potential infectivity due to the absence of a species barrier .
I accept the introduction of additional requirements to improve the traceability of products .
However , the proposed requirements on the marking of unprocessed Category 1 material can be accepted only in the case of specified risk material .
The proposed marking of unprocessed Category 2 material , including manure , cannot be accepted for the same reasons .
Furthermore the olfactory and denaturing marking can be accepted only in principle , as at this stage we have not yet identified an appropriate and safe marker that has these qualities .
I would like to note that adding an olfactory marker to manure may be , to put it mildly , a little superfluous .
However we understand your general concern and will bear it in mind for the future .
The Commission will not hesitate to establish such additional rules on marking should this be necessary .
We accept the need to introduce additional and stricter requirements to avoid cross-contamination .
The Commission proposal already establishes a complete separation during collection and transport of animal waste and a complete separation of plants dedicated to feed production .
We can accept a derogation for burial and burning of cadavers and specified risk materials in remote areas and in case of outbreaks of serious transmissible diseases , because of the danger of propagating health risks or because of a lack of disposal capacity .
We particularly welcome the conditions suggested to prevent abuse of this derogation .
Two different definitions of remote areas are proposed . We could accept a combination of both .
We agree to lay down public health requirements for incinerators which are not covered by the scope of Directive 2000 / 76 on the incineration of waste .
We can accept the introduction of the legal possibility of reviewing the authorised method of disposal following new scientific advice .
We cannot accept adding a specific new technology , as this is unnecessary and in my view premature .
We accept the inclusion of catering waste in the scope of the regulation , but we must clarify that such waste is covered by the proposal only when destined to specific purposes in order to avoid duplication within environmental legislation .
We can accept a definition of catering waste , on condition that it covers catering waste from household kitchens , in order to ensure consistency with forthcoming legislation on classical swine fever .
We can accept classifying catering waste as Category 3 material , on condition that catering waste from international means of transport comes under the highest risk Category 1 and is destroyed as required by existing Community legislation .
We cannot accept the proposal to allow the continuation of swill-feeding using catering waste .
First of all , this practice is not compatible with the prohibition of intra-species recycling and with the demand for full traceability of feed ingredients , both of which have been called for by Parliament .
Secondly , the recent dioxin crisis and the current outbreaks of foot-and-mouth disease adequately illustrate why the continuation of this feeding practice is not appropriate .
We cannot accept the exclusion of manure produced on farm from the scope of the proposal as this would reduce health protection .
We cannot limit the spreading of manure only in cases where it is suspected of disseminating an OIE List A disease , as certain Member States have additional eradication measures for diseases not included in that list , such as salmonella .
We can agree to clarify that a harmonised health certificate for the trade of manure shall be laid down by commitology .
The request to annex this certificate to the regulation is superfluous and therefore unacceptable .
We accept the proposal to spell out the possibility of authorising equivalent processing treatments for manure following scientific advice , which in any case is not prevented by the Commission proposal .
However , it is premature and therefore not acceptable to make reference to a concordance table before the evaluation by the Scientific Committee .
We cannot accept the proposed inclusion of additional animal by-products in the Category 1 .
It is excessive , unnecessary and will create confusion with existing legislation , in particular with the TSE regulation , without making a real contribution to increased safety .
Testing for BSE is properly the competence of the TSE regulation and I believe it deals quite adequately with this .
Furthermore , it is not practical to test all animals for all known diseases .
It is unrealistic .
Animals which die on farm are in any case excluded from the food and feed chain .
The net result of these amendments would be to prohibit the use of an important volume of animal by-products in bio-gas and composting .
It is proposed to require the use of pressure-cooking standards for animal by-products even if the resulting material is incinerated .
For reason of consistency with the TSE regulation , we can accept that this process be used before incineration if required by the national competent authority .
This would allow Member States to require this process when , for example , a long period of storage is needed before incineration .
We note that many other Parliament amendments would maintain this flexibility .
We cannot accept a ban on the use of rendered fats from Category 2 material for the production of fat derivatives for the cosmetic and pharmaceutical industry .
We cannot accept restrictions on the importation of ruminant products due to a TSE risk , as such restrictions are laid down by the TSE regulation .
Furthermore , the safety of ruminant fats is currently under revision by the Scientific Steering Committee .
We can agree to an earlier date of entry into force of the regulation and welcome the proposal that Member States forward a report to the Commission on the implementation of the regulation .
I cannot accept the exclusion of dead sheep and goats from the definition of specified risk material , as this is not in line with the TSE regulation .
I cannot accept the exclusion of solid dung and composting from the prohibition on spreading material on pasture land , because manure in any form is already excluded by this prohibition and there is no justification for excluding compost from a general policy on the spreading of material on pasture land .
We can accept the principle of prohibiting the exportation of Category 1 and Category 2 material .
We can agree to the principle of refrigeration of raw Category 3 material .
We can accept adding products which failed import checks to Category 3 material .
However , for reasons of consistency with the annex and existing Community legislation , we would clarify that this shall apply unless the products are redispatched or their importation is accepted under restrictions laid down under Community legislation .
We cannot accept the introduction of a permanent ban on meat and bone meal in feed , as the feed ban comes under the competence of the recently adopted TSE regulation .
In fact , pending the adoption and implementation of this proposal , I am proposing an extension of the current total feed ban under the legal provisions of the TSE regulation .
In addition I believe that animal proteins produced in accordance with this present proposal can be used safely to feed animals other than ruminants .
The permanent ban on feeding animal proteins to animals other than ruminants is not scientifically justified .
It could be challenged in the WTO and would have enormous environmental and economic consequences .
We cannot accept a ban on certain local feeding practices as this would seriously disrupt existing national schemes for the protection of endangered species .
The conditions established by the proposal to control this feeding practice are stricter than the current one and are in line with the Commission 's inspectors ' recommendation .
In conclusion , the Commission welcomes the report and the many useful and constructive amendments contained therein .
Mr President , following your earlier suggestion , I propose to circulate the amendments in summary form .
Mr President , may I congratulate Commissioner Byrne for fitting all that into a short space of time , but we did not catch much of it , because the interpreters found it impossible to keep up with the pace he set .
We must find some sort of a system to ensure that the comments made by members of the Commission actually reach our ears - either the speeches will have to be shortened or the Commissioners will have to be given more time to deliver them .
One way or the other , we cannot expect the House to make do with the present system .
It makes unreasonable demands of the Commissioner and of us who are trying to listen to him .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , what you say is in line with the suggestion I made just now , that is , that the Commission departments could prepare a written text for distribution when there is such a large number of amendments the Commissioner needs to comment on .
That would also allow the Commissioner to speak more on the substance and less on the Commission ' s position on all the amendments .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
Ozone in ambient air
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0187 / 2001 ) by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive on relating to ozone in ambient air [ 13114 / 1 / 2000 - C5 ­ 0090 / 2001 - 1999 / 0068 ( COD ) ] ( Rapporteur : Mr Davies ) .
Mr President , a friend who used to work for a leading wildlife conservation NGO tells me that it was a depressing experience each morning to read her e-mails detailing the loss of habitats and new threats to the survival of species across the world .
I can understand that .
So it is a pleasure to acknowledge that not every environmental problem is beyond resolution and that , in some instances as least , we are capable of turning the tide .
Such is the case with air pollution .
The evidence is that now , at least in some cities and towns across Europe , the air we breathe is perhaps purer than at any time since the beginning of the Industrial Revolution .
Problems remain .
It is claimed that air pollution still contributes to more premature deaths than traffic accidents , but progress is being made .
Ground-level ozone is a pollutant which still severely affects the health of many of our citizens .
It contributes to problems of asthma in children - now said to affect as many as one in ten children in the United Kingdom alone - and to breathing difficulties in the elderly .
In severe circumstances people die .
Government studies in my country suggest that ozone may lead to the premature death of 12 500 people each year .
We are all well aware of the problems experienced in some cities in Europe , such as Athens , where the problem is intensified by particular climatic conditions .
Pollution has further economic consequences , by reducing crop yields and damaging trees .
European legislation plays an increasing role in setting tighter standards and curbing pollution .
Nothing better illustrates this than the need for concerted action on ozone .
It is created by a chemical reaction between sunlight and oxides of nitrogen and volatile organic compounds derived mostly from vehicle emissions and petrol distribution .
It is often formed miles from the source of the problem .
So it is a classic trans-boundary pollutant requiring trans-boundary action at European level .
The national emissions ceiling directive will provide the framework for reductions in key air pollutants .
This directive concerns the action which Member States should take locally to deal with the particular problem of ozone .
At first reading I welcomed the Commission 's proposals to set a target value encouraging Member States not to permit ozone to exceed the World Health Organisation 's guidelines of more than 20 days a year ; to alert the public if local health risks are high ; and to compare the performance of different countries .
But I argued that the proposals were not demanding enough .
Parliament has made a number of changes and , of the 19 amendments we agreed on , the Council has accepted ten of the minor ones in full and another four in part .
The Council has also decided that it wants the target for the maximum number of exceedances to be 25 rather than 20 days .
This does not sound too bad a compromise .
Perhaps I am just a bit cynical in suggesting that it is too easy for ministers to agree tough targets which are not legally binding .
Parliament should be taking steps now to ensure that the final shape of the legislation places firm obligations on Member States to achieve the objectives they claim they want to achieve .
I want Member States to be required to meet the target , save where it is physically impossible for them to do so .
I want them to work towards a date by which the long-term objective of never having ozone levels exceeding WHO guidelines will be achieved .
I want them quickly to implement short-term action plans if ozone levels exceed double the WHO recommendations , and I want them to provide the Commission with information of a standard which enables comparison to be made between the performance of different Member States , so that the public can determine which countries are making a real effort and which are not .
In saying this , I recognise the need to take into account the fact that one country may not be responsible for the pollution which affects it .
I also understand that meteorological conditions vary .
The north west of England , for example , may generate more traffic fumes than many places elsewhere in Europe but , because we are not blessed with too much sunlight , ozone is less of a problem to us than it may be in Spain .
I do not wish , in particular , to place too onerous a burden upon Mediterranean countries .
But Parliament needs to adopt a strong position now , in order that the final agreement we reach with the Council reflects the need for Member States to take some real action .
I thank colleagues in other parties for working with me to try and ensure that Parliament 's position commands a large majority .
I thank Parliament 's staff and , in particular , my assistant , Vikki Phillips , who has made a very considerable contribution to this process over the past year .
We have an opportunity to make a contribution to the process of reducing pollution and cleaning the air we breathe .
I hope Parliament will give its support to the proposals in this report and the compromises agreed between the political parties , and that we play our part in achieving what could be another success story for the European environment .
Commissioner , the concentrations of ozone in the atmosphere are a serious problem , not only in terms of the environment , but also in terms of public health , since they affect that health of the citizens , especially amongst risk populations such as children and old people , causing allergies and cardio-respiratory difficulties , amongst other things .
Concentrations of ozone are very unevenly distributed amongst the Member States .
And , owing to their cross-border nature , they affect places which are often far from their source of production .
Until now , the Member States have neither studied nor dealt with this phenomenon sufficiently , neither have they assessed it in a systematic and coordinated way .
The result has been an absence of reliable and comparable data , as well as insufficiency in short- and long-term action plans .
It is therefore very necessary that we adopt the present Directive and I take a very positive view of Mr Davies ' s work , especially his approach to the problem , since he stresses the aspects of study and control and is prepared to incorporate the suggestions of other groups , which means the House is able to vote on a proposal with significant compromise amendments , which enrich the Commission ' s proposal and maintain the sense of reality and viability of the measures proposed .
The first important result of this Directive is that it is finally going to persuade Member States to pay more attention to the problem of tropospheric ozone , strengthening its study and control ; secondly , it makes it obligatory to create short- and long-term action plans and improve rapid alert systems and public information .
In this respect , its seems to me important that these plans strengthen , in each case , the study of the local conditions in which the concentrations are produced , in order thereby to combat them more effectively .
I also believe it is necessary to set target dates in order to stimulate progress on the control of the problem .
Nevertheless , we cannot ignore the current difficulties in guaranteeing the complete control of the concentrations of tropospheric ozone and strict compliance at all times with the values and timescales laid down .
Our Group has therefore insisted on the need to seek formulae which , while strengthening the Member States ' obligations , set realistic objectives and timescales , which allow a certain flexibility in those cases where its has been physically impossible to reach the objectives and which take account , in the comparative reports , of the meteorological and local circumstances of the places where the target values have been exceeded .
We have logically opposed the amendments which do not take account of the scientific possibilities of controlling the problem .
Mr President , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Davies for the splendid and very expert job he has done on the report .
Together with Mrs Myller ' s report on national emissions ceilings , which is before the Conciliation Committee at the moment , this report will make an important contribution to securing better air quality , especially in the big cities of Europe .
It will be an important contribution to preventing and reducing ozone ' s harmful effects on the environment and public health .
I should like to point out the most important features of Mr Davies 's report .
First and foremost , it is important that we stick to the WHO 's health targets in this area and that those exceedances of these targets that are to be accepted for a number of years are limited as far as possible , in this case to 20 days per year .
By means of the report , we shall thus also reject the Council ' s wish to be given the option of longer exceedance periods .
Secondly , I would draw your attention to the long-term targets for the concentration of ozone in the air .
We now have a deadline for when the long-term targets are to be achieved , namely before 2020 , except in cases where it is physically impossible to achieve the targets .
It will be an important task for both the Commission and Parliament to ensure that the compromise made here concerning what is physically impossible does not in reality become a pretext for doing nothing and to ensure that there is not too much elasticity in the compromise .
I would also point out how important it is for information to be given both to the general population and , in particular , to the especially vulnerable population groups too , namely children and the elderly .
The report requires that information be provided and that action plans be devised so that rapid intervention is possible if the concentration of ozone is too high .
Allow me , finally , also to indicate two other areas included by Mr Davies .
The first is the relationship with the applicant countries .
I think it is right that we should try to involve the applicant countries as early as possible in this process , as recommended also by those of us in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Ozone pollution is , of course , clearly transboundary in character , a fact which justifies our including as many neighbouring countries as we possibly can from the beginning .
Finally , the reporting , which Mr Davies also emphasised in his speech here today , is important if we are to have comparisons not only of initiatives taken in the Member States but also of exceedances which , as a matter of actual fact , occur in the Member States .
I believe that , with the adoption of this report , we shall be taking a considerable step forward and acquiring a sound basis for the further negotiations with the Commission and the Council in the Conciliation Committee .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Davies has drafted a sterling report on summer smog .
My group is able to support all the amendments .
We should also like to thank Mrs García-Orcoyen Tormo for supporting the compromise amendments .
The Council of Environment Ministers only wishes to provide an interim solution to the problem of summer smog by 2010 .
It refuses to go any further .
We do want to go further .
My group and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy propose to consign summer smog to the past by 2020 .
That can be done by completely eliminating the polluting substance NOx , firstly by introducing the second generation of catalytic converters , which will be compulsory in new cars in 2005 and in new lorries in 2007 , then by introducing fuel cells for buildings , homes and vehicles .
Finally , I should like to ask the Commission once again where the proposal is for a directive on volatile organic substances for paints .
After all , the level of volatile organic substances has to come down as well in order to eliminate summer smog altogether .
We shall adjourn the debate here and resume it at 3 p.m.

Mr President , to my very great surprise , I have learned this morning that a group of three Vice-Presidents has decided to assign the issue of services of public interest , which is incontestably a competition matter , to the Legal Affairs Committee .
The Rules of Procedure state that the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is responsible for competition matters .
The proposal in question , concerning services of public interest , was even presented by Mario Monti , the Commissioner responsible for competition .
Our rapporteur , Mr Langen , who has been working on this matter for several months and has now submitted a report , has just discovered to his astonishment that another committee is responsible .
I wish to say quite clearly here that a group of three Vice-Presidents has no authority to overturn the Rules of Procedure .
For this reason , I ask that we proceed in accordance with the Rules of Procedure and that the Conference of Presidents deal with this matter .
Unfortunately , it is not the only current issue concerning the competence of the Committee on Legal Affairs , which is apparently being widened bit by bit .
This question must be settled once and for all , and the Conference of Presidents is the body to settle it , for the present situation is obstructing the proper discharge of our parliamentary duties .
( Applause )
Mr von Wogau , we will take good note of your comments .
However , according to my current information , which I will verify , the committee on conflict of competences - which is the body you are referring to , made up of three Vice-Presidents - adopted a proposed decision which was ratified by the Conference of Presidents of Political Groups in its meeting last Thursday .
This is the procedure contained in our Rules of Procedure .
Without getting into the argument of whether or not this proposed decision is the most desirable one , it is the one which has allowed us to resolve it in accordance with the Rules of Procedure .
But we will verify whether the information I have been given is up to date .
VOTE
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0183 / 2001 ) by Mrs Klamt , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council Framework decision on combating trafficking in human beings [ COM ( 2000 ) 854 - C5-0042 / 2001 - 2001 / 0024 ( CNS ) ]
Before the vote : President .
Mr Pirker has the floor for a point of order .
Pirker ( PPE-DE ) .
( DE ) Mr President , on a point of order , I wish to point out that the Council is once again conspicuous by its absence on a day when very important subjects are on the agenda for debate and votes are scheduled on important documents such as the Klamt report which is before us now and which relates to a framework decision on the elimination of trafficking in human beings .
The reason I requested the floor is that the opinion of Parliament has been sought on this framework decision .
The rapporteur had also received a personal assurance that the Council would not act until Parliament had delivered its opinion .
It has no option in any case , because Article 39 ( 1 ) of the Treaty on European Union states that the Council shall consult the European Parliament before adopting any measure .
The Council , however , has already discussed this matter and took its decision on 28 May , reaching agreement on all but one point .
So to all intents and purposes , the Council has already decided on this matter , even though we were unable to debate this issue until yesterday and although we are not yet in a position to present the Council with our decision in the form of a corrigendum .
This means that it is the duty of our Parliament to protest in the strongest possible terms , which I wish to do herewith , firstly because the Council went back on its word and secondly because it infringed Article 39 of the EU Treaty , which it has done repeatedly .
We in the European People ' s Party reserve the right to take further action , but we expect the Council to answer our charge and explain its absolutely unacceptable behaviour , informing the European Parliament why it not only violated the Treaty but also showed contempt for the work of Parliament .
Mr President , it is clear why our Group is going to vote in favour of the Klamt report and is not going to support its withdrawal .
Yesterday I had a dream in this chamber : in the European Union there was a single executive , which was the Commission , and a single legislative body , which was Parliament , and Mr Vitorino woke me up from this dream during his last speech , by reminding me that the absent party did in fact exist .
And not only did it exist , but it had also already adopted the majority of what we were discussing .
Since I do not want them to have the excuse that they have not received Parliament ' s opinion , we are going to vote in favour of the Klamt report , but I would ask the Council at least to show the minimum of loyalty .
Thank you , Mrs Terrón i Cusí .
With regard to the absence of the Council , you already know - I do not know if it is coincidental that it happens under my Presidency - that the Council is profoundly allergic to debates and votes on issues relating to freedoms .
It is an illness that recurs on a regular basis .
With regard to Mr Pirker ' s comment , I believe that his protest is absolutely justifiable and the Presidency will pass it on to the Council in the correct manner .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0191 / 2001 ) by Mrs Dybkjær , on behalf of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , on information and communication technologies ( ICT ) and the developing countries ( 2000 / 2327 ( INI )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0122 / 2001 ) by Mr Aparicio Sánchez , on behalf of the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the report from the Commission to the Council , the European Parliament and the Economic and Social Committee on the implementation of Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 3911 / 92 on the export of cultural goods and Council Directive 93 / 7 / EEC on the return of cultural objects unlawfully removed from the territory of a Member State [ COM ( 2000 ) 325 - C5-0509 / 2000 - 2000 / 2246 ( COS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE- Whitehead report ( A5-0198 / 2001 )
Mr President , I would like to welcome my mother , my sister and my wife who are sitting in the public gallery .
They have , at last , visited me in Strasbourg and they supplied the cue for my first explanation of vote when they told me it was lunchtime .
' We can smell Italian food , ' they said , ' we can smell Parmigiano Reggiano cheese , Parma ham and steaming spaghetti .
So you are talking about a European Food Authority ? Well , where else to locate the European Food Authority but Parma ? '
I was therefore delighted to vote in favour .
Mr President , I actually wanted to express my regret today that the House did not pronounce itself in favour of any provision for the needs of small businesses from the domains of primary production , processing and marketing in the general principles and requirements of food safety .
The traceability of primary products at the processing and marketing stages is of extreme importance to consumers and farmers , and I can only keep re-emphasising this point .
Let me suggest , however , that consideration of the relative size of businesses is indispensable and that small businesses cannot be treated in the same way as multinational food corporations .
Moreover , I also find it regrettable , Mr President , that there are no derogations from these provisions for farming businesses which produce their own livestock feed .
I very much welcome the extended application of the precautionary principle to food and feed imports into the EU as a contribution to better consumer protection .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the establishment of our own food authority is an essential signal to consumers , whose confidence in food products has been badly shaken in recent times .
Not only the Commission but every Member State too must have the legal power to appeal directly to the new authority .
That is logical .
The European Food Authority must operate independently of the Commission , so that it can intervene as quickly as possible in any crisis .
We have great expectations of this authority , and we want it to be staffed by independent experts who can offer the politicians a scientific basis that will enable them to make the right decisions and fully restore consumer confidence .
The official objective of the Commission ' s proposal on the European Food Authority is to improve the prevention of crises such as mad cow disease .
In reality , however , we are watching the creation of a perfectly deliberate system intended to hinder those Member States who would like to use their own powers of national safeguard in the case of a public-health crisis ( as France did at the end of 1999 , when , to the chagrin of the Commission , it continued to maintain its unilateral embargo on British beef ) , and in so doing to preserve as much as possible the sacrosanct free circulation of products .
Although the only objective of the new European body is to give scientific opinions to the Community institutions and to Member States , it is obvious that it will circumvent or neutralise the opinions of national food-safety agencies , such as the AFSSA in France , so as to prevent governments from having a legitimate reason to base their decisions on those agencies .
The new body is to be governed by a management board composed of 16 members , four of whom will be appointed by the European Parliament , four by the Council , four by the Commission and the other four acting as representatives of consumers and the industry , and appointed by the Commission ( Article 24 ) .
Half of the members are thus appointed by the Commission , and all of them are appointed by the European institutions .
None of them are appointed by the national food-safety agencies , which would have been essential if everyone was supposed to be working together as a network , but obviously that was never the intention .
In order to sew things up even more securely , the executive director will be appointed by the management board , following a proposal by the Commission ( Article 25 ) and the members of the scientific groups will be appointed by that same board , following a proposal by the executive director ( Article 27 ) .
Who is going to believe that such a structure will not support the Commission ' s views ?
Article 22 explains that the new system will provide ' the best possible scientific opinions ' , thereby devaluing all others .
The central body is called ' the European Food Authority ' ( or ' the Authority ' for short , with a capital ' A ' ) .
The name should have been ' Agency ' because in theory this body will be simply issuing opinions , but the Commission insists absolutely on the word ' Authority ' , and it is easy to see why .
Moreover , it is a ' Food Authority ' rather than a ' Food Safety Authority ' , so as to expand its scope to cover the vast areas listed in Article 21 .
Among the areas listed , we also find , placed modestly at the end , genetically modified organisms .
Who could be in any doubt that one of the first ' opinions ' of the ' Authority ' will advise that the issuing of authorisations for GMOs should be resumed ?
We are dismayed , yet again , to see national states allowing themselves to be caught in such crude traps , which will mean that in future they will no longer be able to protect their citizens .
Yet when all is said and done , perhaps that is what they really want .
. ( SV ) We have voted for the report which in many areas improves the Commission ' s proposal and makes the regulatory framework more stringent .
However , we would have preferred to have seen a more restrictive attitude concerning meat and bone meal in animal feed .
We therefore voted for Amendment No 100 , which unfortunately was rejected .
This amendment demanded that Member States ensure that meat and bone meal , with the exception of fish meal , not be released on the market for animal feed .
I voted in favour of this report .
In principle , I am not in favour of the creation of an agency .
Just lately , there has been a proliferation of these new agencies : a European Maritime Safety Agency , a European Aviation Safety Agency etc .
A new Community bureaucracy is being created , and I deplore it .
However , certain circumstances may lead us to consider whether we need to create a special authority , and this is the case here .
The existence of this report is in fact the result of a sad admission - that the European Commission has shown itself to be incapable of reacting effectively to various food crises .
In order to make up for the shortcomings of the Commission , therefore , to respond to consumers ' and farmers ' expectations and to restore their confidence , the setting up of a special authority for food safety may be an effective alternative .
There are two essential principles that should guide the actions of the Food Authority : it is essential to give it a clear mission , and to make a distinction between what can be classified as scientific responsibility on the one hand , and what can be classified as political responsibility on the other .
The authority must focus on identifying and assessing risks , coordinating its activities with those of the national agencies and supplying all the information that is needed .
Under no circumstances can the Food Authority have the task of managing the rapid alert system .
That is an instrument for the consumer ' s use , and the decision on the measures to be taken belongs entirely and exclusively in the political sphere .
Finally , on the question of where this authority should be situated , I voted in favour of Amendment No 188 in its entirety .
France is one of the great founding countries of the Union .
It should demonstrate to its partners its commitment to Europe by transposing the European directives into its national legislation as quickly as possible .
So far , however , my country has remained one of the worst offenders in this respect .
By voting as I have done , I simply wish to send a strong signal to political leaders in France , to tell them that this situation must be remedied .
That is how France will enhance its prestige and its voice will carry greater weight during the forthcoming negotiations .
The European Food Safety Authority was announced in September 1999 .
The White Paper on Food Safety is dated January 2000 .
We are halfway through 2001 and we are not yet in a position to say when this Authority is likely to come into operation .
There are multiple practical problems to be resolved , but the proposals have arrived late and we will not know when the measures intended to prevent the outbreak and spread of contamination will be implemented .
I deplore this irresponsible delay , because I refuse to make consumers and producers run the risks and face the real damage produced , for example , by the spread of mad cow disease .
While waiting for the procedures to take their course , and for the governments and the Commission to reach agreement on the proposals from Parliament on responsibility for assessment and notification of risk and its management - the latter should be the exclusive responsibility of the Commission - we again propose the establishment of a provisional committee to reassure European citizens about the quality of food on the market .
As regards the location of the Authority , I would stress once again that it is appropriate to locate it in an agricultural area with strong traditions , which is also a crossroads between Mediterranean and Continental Europe , which has a great and established agri-food tradition , and is the seat of a university and a centre of specialised agri-food research .
We consider it out of the question , however , for the location of the Authority to become an object of barter between the Commission and any government , an affront to the citizens and to good sense .
Certain that , despite the delay , the report maps out the road to travel , I am voting for the resolution .
.
I wholeheartedly applaud the efforts of my Labour colleague , Mr Whitehead , to put forward measures to establish a European Food Authority to deal with food safety and the concerns of consumers .
With such a host of alarming reports on food safety , it is imperative to protect Europe 's people and our safety standards in food .
With this in mind , I support Mr Whitehead 's proposal to include the word " safety " in the title of the body to read European Food Safety Authority .
We must put safety first and make sure that harmful substances do not enter the food chain unseen by the back door .
Furthermore , the remit of the Authority should be extended to include animal health and welfare , plant health , GMOs and food labelling . Of course , the health and well-being of our citizens is of paramount importance .
We are calling for an Authority that has a clear and targeted remit to examine issues of food safety and is founded on the principles of transparency and meritocracy .
Labour MEPs have been at the forefront of protecting consumers across Europe .
We have consistently backed proposals to ensure that food safety is strictly controlled within the EU .
Mr Whitehead 's report is yet further proof of Europe cleaning up its act and putting the safety of our citizens first .
Only with clear principles and a specific mission will the EFSA win the confidence of EU consumers and the entire EU food industry .
Paulsen reports ( A5-0185 / 2001 and A5-0200 / 2001 )
Mr President , as agreed by all the pensioners in my party , I have voted for these health rules Mrs Paulsen has presented so well .
I also want to tell you that my daughter , Cristina - one of the few members of my family who is not here with me in this Chamber today -was passing a hot dog and hamburger restaurant the other week , and feeling hungry , tried to drag me inside , saying : ' That smells delicious .
I feel hungry .
Come on , let ' s go and eat some delicious hot dogs ! '
I have to say , though , that as we were about to go in , I found Mrs Paulsen blocking our way and forcing me to listen to her .
She told me to make quite sure there was a label on every hot dog I ate , to check that they had been produced according to health rules and to find out what these animals , which seem so appetising to us , have themselves eaten !
Of course , I insisted on going in - I never refuse my daughter Cristina anything - but once inside I remembered to check that all the European Union ' s health rules had been applied , and that everything was labelled .
I have to say that this had been done even before the directives were passed .
And I ate some excellent hot dogs !
When I asked the Commission , five years ago , if it knew whether Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease had appeared in Germany , and whether it was not afraid that , without adequate controls , the disease would affect cattle , I was told that the institution was aware of the reports , but that everything was under control and there was nothing to fear .
We know the rest .
BSE spread in Britain and has also appeared in other European countries , although to a lesser degree , claiming human victims and leading to the slaughter of a large but still unspecified number of cattle , with enormous damage to breeders and the livestock economy of the whole area .
It is generally held that fodder based on animal meal has encouraged the spread of the livestock disease .
The Commission ' s proposal on the treatment of by-products of animal origin is a step in the right direction , but I agree with the rapporteur that we should strengthen the regulation by asking for strict separation , and hence visibility in the food chain , of the three categories of materials : extremely dangerous , for example contaminated by dioxins and transmissible spongiform encephalitis ( TSE ) ; carrying risk of diseases other than TSE ; and produced from healthy animals .
By-products in the first and second categories should be traceable through the use of dyes or odorants and should be prohibited .
Only those in the third category are to be permitted as ingredients in animal fodder .
The stricter the controls , the better it will be for the health of consumers .
Notwithstanding the laudable amendments tabled by the rapporteur , whose efforts to strengthen the Commission ' s proposals we appreciate , many points still remain unresolved in terms of decisions on urgent action in the event of crises .
For this reason , I abstained in the vote .
Karamanou report ( A5-0206 / 2001 )
Mr President , the GUE / NGL Group could not support Mrs Karamanou ' s report on child pornography .
We strongly condemn child pornography .
We consider this to be a very severe and very serious crime .
For this reason we consider that the proposals submitted by the Commission are better than the report submitted by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
It is important that legislation defines child pornography as distinctly as possible .
Definitions must not be allowed to become so broad as to make police work and the work of authorities more difficult .
If a parent or guardian admits serious abuse of a child , their own child or someone else ' s child , they must be treated as the criminals they are and not afforded special treatment in any way .
If there is no obligation to report knowledge of actual crime in this respect in Member States , we hope that the Commission will encourage the implementation of such legislation .
However , we do not wish to encourage moral panic by encouraging citizens to report anyone without relevant suspicions .
Finally , we turn to the proposal submitted by the Commission and the committee on age limits .
In accordance with the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , a person is to be seen as a child until he or she has reached the age of 18 .
Whatever the age of the child , vulnerability , the degree of abuse and the nature of abuse must be the guiding factors when setting penalties - irrespective of age .
Mr President , I have voted in favour of this report whereby the European Union sets about combating sexual exploitation of children and child pornography .
I should add that I associate with many older people as national secretary of the Italian Pensioners Party , and my mother is also one of them . She looks and moves as if she were much younger but she passed 65 some time ago .
Well , she told me she has lots of spare time and could accompany her grandchildren to school - and even her great-grandchildren , if she had any .
Many older people have told me the same : they are willing to keep an eye on children wherever they go .
I hope Mrs Karamanou and Parliament will propose facilitating the use of older people to take care of children in the next report .
The Alleanza Nazionale group has voted for the Karamanou report because the European institutions are at last decisively committed to combating phenomena like child pornography and the sexual exploitation of children , which is worsening and spreading all the time , striking down the weakest and most defenceless citizens of the European Union : our children .
This is the first perceptible step to remind the Member States of their responsibility to introduce more appropriate legislation to deal with the specific nature of this odious crime .
The Alleanza Nazionale group has frequently denounced the urgent need to intervene and impose strict controls and prohibitions on the Internet , which represents one of the main channels of communication and distribution of both audio and video child pornography , making the service provider criminally responsible for the content of the services provided .
Finally , we particularly appreciated the proposal to confiscate the proceeds of this sexual exploitation and devote them to victims and children ' s rights NGOs .
The European Union will then be playing a decisive role in resisting a phenomenon which knows no frontiers because it is often run by large criminal associations at international level .
. ( SV ) The Swedish Moderate Party delegation in the PPE-DE Group considers that the articles on criminalisation in the report on combating the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography are vague in places , which makes it difficult to gain an overview of the criminal area .
We have voted in favour of the report as we assume that no constitutional change needs to be made .
Our abstention on this report in no way signifies a lack of interest , nor does it mean that we are neutral in our attitude towards the problem of paedophiles , whom we firmly condemn .
It simply means that the text is inadequate on some points and ambiguous on others .
, in writing . ( SV ) Mr President , the GUE / NGL Group could not support Mrs Karamanou ' s report on child pornography .
We strongly condemn child pornography .
We consider this to be a very grave and very serious crime .
For this reason we consider that the proposals submitted by the Commission are better than the report submitted by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
It is important that legislation define child pornography as distinctly as possible .
Definitions must not be allowed to become so broad as to make police work and the work of authorities more difficult .
If a parent or guardian admits serious abuse of a child , their own child or someone else ' s child , they must be treated as the criminals they are and not given special treatment in any way .
If there is no obligation to report knowledge of actual crime in this respect in Member States , we hope that the Commission will encourage the implementation of such legislation .
However , we do not wish to encourage moral panic by encouraging citizens to report anyone without relevant suspicions .
Finally , we turn to the proposal submitted by the Commission and the committee on age limits .
In accordance with the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child , a person is to be seen as a child until he or she has reached the age of 18 .
Whatever the age of the child , vulnerability , the degree of abuse and the nature of abuse must be the guiding factors when setting penalties - irrespective of age .
. ( PT ) As the report acknowledges , important international agreements already exist to protect children , specifically the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child , the Protocol on the sale of children , child prostitution and child pornography and the European Council Convention on Cyber-Crime .
The European Union has the task of complementing and extending this work , bearing in mind the gravity of the situation that still exists in this field .
It is not enough , however , to establish legal frameworks .
We must also adopt fundamental political measures , which address the causes .
The European Commission ' s proposal offers very little analysis of the causes of the sexual exploitation of children and the consequences of such behaviour and back-pedals significantly on the measures that are proposed and an actual definition of child pornography .
During the debate on the proposal in the Committee on Women ' s Rights , we tabled various amendments , thereby making a positive contribution to improving the initial positions .
Not all of our amendments were adopted , but the report makes a significant improvement on the Commission ' s proposals in various ways . It falls short , however , of what we would like to see in this field , specifically with regard to the concept of child pornography and to the penalties that could be imposed for such activity .
We are in favour of this step , which confirms the need for a framework decision defending the need for strong and concerted action against the sexual exploitation of children and child pornography , the latter having developed greatly as a result of the Internet and new technologies .
This battle must be fought on all fronts , because the consequences for children are disastrous , and from this point of view we support the argument that the possession of child-pornography material in itself constitutes an offence .
The main problem is to avoid a situation in which this vital battle against the sexual exploitation of children and against child pornography is used by supporters of a reactionary morality , resulting in excesses tending to abolish freedoms , in particular in relation to certain material containing sexual information , or certain types of fiction .
Therefore one cannot state than any representation of children showing ' sexual behaviour ' is reprehensible .
What concerns us is the ambiguity of a certain number of amendments dealing with virtual products .
Perhaps this is a justifiable area for concern , but there is a real risk of going off the rails here .
We are therefore in favour of a no-holds-barred campaign against the sexual exploitation of children and against child pornography , but a certain number of amendments involve a very real risk that this just campaign will be used for reactionary purposes .
This is why we are abstaining from the vote .
. ( NL ) The crimes of Marc Dutroux in Belgium and similar atrocities elsewhere have been waiting for a response for years .
People who put their personal pleasure , or earning money from the pleasure of others , before the protection of children are a danger to society as a whole .
Society must be protected against people who force children into sexual acts and who are even capable of killing those children if they can no longer be used for that purpose .
I give my unqualified support to that part of the proposals in the Karamanou report .
Unfortunately , in certain other proposals and in the debate in this connection , I have detected a nineteenth-century , Victorian undertone .
I get the impression that a number of people who advocate tough measures would , in fact , ideally ban same-sex marriages , nudist beaches , pornographic images and text , sex outside marriage and Manneken Pis .
I also get the feeling that they want to criminalise parents who , they believe , do not raise their children in a sufficiently prudish manner .
You are already committing an offence if you give your children sex education , if other people can see your children naked or if the children can see their parents naked .
That is not how you deal with the irresponsible , the profiteers and the criminals ; instead you take away newly acquired freedom from ordinary well-meaning people .
That part of their objectives will not receive my support .
For over seven years , with speeches in the House , questions , motions for resolutions , press conferences , round tables and meetings , the Alleanza Nazionale in the European Parliament has been calling for action to combat the odious crime of paedophilia and the exploitation of minors through child pornography .
We have even resorted to a people ' s petition to try to speed up the involvement of the Commission , governments and political forces in the defence of the thousands and thousands of children who are double victims of crime : first because of the violence suffered ; and then because of the length of proceedings and the indifference of institutions .
The Council and Parliament are finally promoting new initiatives , but these will not have sufficient impact unless a culture of respect for children and strict and swift legislation against their enslavers are speedily developed throughout the world , and especially in the West .
As long as the West allows child pornography and paedophile pictures and propaganda , with extremely shady connections , to be distributed over the Internet , it cannot effectively protect minors .
The Commission must take responsibility for dealing with this unspeakable situation and negotiate with international organisations and governments to block the use of the Internet for illicit purposes .
. I congratulate my Socialist colleague , Mrs Karamanou , on her report on combating the sexual exploitation of children .
Europe must introduce stronger measures to tackle this disturbing subject and ensure that offenders are punished in a similar way across the European Union .
We have all heard of awful and tragic cases of child pornography and child exploitation across Europe .
We must seek to ensure that history is not repeated .
Our children must never again suffer such terrible afflictions and we must do all we can to prevent this .
Cooperation should be increased between Member States in the European Union through common penalties for offenders and police services working together across the Member States .
Tougher penalties must be dealt out to those participating in the sexual exploitation of children and offenders must not be allowed to get away scot free .
Hard measures should be taken against those guilty of exploiting children , as well as those who gain financially or are members of a criminal organisation .
Parents who have agreed for a child to engage in prostitution or pornography should also be regarded as criminal offenders .
I fully agree with Mrs Karamanou that victims and witnesses should be given better protection and assistance .
Financial compensation for rehabilitation is important , but we should remember that you can never buy back innocence .
Our children are our most vulnerable citizens and we should make every effort possible to protect them .
I merely wish to ask whether the written explanations of vote should not be taken first .
As I understand it , one must be present in the chamber even when submitting a written explanation of vote .
Or have these rules been changed again ?
My delegation has remained as we wish to submit a written explanation .
We would like this to be registered and then we would like to be able to leave .
It would therefore be easier if we took the written explanations first .
I would like some clarification : Does one need to remain in the chamber if one wishes to submit a written explanation and have it approved , or not ?
I am not sure if I have understood you properly , Mrs Carlsson , but for many years the practice has been that anybody who has taken part in the vote simply has to give the written explanation of vote to the Bureau or indicate that they will deliver it within two hours , and do not have to wait to be called .
If you have taken part in the vote and do not wish to wait and wish to make a written explanation of vote , you simply have to say so and deliver your written text to us before 3.00 p.m.
Is that clear ?
Thank you for your answer .
I was of the opinion that one had to remain also for written explanations of vote .
That is excellent , now I know and will be able to save time in the future .
Klamt report ( A5-0183 / 2001 )
Mr President , I do not know why , perhaps it is the fact that it is always close to lunchtime , but I always find myself starting my explanations of vote by saying I was in a restaurant .
To explain why I have voted for this report on combating trafficking in human beings , I have to tell you that I was in a Chinese restaurant in 2010 .
It should not surprise you , Mr President , that with me the future can become the past .
Well , in 2010 I was in a Chinese restaurant and I had a very good meal .
It was so good that I got friendly with the owner and asked him about his life .
' So you were a Member of the European Parliament ? ' he said .
' You did well to vote for the report against trafficking in human beings !
Because , you see , I would have had to work with no social security , no wages , no pension , because I would have come to Strasbourg the wrong way .
As it is , I have been able to earn a good salary . I also have a pension , and now I devote myself to this restaurant .
I owe that to the European Parliament and its Members who voted in favour of that report ten years ago . '
And he thanked me .
Today the Commission has put before us regulations against trafficking in human beings and sexual exploitation which we cannot but approve of , though at the same time noting that they hide a less praiseworthy objective concerning the issue of illegal immigration .
In effect , the Commission , which is frequently accused of using its new powers of initiative , which it derives from the Treaty of Amsterdam , in a way that is too favourable towards immigration ( in particular the proposals on reuniting families and on temporary protection ) , is seeking to clear its name by including , under the heading of trafficking in human beings , trafficking in human beings for the purpose of labour exploitation .
It claims that this is a contribution to the campaign to halt illegal immigration .
In reality , however , this is an alibi .
If we examine the text more closely , we can see that the approach favoured by the Commission is to defuse the repressive measures .
The offence of trafficking in human beings for the purpose of labour exploitation , as described in Article 1 , does not require the illegal crossing of a border , and yet that is precisely the primary criterion in a case of illegal immigration .
The result is that this offence is defined in a vague manner , so that it can cover very different types of cases , and not just illegal immigration .
Under the pretext of this broad definition , the person who is the object of the trafficking is presented , in the Commission ' s explanatory statement , as a ' victim ' .
Therefore , in order for an offence to have been committed , that victim must have suffered a constraint , which does not correspond to the case of illegal immigrants , who generally come voluntarily .
In these circumstances , these supposed provisions against illegal immigration , buried as they are in the campaign against exploitation of all kinds , including child pornography , cannot possibly be effective .
They serve merely to provide a trompe-l ' oeil counterpart to other texts on immigration which are extremely lax .
Fortunately , Member States , and in particular France , have used the powers of initiative which they still posses , until 1 May 2004 , to put forward other proposals which are more precise , better targeted , and therefore more effective .
There is a proposed framework decision aimed at reinforcing the penal code to stop the facilitation of unauthorised entry into and residence in the Union , a draft directive which seeks to improve the definition of ' facilitation of unauthorised entry , movement and residence ' , and a draft directive on hauliers ' liability if they carry illegal immigrants .
If Member States had not taken these initiatives in order to restore the balance , the texts currently being proposed by the Commission would be more or less pointless , at least as far as illegal immigration is concerned .
- ( DA ) We have some reservations regarding the legal bases of both reports .
Trafficking in human beings , and emigration which is claimed to be voluntary but which is in fact forced on people by destitution , have one thing in common : they are both the result of the poverty which afflicts most of the world .
Without a deep-seated social change which puts an end to a system which , in order to concentrate wealth in the hands of the privileged classes of the rich countries , impoverishes the labouring classes of the world , it will not be possible to halt either so-called voluntary emigration or trafficking in human beings .
We voted in favour of the text in order to express our condemnation of those who profit from this type of traffic or from the sex trade .
Nevertheless , it has to be said that this most irresolute of resolutions does not finish what it sets out to do , since it could only achieve its objective by granting the victims of this trafficking not a temporary residence permit but the full right to remain , if they wish to , in the countries of the European Union .
. I welcome the adoption of two reports calling for closer co-operation between Member States on the twin evils of sexual exploitation of children and the trafficking of human beings .
The Klamt and Karamanou reports are related in that they seek to harmonise definitions of sexual exploitation .
They call for a common definition and application of penalties relating to pornography in an age where the Internet has enabled sexual exploitation to transcend all frontiers .
It is horrific that slavery and exploitation can take place on the European continent where we like to think of ourselves as socially enlightened .
It is imperative that proposals for severe penalties for those convicted of sexual exploitation and trafficking should be followed through .
I call on the Irish Government to state clearly what position it will take on these issues before decisions are taken at Council .
Those recitals in the draft which state that there is a need to take strong measures to halt trafficking in human beings , and the references to the UN texts , appear to us to be broadly correct .
Of course , the concept of labour exploitation could be expanded ( the references are those of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which are too restrictive ) .
The main danger lies in confusing trafficking in human beings with immigration and attempting to treat the two as one and the same thing .
This is why we supported the amendments which point out that the campaign to stop trafficking in human beings must not be used to repress unauthorised immigrants , and those which refer to the right to reside for all victims .
We also voted in favour of those amendments which seek to classify as an offence what was originally called an infringement , in view of what trafficking in human beings means in terms of exploitation , humiliation , and physical and mental violence .
Finally , we should like to make it clear that our positive vote on this proposed framework decision in no way means that we believe that the various European systems of cooperation between police forces and judicial systems currently in use are acceptable or legitimate .
- ( NL ) The division of poverty and welfare among countries and among groups within one country is becoming increasingly unfair .
A growing number of people in the richest countries attaches more importance to earning as much money as possible than to the well-being of their fellow men and the protection of the environment .
This brings out the worst in people .
Although colonial slavery was abolished 140 years ago , new forms of slavery are now emerging rapidly .
Many women and children from Eastern Europe and the Third World , in search of a better life , fall into the hands of new slave drivers during their journey to richer countries .
These seek to make money by forcing others into providing involuntary sexual services .
Tough measures are needed , not to punish the victims , but to make it impossible for the profiteers to continue in their criminal activities .
I welcome the fact that the proposal draws a distinction between the granting of humanitarian aid to people without the required paperwork and trafficking in human beings , that a compensation fund will be set up for victims , which is to be financed from confiscated , illegal profits , and that victims and witnesses are to be protected .
I can therefore support the basic ideas of the Klamt report , although I share Mrs Sörensen ' s concern that , with this proposal too , the Mafiosi , which have a genuine vested interest in this kind of activity , will continue to remain too much out of range .
. ( SV ) We Swedish Christian Democrats welcome the initiative to combat human trafficking .
We consider that there is a natural difference between the concepts of human trafficking and human smuggling .
Consequently it is beneficial to address these issues in separate legal instruments , an opinion reflected in our vote .
Furthermore , we consider that as the framework decision concerns combating human trafficking and the punishment of those guilty of this , questions such as the treatment of victims of human trafficking should not be regulated in this instrument .
We have therefore chosen to abstain from voting on these points .
. I support this report against the trafficking in human beings .
Europe needs to crack down on the trade in trafficking human beings .
Human trafficking involves force , violence , deceit and abuse of its victims and is totally unacceptable .
Over 120,000 women and children are abducted from Eastern Europe each year to be brought into the EU for exploitation .
Not only should this type of activity be punishable , but it should be classed as a criminal offence .
I strongly believe there should be common rules for penalties with those guilty facing a minimum prison sentence of six years rising to ten years for more severe cases .
All those involved in circles of human trafficking should certainly face stiff penalties , whether they are police officers , customs officials or civil servants .
We must not forget the victims ' needs and their suffering in all this .
They should be given better support , including financial compensation from the confiscated proceeds of crime .
The European single market allows borders to be crossed , but we must do all we can to prevent such exploitation of our borders .
If we are truly a people 's Europe , we must put the people first and protect them from abuses such as these .
Karamanou and Klamt reports ( A5-0256 / 2001 ) and ( A5-0183 / 2001 )
Dybkjær report ( A5-0191 / 2001 )
Mr President , my wife Graziella is at last with me in Strasbourg , and when we went back to the hotel last night I read her part of the Dybkjaer report , about the two billion people in the world , in developing countries , who have never made a telephone call , never watched television , never gone to the cinema , never been in an aeroplane or a car .
' Ah ! ' she exclaimed .
' They are the lucky ones then , they are fine without telephones , televisions and cars ! '
' No ' I explained .
' I cannot do what you want and vote against this report .
I must vote in favour because they must progress , they must have their televisions , cinemas and telephones too ' .
In fact I have voted in favour .
But she got angry and we argued and for the second time in my life I spent a sleepless night .
But I have voted for the report and I am very happy to have done so .
We can only vote against this heap of rubbish , which in its very first recital states that poor countries have ' possibilities to improve their economic situation , fight poverty ... ' , however little they know how to use this ' ICT revolution ' .
In many of the poorer countries , the majority of the population not only do not have electricity , they are not even fed properly .
It is easier to draw up and adopt resolutions of this kind , and even to grant a few subsidies allowing computer manufacturers to dispose of unsaleable stocks , than to feed the people of these countries or , even better , to give them the opportunity to feed themselves , instead of exploiting them and forcing them to abandon even their own food crops in order to produce for western markets .
It takes a great lack of awareness or a high degree of cynicism to state that ' information and communication technologies afford possibilities of making a major contribution to direct democracy ' .
In some of the poorer countries , particularly in Africa , the people would be happy if the major European powers would make a ' contribution ' to democracy by ceasing to support , finance and arm their dictators .
However , it would be asking too much to expect the governments of Europe to abandon the long-standing dictatorships which protect the interests of their trusts .
The people are demanding democracy , are they ?
Let them make do with the Internet !
Aparicio Sánchez report ( A5-0122 / 2001 )
Mr President , I hope you and all the interpreters and officials who have had the patience to stay in the Chamber with me have a very good lunch .
I have voted for this report and it was my sister who suggested this explanation of vote to me .
She said : ' Listen , when will we finally see the Mona Lisa in Italy ?
When will we see Michelangelo ' s Moses in Strasbourg ?
And when will we see Van Gogh and Renoir in Spain ? They have never been shown in our museums . '
' Very soon , ' I replied , ' because , as well as legislating on the theft of works of art , the European Union will surely also ensure that these works can circulate freely and easily throughout Europe . '
And that is the end of my explanations of vote for today .
We voted against this report in order to condemn the hypocrisy of a text which claims to oppose the renewed outbreak of thefts of cultural objects in the European Union and the illicit trade in such objects .
The author of this text forgets to point out that not only the national museums of the countries of Europe but also private collections are filled with cultural objects pillaged over centuries from the countries of the Mediterranean , the Middle East , Asia and Latin America or Africa
While the British Museum , the Louvre , and the Pergamon Museum in Berlin are filled with the wonders of ancient art , in Greece there are mostly only plaster copies now .
In museums , these cultural objects are at least exhibited to the public .
The same is not true , however , of private collections .
If this text is claiming to prevent illicit trade , it should first of all define as illicit all purchases which enable extremely rich individuals to appropriate and keep for their own private use cultural goods which ought to be the heritage of the whole of humanity and accessible to everyone .
Mr Fatuzzo , before suspending the sitting , I would like to tell you something which I am sure will delight you : every second of every speech costs the European tax-payer EUR 9.65 .
That concludes the vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.20 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Ozone in ambient air ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the recommendation for second reading ( A5 ­ 0187 / 2001 ) by Mr Davies , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive relating to ozone in ambient air [ 13114 / 1 / 2000 - C5 ­ 0090 / 2001 - 1999 / 0068 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , as I see it , Mr Davies ' report deals fundamentally with the credibility of the EU ' s environment policy and whether we really are to attempt to achieve the targets created by the Union .
Ground level ozone is a serious air pollutant which creates considerable problems for public health and the environment .
The targets we are setting to reduce the extent of pollution must be binding , otherwise we risk the decisions becoming mere castles in the air .
It is therefore not good to have legislation which only talks about targets being reached as far as possible , as expressed by the Council of Ministers .
In this respect we naturally support the committee ' s proposal for clearer wording .
Our group also supports Amendments Nos 5 and 23 which state that the targets must be entirely attained by 2020 at the latest and that they may not be exceeded by more than 20 days a year until 2010 .
Without these changes the legislation will be toothless .
Another important aspect of Mr Davies ' report is the more stringent requirements in terms of information to the public .
This type of air pollution has a considerable effect on public health . It is therefore important that all available information is made public to the general public and voluntary organisations .
There must be consistency between the EU ' s environmental policy in different areas .
We have common targets for air quality and are currently negotiating with the Council to approximate the rules on national ceilings for emissions and large incineration plants .
If this policy is to hold together , we also require binding rules on ozone emissions .
With these words I wish to thank the rapporteur for his excellent work which we will vote for in every respect .
Mr President , the main thrust of this directive is to set targets for the levels of ozone which will be permitted in ambient air within the European Union .
This directive is part of an overall package which is being implemented by the European Union at this time to comply with the obligations under the Kyoto Accord .
We can all recall that the Kyoto Accord sets down a timetable for the reduction in the level of the use of greenhouse gases .
The US President , Mr Bush , has already stated that he wants to renegotiate the Kyoto Accord .
This is highly regrettable because , in the eyes of many , it is felt that the targets set by the Kyoto Accord will not even achieve the goal of substantially reducing the use of greenhouse gases .
The clear scientific evidence is that climate change is real , is happening now , and will get worse .
Emissions from the developed world are the primary reason for global warming .
Developed countries must take the first meaningful steps in reducing emissions .
The European Union is determined to play its part in reaching our targeted 8 % reduction in greenhouse gas emissions below 1990 levels over this decade .
We are all aware that President Bush is due to meet the European Union leaders in Göteborg this week .
I hope that the US President will come up with a firm proposal to outline how his administration intends to reduce the level of greenhouse gases in the immediate future .
There is unequivocal scientific evidence about the damage which has been done to many communities as the ozone layer is being depleted .
Extensive production of greenhouse gases is resulting in the depletion of the ozone layer which , in turn , is resulting in higher sea levels , contributing to greater coastal erosion , greater flooding and the elimination of many of our island communities .
We have a moral obligation to ensure not only that the quality of life of present communities is protected , but that the quality of life of future communities is protected also .
That is why it is so important that we all guarantee that we reduce the level of greenhouse gas emissions in Europe , the United States of America and elsewhere so as to achieve our objective in this regard .
I congratulate Mr Davies on his excellent report .
Mr President , since this morning , we have been talking specifically about ozone and the serious effects which it has on human health , but also , more generally , about ecosystems and the environment as a whole .
I myself , in my département in France , chair an air-quality monitoring network , and whenever the weather is very good , when it is sunny and there is no wind , I dread the effects of road traffic , because I know that the maximum levels will inevitably be exceeded , and there will be what we normally call an ozone peak .
In such conditions , what can we do ?
What can we do to comply with the Kyoto Accord and solve the problem of climatic change ?
We know that it is human activity , in the form of industry and road traffic , which causes the maximum ozone limits to be exceeded in our urban areas , but afterwards this ozone , depending on wind and topography , spreads to regions which ought to be protected .
It is therefore vitally important to set objectives which are precise , to have real , effective air-quality monitoring networks .
The rapid alert system which comes into play when ozone limits are exceeded to an extent which is likely to be harmful to the health of susceptible people such as children , the elderly , or people with heart or respiratory problems , must be effective .
The network must cover the whole of Europe , so that everybody can be properly informed .
However , we should be aware that it is difficult to reduce excessive levels in Spain , Greece and Italy , and that it is much more difficult in the countries of southern Europe than in those further north .
Those who are responsible at local level should take effective town-planning measures , in the context of sustainable development , without , however , harming the competitiveness of our businesses .
We should aim our awareness campaign above all at those who are in a position to change their behaviour but , more than anything else , in order to succeed we must make sure that all countries are aware of their responsibilities , so that our decisions are not merely European , but international as well .
President Bush has arrived in Europe , and we should do all we can to make him aware of the responsibility which the United States also bears in this area .
Mr President , firstly , I should like to congratulate Mr Davies for the work that he has done on this report .
He brings something to us which will hopefully provide some interesting issues to be debated and discussed and then resolved in consultation .
This report excellently demonstrates why environment policy has to be achieved at a European level .
Ozone is a European problem and the best example I can think of a problem that has to be addressed at the European level .
For example , within the United Kingdom , where in many ways the circumstances are amongst the most favourable within the European Union , 50 % of the ozone is created by emissions outside the UK .
That is very much the pattern for the rest of Europe .
Indeed , in many parts of Europe , a great many of the problems about ozone are not necessarily a consequence of activities by that individual Member State .
Ozone is a collective problem which has to be dealt with collectively .
I have one concern , namely that we are trying to set too strict values .
We are setting target values that , by their very nature , will be almost impossible for many Member States to meet in certain given circumstances during the year .
They are going to be , through no fault of their own , in breach of European legislation .
It is not sensible that we should create a piece of legislation that puts Member States in this position .
There are many Member States , particularly in southern and eastern-central Europe who are going to find themselves constantly in breach of this legislation , no matter what they do .
Some of the things they are going to have to do , where physically possible , as indicated in the compromise amendments , is to close factories , perhaps shut down whole parts of industry , and create car-free zones inside their cities .
And still they will not solve the problem of ozone .
Still they will find themselves breaching this regulation we are creating .
When we go into conciliation - as I expect we will because we will have the votes for many of these amendments in the House - we are going to have to think very carefully about whether we continue to adopt this type of approach and this type of legislation .
Mr President , the proposal we are discussing today , together with the directives on large combustion plants and national emission ceilings , forms an important part of the Community 's ongoing efforts to clean up air over Europe .
First of all , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Davies , for his hard and dedicated work on this important and complex issue .
The proposal sets target values and long-term objectives for ozone in ambient air .
While the long-term objectives are based on the latest advice from the World Health Organization , the target values have been set with regard to the best attainable air quality .
In doing so , the transboundary nature of ozone and cost-efficiency aspects have been taken into account .
As I mentioned earlier , this proposal is closely related to the proposal for a directive on national emission ceilings where conciliation negotiations are currently under way and we have to recognise the difficulty of finding a solution for linked issues , for example the target values for ozone , in the absence of a definitive outcome .
At its first reading in March last year , Parliament presented a well-considered report including 18 amendments .
Council 's common position adopted in March 2001 takes due account of most of Parliament 's concerns .
Now 32 amendments have been tabled to the text of the common position .
Amendments Nos 4 , 15 and the first part of Amendment No 23 all seek to turn the target values into binding limit values .
In light of the insufficient scientific knowledge on ozone formation , the Commission cannot accept any of those amendments .
On the other hand we can accept in principle Amendments Nos 30 and 31 requiring binding target values , save where physically impossible .
However , we would also have to bear in mind that target values would not be attained where it is not efficient from an economic viewpoint .
With regard to the target values , it is not acceptable for the Commission to keep 20 days as the target value for the protection of human health .
The Commission agreed on Council 's common position on national emission ceilings , which result in 25 days as an attainable target .
Therefore the Commission cannot accept the second part of Amendment No 23 .
Moreover , Amendment No 23 would set 2020 as a binding target year to attain the long-term objectives .
Amendments Nos 3 , 5 and 15 follow the same intention .
As there is there is no scientific evidence yet to prove this aim to be feasible , the Commission cannot accept those amendments .
However , the Commission agrees on the general aim fully to close the gap between long-term objectives and current ozone levels and could accept Amendments Nos 2 and 6 .
Amendments Nos 26 to 31 would require attainment of the long-term objectives , save where physically impossible .
Again , this would have to be complemented by taking account of economic efficiency as well .
Therefore , those amendments could only be accepted in principle .
Several amendments would enforce the obligations of Member States to report to the public and the Commission .
The Commission welcomes these amendments if the requirements are considered feasible and useful .
The Commission therefore could accept Amendments Nos 8 , the second part of 10 and 16 .
Amendment No 11 would be acceptable in part . Amendment No 17 , in principle .
Amendment 32 would complement Amendment No 17 in a way that is acceptable .
The first part of Amendment No 10 and Amendments Nos 18 to 20 and 25 are not acceptable .
Amendments Nos 12 and 14 both clarify responsibilities in setting up short-term action plans and are acceptable in part and in principle .
The last part of Amendment No 12 and Amendment No 13 are acceptable in stressing the role of guidance on examples for short-term actions .
The Commission accepts Amendment No 24 , which supports a more effective trigger value to initiate short-term actions .
There are four amendments on other issues .
Among those the Commission cannot accept is Amendment No 1 , as it is directed towards candidate countries , which is not appropriate for an EU directive .
We can accept Amendment No 7 on tightening requirements to maintain air quality .
Amendment No 21 would require a direct comparison between the performance of Member States in improving air quality and the Commission could not accept this amendment as the proposed comparison is not considered appropriate , in particular , with regard to the transboundary nature of ozone .
As Amendment No 33 incorporates those aspects , it could be accepted in principle .
However , no direct comparison of Member States should be required .
Finally , Amendment No 22 requires special attention to the effects of ozone on human health and the environment and the Commission accepts this amendment .
I consider it essential to put this legislation in place soon , so that appropriate monitoring can start .
Member States need to be able to identify problem areas , so that they can make sure that the public 's health is properly protected in the future throughout the Union .
Hopefully a valid compromise will soon be found , having regard to the outcome of the conciliation negotiations on the directive on national emission ceilings .
Thank you very much , Commissioner Wallström .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
WTO Panel / Section 211
The next item is the oral question ( B5 ­ 0326 / 2001 ) by Mr Westendorp y Cabeza , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the WTO Panel Section 211 .
Mr President , I should like to say a few introductrory words and then perhaps go on to explain our oral question .
We have tabled an oral question on behalf of our group .
The main reason for this is our group ' s criticism of the way in which the Council used the procedure laid down in Article 133 as the basis for its decision to apply for the appointment of a panel to examine whether section 211 of the U.S. Trademark Act is incompatible with the TRIPS Agreement .
We did not deal to any great extent with the substance of the Council ' s case , although the substantive argument did meet with some opposition and engendered lively discussion in committee ; we chiefly focused on the expression of our desire to be fully informed in future and to be included in the decision-making structures used by the Council and the special committee established under Article 133 .
We believe this is especially necessary in the realm of trade policy .
As all of you here - honourable Members , Commissioner and representative of the Council - are aware , when it comes to trade issues , we in Parliament are only involved to a limited extent .
For many years we have been crossing swords on this issue - mainly with the Council and only to a lesser degree with the Commission .
In the case in question , it is a matter of initiating proceedings to examine whether , in a dispute between Pernod / Ricard and Bacardi , a primarily Euro-Cuban holding and a primarily U.S.-European corporation , the EU is entitled to lend support as it sees fit .
The Council has come down clearly on the side of Pernod / Ricard in this dispute , and the Commission supports this position too .
We in the committee did not pronounce ourselves on this dispute .
All we said is that we should have wished to be informed before the institution of proceedings and before the appointment of the panel , so that we as a Parliament could have adopted a substantiated and well-founded position on the decision taken by the Council and the Commission .
Let me add that the Commission , especially Commissioner Lamy , has kept us regularly briefed .
Accordingly , none of our criticism in this case has been directed at the Commission .
Perhaps the main point , and the reason why we attach so much importance to this issue , is that section 211 of the Trademark Act is one of those cases that relates to our long-running dispute with the United States over the Helms-Burton Act .
It is about the extraterritorial application of domestic legislation .
To that extent , we support the action taken by the Commission and the Council from a political point of view , but - as I have already mentioned - we do not condone the inadequate briefing of Parliament and its competent committee .
Why is this so important ?
You will have noticed that legislators on both sides of the Atlantic have been coming under increasing pressure to support the decisions of their respective governments .
It is very , very important to us to make it clear to the other institutions that they will only be able to secure our support in future if they provide Parliament and the responsible parliamentary committee with comprehensive information .
You will see how necessary this is from the letter written by many Members of this House - I believe there were more than a hundred of us - and addressed to both the U.S. Government and the Council .
The letter not only criticised the procedure adopted by the Council but also the substance of its decision .
That is why I wish to make this urgent appeal to the Council to do everything possible in future to keep Parliament fully informed and to extend this obligation to cover any application for the institution of dispute-settlement proceedings , which means coming to the committee or the plenary chamber on such occasions and briefing Parliament in order to establish total transparency .
Mr President , on behalf of the Council I would like to remind you that , according to Article 133 of the Treaty , the Council makes decisions on the common trade policy on the basis of the Commission ' s proposals .
We in the Council are well aware of the desires regarding the procedure for decisions on the common trade policy which Parliament has formulated on several occasions .
These desires have been examined and assessed very carefully .
As we all know , they have also been the object of discussion at the Intergovernmental Conference which concluded its work in Nice on 7 - 9 December 2000 .
The changes to the text of the Treaty which this Intergovernmental Conference agreed on do not address this aspect of Article 133 .
It should also be noted that the vast majority of Member States did not consider it necessary to amend the article in this respect .
Besides the obligations laid down in the Treaty , the Council requires openness .
At meetings with the chairman of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy in particular , the Council regularly informs Parliament of issues which are of importance to Community trade policy and in accordance with the Westerterp Procedure of 1973 the Council informs Parliament of negotiations concerning trade agreements with third countries before they are initiated , while they are underway and once negotiations have been concluded .
I also wish to note that Swedish Minister for Trade Leif Pagrotsky will hold two meetings with the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy during the Swedish Presidency .
Furthermore , representatives of the European Parliament were invited to the Euro-Mediterranean Ministerial Meeting on Trade on 29 May 2001 .
What is more , the chairman of the Article 133 Committee invited all members of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy to an informal meeting on 31 May 2001 .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office , ladies and gentlemen , the WTO dispute between the European Union and the United States in the Havana Club case , in other words the dispute regarding section 211 of the U.S. Trademark Act , highlights the need for our Parliament to be informed and involved by the Council at crucial junctures in the pursuit of our common trade policy .
Unlike the Commission , the Council failed to take steps to inform Parliament fully and promptly of the formulation of a common position , as it ought to have done .
The Council would normally apply Article 300 ( 2 ) and the last sentence of Article 300 ( 3 ) , mutatis mutandis , and brief us on such important matters .
The point is that the Council , by persisting with its current practice , is evading its parliamentary accountability to the Member States and to ourselves .
This situation cannot be tolerated indefinitely , and we demand changes .
In the present case , as Erika Mann has said , the absence of information from the Council has prompted a host of individual expressions of opinion in the European Parliament . Most of these , I believe , have been inconsistent with the prevailing view in the Committee on External Trade , and their cumulative effect has been to undermine seriously the Council position in Parliament .
In other words , by failing to provide information , the Council has sown the seeds of uncertainty and has given our trading partners - in this case the United States - an opportunity , if not to weaken the position adopted by the Commission then certainly to present it as rather less clear-cut than it actually is .
I therefore believe that there is ultimately no alternative to a judicious change of procedure .
In calling for change , we are merely exercising our parliamentary power of scrutiny .
We are responsible as a Parliament for scrutinising the implementation of the common trade policy , and we should be better equipped in future to perform that function .
Although the Commission keeps us informed , it is not enough for the Council , as it did through the Swedish Minister of Industry and Commerce , for example , to come to us and hold general discussions with us without involving us in consultation mechanisms such as the EU Trade Ministers ' informal talks .
Under the Portuguese Presidency , for instance , we were invited to take part in these talks .
I believe the Swedish Presidency still has a pledge to honour in this respect .
As spokesman for the PPE Group , I should like to reaffirm emphatically that we do approve of the way in which the Commission has acted on the provision of information as well as in defending the interests of the European Union against the United States in the dispute-settlement procedure , as has now been shown .
The Council , however - as I have already said - failed to inform us about this common position , contrary to the undertaking given by Mr Pagrotsky .
I therefore believe that the practical conclusion to be drawn from this is that the Council should show , through its actions as well as its words , that it accepts Parliament as an equal partner on issues of common trade policy , particularly by using the proper legal basis for all the measures with which it implements the common trade policy , in other words Article 133 of the EC Treaty , which is now applicable in conjunction with Article 3 , as well as Article 300 ( 2 ) and ( 3 ) - new numbering - the latter being applicable by analogy , given the necessary will to cooperate .
Secondly , the Council should enable the Commission to seek the opinion of Parliament prior to the conferment of a negotiating mandate , as in this Havana Club case , for example .
We could then begin a dialogue and bring it to a satisfactory conclusion .
We also believe there is a need for an interinstitutional agreement on this matter , like the one we concluded with the Commission , until such times as the Treaty is finally amended too .
Lastly , I must urge the Council , when it next revises the Treaty of Nice , which I hope it will do at the forthcoming Laeken summit , to reword Article 133 so as to involve the European Parliament in the framing of policy and the negotiation and conclusion of agreements on important trade issues .
This proposal is contained in paragraph 28 of the Mendéz de Vigo and Seguro report on the conclusions to be drawn from the Treaty of Nice , and we shall insist on the earliest possible introduction of this amendment to the EC Treaty .
Mr President , may I pick up on a point that Konrad Schwaiger has just made .
I too believe - and I am speaking here on behalf of my group - that there is a need to redefine the obligations of the Council in terms of its accountability .
We all know , of course , that the Council acted correctly in the purely formal sense - this was the honourable Member ' s line of argument too - and that the Council is not under any formal obligation to consult Parliament .
However , I do not believe we are talking about formal procedures here , but rather about proper substantive political cooperation .
As far as proper cooperation is concerned , the Council is still falling far short of its duty to Parliament .
My wish for the future is that the Council , instead of constantly invoking the formal position , will find an interinstitutional procedure that enables us to engage in some decent cooperation in future in the field of trade policy .
What you have seen this time will be seen more often in the future .
But let us not be under any illusions : trade policy is becoming an ever wider field , and many issues go beyond trade policy and into the domain of international politics .
These numerous trade disputes with the United States are a prime example .
If you want Parliament to stand by you - and Parliament is with the Commission on the substantive issue , as Konrad Schwaiger said - you must ensure that we can cooperate properly on matters of substance .
You must look on us as an adult partner , even if the Treaty does not yet formally recognise our adulthood .
I believe that the institutions have always found ways and means of cooperating in the past .
I wish the Council would do likewise and find a new procedure .
It may be that a discussion or briefing session would be held after each meeting of the special committee referred to in Article 133 ( 3 ) .
Or , if the Council initiates official procedures , it could come to the parliamentary committee and explain the situation .
I believe these would be ways of cooperating , and they would remove much of what I believe to be utterly unnecessary bitterness from the present debate .
We largely agree on the substance of this issue .
I also hope that many of the honourable Members who signed the letter have come to see that this was not the right course of action .
May I therefore urge the Council most earnestly to venture forward , perhaps even today , and make the case for a new form of cooperation .
Mr President , during the formal and informal debate on this issue over the last few weeks and months , both the Commission and the Council have indicated that it is not the business of the European Parliament to stick its nose into the substance of WTO cases .
I broadly agree .
The Council and the Commission have also indicated that they think it is none of the European Parliament 's business to issue awkward declarations on issues which are basically sub judice .
Again , under normal circumstances , I would agree .
But I would ask the Council and the Commission to tell me what we are supposed to do when we ask both of them in committee several times for justifications of how and why the decision was taken to launch this highly sensitive case and we get no more than a mere technocratic response .
What are we supposed to do when we are told the decision was taken over lunch , not even by ministers , but over lunch in some obscure Council working group without any minutes to justify to the public or , indeed , to politicians such as ourselves , why the EU is launching yet another politically sensitive trade dispute ?
What strikes me is the sheer naivety of both the Commission and the Council in tackling such a highly political issue as if it were nothing more than a technical decision .
It is simply inconceivable that the US Administration in Washington would rush headlong into yet another trade dispute with the EU without first ensuring there is a minimum of political backing in Congress .
I find it very striking that both the Commission and the Council have failed to do that this time .
It has been suggested that those who have signed this hotly worded declaration were behaving irresponsibly .
Some Members of this Parliament feel it was irresponsible .
It is surely much more irresponsible to launch such a politically and commercially sensitive trade dispute without even a ritual nod towards the normal standards of transparency and political probity .
It is not an issue of reforming Article 133 .
It is simply expecting both the Commission and the Council to conduct trade policy , particularly on politically sensitive issues , in a more transparent and politically intelligent manner .
Mr President , others have talked about the issue of dispute settlement specifically .
I would like to focus on the wider issue of democracy and accountability more generally .
This specific case demonstrates precisely the absence of democratic accountability in EU trade policy .
That is a huge indictment of the largest trading block in the world which prides itself on standing up for those very values .
The Nice Treaty could have been an opportunity to begin to improve the democracy and transparency of EU trade policy but in fact the Treaty makes these matters worse by increasing the powers of the Commission but not balancing that by increasing the powers of Parliament via the codecision procedure .
Meanwhile at Council level the 133 Committee meets behind closed doors .
As parliamentarians we are not even allowed as observers much less as participants .
We receive no minutes of these meetings .
There is no formal dialogue between us .
We thank you for the informal receptions which are very nice but they are no real substitute for a formal dialogue .
Furthermore in spite of all the rhetoric about trade policy supporting sustainable development , when you look at who attends the 133 meetings , it is usually simply the representatives from the trade and finance ministries alone .
But if we are serious about integrating international trade and sustainable development , then the very minimum we need to do is to ensure that representatives from social affairs , from environment , from development ministries have their voices heard at 133 meetings as well .
If sustainability really is a key issue for the EU and if the Swedish Presidency is really serious about openness , could the Presidency tell us if first of all it envisages a formalised dialogue between Parliament and the 133 Committee , and secondly if it is ready to propose revisions to the composition of that committee .
Ultimately , in order to make it more likely that trade policy enjoys the support of both parliamentarians and the wider public , Parliament should in the longer term have codecision powers , not only on the final outcome of any new trade agreement but also crucially on the Commission 's mandate for negotiations .
The EU says it is committed to reforming the World Trade Organisation but a first place to start would be to reform the decision-making machinery of the EU itself .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in Seattle we learned that the world is changing .
I believe we have to accept that certain decisions of the past require revision .
The European Parliament is responsible for monitoring the common trade policy .
We have co-decision rights on matters relating to the single market .
But on important international trade issues , the Union is not such a model of democratic transparency .
I believe that Sweden , which is itself a model of transparency , is called upon as the present incumbent of the presidency to take us another step along this road .
It is quite simply imperative to guarantee an open and transparent decision-making process on the basis of Article 133 .
We know that the European Union , after enlargement and the forthcoming final stage of the switch to the euro , will be the world ' s foremost trading bloc by a considerable margin .
In the United States , it is apparent that cooperation between the Government , the President and Congress actually works very well and that information flows freely between them .
Cooperation between the Council and the Commission is very good at the present time ; Mr Lamy must be complimented for this .
I do wish , however , that the Council would also take joint initiatives with the European Parliament on the international stage , because these issues are of the utmost importance to our future .
One day , when our membership has risen from 15 to a greater number of States , our clout will increase , and I believe that the link with the roots of the Union ' s legitimacy in its Member States is an essential democratic requirement .
If we want to develop a global market for our goods , such an effort will ultimately affect all of us .
In other words , we must stand shoulder to shoulder as equal partners and strive for success .
Mr President , let me say that the Council values this opportunity to discuss with the honourable Members the important issue of how we are to design the Union ' s trade policy in an effective but also an open and transparent manner .
In the discussion here in the Chamber , I have identified two distinct trends .
The first trend , represented by Mr Schwaiger among others , would require us to change the procedure .
I assume that Mr Schwaiger considers that we must change the rules .
Mr Clegg , on the other hand , who represents the second trend , says that the issue is not primarily about Article 133 but about the Council ' s desire for openness in general .
However , I can see no other way of addressing this issue than actually working on the basis of what is laid down in the Treaty and Article 133 .
As we live in a society based on the rule of law , we can do nothing other than proceed on the basis of what is said in the Treaty .
Of course , some might think that this should possibly have been changed .
I therefore reported on a little of the discussion surrounding the amendments to the text of the Treaty which took place in Nice , and there will of course be an opportunity to return to this question .
We have an Intergovernmental Conference coming up in 2004 .
Mr Schwaiger hopes to see changes as early as in Laeken .
This might be a little optimistic but , as I have stated , there will be an Intergovernmental Conference in 2004 .
Let us return to the discussion then .
So what opportunities do we have if we cannot achieve progress along formal lines ?
Has the Council done enough to proceed along informal paths , keep Parliament up to date and give Parliament an opportunity to take part in the discussion ?
Naturally , openness and consultation can always be improved , but it is with a certain amount of regret that I note that , on two occasions during the Swedish Presidency when we invited dialogue on the issues I mentioned earlier , no-one attended from Parliament .
There is an English expression " it takes two to tango " , and this also applies in this context .
The Council has demonstrated that we want dialogue .
Unfortunately , it appears that there was insufficient interest on the part of Parliament and on the part of the representatives of the committees concerned in taking part in such a dialogue .
I can only regret this .
It only gives us cause to maintain this dialogue to ensure that we obtain a consultation procedure which respects what is set out in the Treaty .
Otherwise , we will seek the informal paths which are open to us in order to obtain the democratic support we all desire on these important issues of trade policy .
Mr President , I would very willingly have let the debate proceed between Parliament and the Council , without any intervention by the Commission in this affair , an affair in which the Commission has a completely clear conscience , but Mr Clegg ' s speech , and the slightly abrasive tone in which he made his remarks , make it necessary for me to provide a few explanations .
As far as procedure is concerned , I would remind you that the decision to launch a procedure of this type at the WTO forms part of the executive responsibility of the Commission .
We took this decision while fully complying with the rules set out in the Treaty , which are what they are unless and until they are changed .
The Commission , as you know , would like to change them , but the Council has decided otherwise and up to now , when it comes to amending the Treaty , it is the governments of the Member States who take the decision .
We therefore observed the procedures entirely correctly .
The 133 Committee , the consultative body of the Council , gave its support to the launching of this procedure in March , and it confirmed its position in June 2000 .
As Mrs Mann and Mr Schwaiger have said , numerous discussions have taken place between the Commission and its staff and the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy on the question of this WTO case .
I myself have responded to oral and written questions which have been raised by the Members of this House .
I have also met some Members in person in order to discuss the subject with them .
In order to make things quite clear and to add my own opinion to this debate , I would remind you , in case anyone needs reminding , that it was not a question of taking sides in favour of such and such a business , or in somebody ' s individual interests , whether that would have been legitimate or not , but rather of assessing , from the point of view of the interests of the Union in general , the compliance of the American law on trade marks with the WTO Code .
That is why I believed , and I said so at the time before the Committee on Industry , that a parallel intervention by Members of Parliament in a WTO procedure seemed to me to be rather strange , even inappropriate , and I said at the time , and I shall say it to you again now , that I believe that a proper exchange of information between us should have the effect of avoiding any repetition of this type of incident in future .
Mr President , since Mr Danielsson addressed me directly , I should like to reply to two points .
Firstly , let me express my thanks to the Swedish Presidency for the recent invitation from the Swedish Ambassador in Brussels to informal talks with the members of the ' Article 133 ' Committee .
This , however , was a cocktail party , not a meeting , and I pointed out to several people , including the chairman of the ambassadors ' group , that it was perhaps not an ideal arrangement to hold the event on a Thursday evening , when the Members of Parliament were returning to their constituencies at the end of a plenary week .
But these things can be rectified , and another weekday could be chosen next time .
That is the first point .
Thank you for the initiative of your diplomats .
Secondly , you said that things will have to be changed - not now but in 2004 .
But please remember , Mr Danielsson , that we now have a round of international trade negotiations in Qatar , and we have a ministerial meeting at which the U.S. Congress will be represented .
The U.S. Congress , however , has not yet approved the ' fast track ' proposal .
This means that the U.S. Congress currently has direct participatory powers in Qatar .
We in the European Parliament are no longer receiving sufficient information from you .
Compare your conduct , the conduct of the Swedish Presidency , with that of the members of the U.S. Administration , who now speak to the Members of Congress virtually on a daily basis , week in , week out .
You no longer have any national control ; you no longer have any European control ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I am grateful for the fact that we are having this debate , but I should just like to make two points .
I am in the same boat as my fellow Members , in that I was only informed of one of the meetings to which the Council presidency invited us .
We were , of course , delighted to receive the invitation . But it was indeed a cocktail party on Thursday afternoon , with all the attendant difficulties .
When I arrived , the door was already closed .
There was something I had to discuss beforehand and could not make it for the start of the gathering .
It would be very good of you , Mr Danielsson , to make a proposal next time for a better arrangement that would enable all of us to be present .
As for the second meeting you mentioned , I should be grateful if you would remind us which meeting that was .
I know nothing about any other meeting .
Konrad Schwaiger did not refer to it , presumably because he knows nothing about it either .
Would you perhaps be so kind as to tell us which meeting it was that you invited our committee to attend ?
There is another point on which I am at one with my fellow Members , and I know that this is not a question but a brief comment : I wish you would truly regard this Parliament as a heavyweight in the political ring and treat it accordingly .
We fully understand that we do not yet have the means or the right to demand such treatment , but I believe you can regard us from a political point of view as an equal partner .
Mr President , in my initial speech I mentioned the two informal meetings concerned .
The first took place on 29 May and the second on 31 May .
I am sorry that one of the dates was unsuitable .
At the same time I would like to point out that when it comes to the presence of the Council here in plenary session there is never any question of whether the date is suitable .
The Council is expected to attend all the time , whatever the date .
Naturally , it is in the interest of the Council that we have a functioning informal dialogue with Parliament on these issues .
I have attempted to describe some of the measures taken by the Swedish Presidency .
I am convinced that the coming presidency will work in the same spirit .
Thank you very much , Mr Danielsson .
The debate is closed .
ASEM process
The next item is the report ( A5 ­ 0207 / 2001 ) by Mr Brok , on behalf of the Committee on External Affairs , Human Rights Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission Working Document : Perspectives and Priorities for the ASEM Process ( Asia Europe Meeting ) into the new decade [ COM ( 2000 ) 241 - C5 ­ 0505 / 2000 - 2000 / 2243 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , soon I will be joining the ranks of the trade politicians and then at least I will get an invitation to a cocktail party .
For the rest , however , I have no trouble at all in joining in this debate because in this very area which we are now called on to discuss , that is ASEM , we also have to ensure that we have increased parliamentary participation .
That is why we also propose in our report that there should be a second ASEP parliamentary conference before the ASEM IV Summit .
Clever executives always get parliaments involved when foreign policy or trade are at issue .
That is why we ask in this connection in the report - and this is one of the most important requests that we make - that the Council and in particular also the Commission should keep the European Parliament informed of developments in this area .
In particular , they should also report on the implementation of the decisions made at each meeting : this information could then be fed into a process of parliamentary supervision which could be used to speed up progress .
I believe that this is in the common interest because this particular initiative , ASEM , is of such exceptional importance .
If both groups - the European Union in Europe and ASEAN in Asia - , which are after all stable , work together with other states in Asia and manage to cooperate closely in such important areas as the three pillars identified within this process , namely political , economic and cultural dialogue , this can have undreamt-of implications for stability in these regions and throughout the world .
That is why I believe that we should take this ASEAN process as seriously as possible , place greater emphasis on it and make it a higher priority .
With your permission , I will illustrate this by way of a few examples .
If we manage to table a number of political proposals at the ASEM III Summit , which we are reporting on here , and then also in the run-up to ASEM IV - for example in the area of conflict prevention - then I believe that a considerable amount can be achieved here .
You only have to think of the People 's Republic of China and Taiwan or North and South Korea .
I believe that together in a multilateral process of this kind we can make an important contribution to the situation developing peacefully and decisions being made which benefit the people in the region concerned , but also foster peaceful development in the world as a whole .
At this point , I should simply like to recall the issue of the proliferation of weapons , because we do actually have political contacts and relations with one or two of the ASEM members , or we have developed mutually dependent relationships with them , and through this it is possible to exert considerable influence to prevent the dangerous proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and carrier weapons . In this way we can make a contribution to world peace .
If we also succeed in internalising this political process and implementing the commitments made in respect of the rule of law , democracy and human rights there , then this is very significant , not only for human rights and the rule of law , but also for the stability of the whole region .
In the economic area , these two groups , which are working together in Asia , should also see to it that they use their combined weight to foster positive global economic development , by preparing for WTO negotiations together and by cooperating fruitfully in international fora and the UN .
They should ensure that there is greater stability in the field of financial services and , where trade agreements are concerned , they should ensure that social standards are gradually raised across the board so as to contribute to there being greater justice in this world .
If , in addition , we manage to be active in the third pillar , in the area of cultural relations , by involving people , groups and those working in the cultural sector , and in this way bring people together , because cultural relations do after all lead to ties being formed , then this would seem to be a further important starting point for making a decisive contribution to greater stability in our world .
We call on the Commission to table specific proposals for the next ASEM conference in its working document on the development plan for the ASEM process in the next decade and to discuss these with us .
Commissioner Patten , I am sure that we will do this in a joint dialogue drawing on your experience in this region , so that we will be able to make a contribution to creating a better world .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I fully agree with what the committee chairman has just said : the ASEM process is an important framework for dialogue between EU states and Asian states .
But , quite honestly , we should also admit that the results of the ASEM III Summit in Seoul last year were not so terribly significant .
Many assertions remained very vague and if you look at how many of them have been put into practice you will see that we actually still have work to do on many of them .
In this respect I fully share the views of our committee chairman .
Commissioner , I think that we are acting as allies when we ask you to table a report on the preparations for ASEM IV , so that both of us - the Commission and Parliament - as we say in Hamburg , have a bit of butter with our fish , that is , actually introduce some substance into the preparations for ASEM IV in Copenhagen next year .
We would ask you to provide us with a very substantial report as soon as possible so that we can debate with you , but also with the Council , which areas further negotiations should really focus on .
Allow me to make one additional comment .
I should like to take up once more what Mr Brok said about conflict prevention , but also about conflict resolution .
We are in the business of helping each other .
I need only recall that the Japanese donate a considerable amount of development aid to south-eastern Europe - our area - so as to express their solidarity with us on matters of security policy , and we should not therefore shy away from taking part in discussions about conflict resolution or providing assistance in this respect either , whether it be in China , Taiwan , North Korea or South Korea .
There is one further comment which is on the tip of my tongue , Commissioner .
Consider the following : this initiative involves ten Asian countries and fifteen European countries .
There will soon be eighteen or twenty countries on the European side .
We should maintain a balance .
That is why I think it is important for us to consider to what extent it might be possible for the Asian side also to admit more members .
I believe , for example , that a country like India , which is significant on the one hand because of its abundant population but on the other because of its democratic structure and experience , could be a good partner .
Perhaps you could discuss this briefly with your Asian colleagues even in the run-up to ASEM IV , so that we have balanced coverage of both geographical areas .
I think that we agree here : we need to make it clear in the political discussion that Asia 's relations with Europe are of decisive importance , and we should help each other in this respect .
In conclusion , I should once again like to refer to Mr Brok 's opening comments .
Relations between states are of course negotiated formally by their governments .
But I would say to the Heads of State and Government : civil servants and ministers need the support of members of parliament .
That is why the committee 's idea ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , allow me to begin by congratulating Mr Brok warmly on his excellent report .
Along with the just focus on Europe and surrounding areas , and on the transatlantic dialogue , Asian relations should form the third pillar of the EU ' s foreign policy .
We cannot afford to leave Asia in the care of the Americans , despite the fact that their military presence is far more conspicuous .
We have not reached that stage yet .
Irrespective of the geographical distance and cultural differences , there are major political points of discussion .
Fortunately , these are high on the agenda in the ASEM process .
The EU does well to continue to underline the human rights issue , even in cases of social abuse .
We do not believe in the universality of " Asian values " , and these are increasingly consigned to the background in the region itself , which is evident from the democratic breakthroughs of the past decade .
However , that does not eliminate the causes of conflicts , such as poverty and ethnic and religious conflicts .
I would refer to Indonesia , but also to the need for permanent intervention in the Korea issue .
We welcome the fact that the European Union is committed .
Alongside the US , Europe must claim a more global role .
At the same time , we should not punch above our weight , for then we will remain bogged down in fine words .
Asia is large , and Asians will mainly need to solve their problems themselves .
The ASEM process , preferably enlarged to include a country such as India , must be more than a discussion forum .
We must strengthen the mutual interests on the basis of equality .
That will bring Asia and Europe closer together .
Those interests are mainly in the economic field .
That is where Europe can be of most significance , and there is great potential , given the interconnectedness of the world economy .
We would also call for a far more intensive cultural exchange to prevent the ASEM process from remaining an elitist affair .
If we draw in the reins more tightly , Europe will be able to better embed its expectations in permanent political dialogue .
The emphasis in this connection is on democracy and human rights .
However , we should not neglect the safety aspects .
Preventing the proliferation or spread of nuclear weapons also springs to mind , for example .
However , the ASEM process is not an alternative to sound bilateral relations with Asia ' s major countries .
Asia cannot be compared to the European Union .
It is unclear which country will in time be at the helm in that region .
There are major paradoxes .
China is developing fast , but is not a democracy .
India is large , but vulnerable , and the Japanese engine is misfiring .
Europe can help improve regional perspectives , but that should not be at the expense of the direct involvement of the countries in that region .
Direct criticism pertaining to special situations should not get lost in multilateral declarations .
The region is not served by organised silence .
Mr President , we already talked last year about ASEM ' s Summit in Seoul and , on behalf of my group , I then expressed my disappointment at the outcome , not about ASEM as such , and certainly not about the Commission ' s attitude or about that of our Commissioner , which bore witness to a vision and was very intelligent .
We were disappointed about the attitude of our Council : the EU ministers had to be dragged to this Summit kicking and screaming .
One could be forgiven for thinking it was a Parliament meeting : that was the level of unwillingness that was displayed about going !
Their presence did not reveal any sense of involvement .
I therefore believe that the meeting was quite a bit weaker than it could otherwise have been .
It is , of course , understandable .
Ministers have to attend so many summit meetings : every other week , they have to attend some summit or other .
But if they started by handing over EU matters to the European Commission and the European Parliament , that would free up a considerable amount of time in their diaries and might well lead to decisions which the public could back more .
But that is another matter .
This resolution is not terribly exciting , except maybe for the point about issuing visas for authorities from Taiwan .
This is an important point , in our view .
It is odd , to say the least , that a President such as Mr Chen , who has , after all , been democratically elected , cannot enter the European Union , even in a private capacity .
The United States has been issuing visas in this connection for much longer .
We will no doubt be backing some amendments by the GUE Group .
But some of their other amendments seem to emanate from the Chinese friendship association , and we will not be supporting those .
We did find Mr Dupuis ' original report exciting .
That report is truly radical in its appeal for a coherent strategy aimed at more democracy and the development of the rule of law , which is also important for the development of the economy .
We need no longer place the main focus of policy on China .
There is an entire region which is of importance to us , and expansion to include a country such as India , for example , would be crucial .
Finally , the ASEM process is of major importance to us .
We would also like to see MEPs become more involved .
We are looking forward to the talks on ASEM IV .
We hope and trust that the European Commission will be closely involving us in that process .
Mr President , this report has a somewhat turbulent history .
Initially it was a report which I in the committee saw as a diplomatic declaration of war on the People ' s Republic of China , which was naturally not the intention .
Thanks to the combined efforts of the committee , the report has been radically amended and is now more to do with what its title indicated it was intended to be about .
It is largely acceptable to us in the Green Group but some problems still remain .
The first is point 21 , which attacks the Chinese demographic policy which naturally has many different aspects .
The fact is , however , that it is in the process of being changed quite radically .
As recently as just a month or so ago the New York Times - of all papers - contained reportage which described in very positive terms how the one-child policy was being changed quite thoroughly and radically .
In this situation I think it is quite unnecessary of us in the European Parliament to attack the Chinese population policy as one-sidedly as in point 21 .
The second problem is about visas for Taiwan ' s top leaders .
I have to admit that I think this is quite difficult .
In Swedish debates I have criticised visas not being given to these top Taiwanese leaders .
On the other hand I have understood that the People ' s Republic of China sees this as us attempting to change practice and more or less indirectly begin to recognise the State of Taiwan , which is no-one ' s intention .
This is clearly problematic .
For my part I will abstain from the vote on this point .
Mr President , I would firstly like to point out that the Committee on External Affairs has made an extraordinary effort to present a coherent report in accordance with the European Union ' s objectives within the perspective of the ASEM process .
It has done this , on the other one hand , by transforming the unfortunate and aggressive initial draft and , on the other , by taking on board that the agreements of the Third ASEM Conference in Seoul have replaced the initial proposals contained in the European Commission ' s original document .
We cannot ignore the enormous importance for the world , globally , and for the European Union specifically , of the improvement in relations between these two regions of the world - the European Union and Asia .
And this is the case in all respects : economic , social , cultural , scientific and political .
Despite the current conflicts and problems , Asia is the most dynamic region in the world .
It contains three giants : Japan , China and India , which are going to be increasingly important on the international stage .
Relations between the European Union and this region must therefore be particularly prudent and positive and at the same time help towards a negotiated and peaceful solution to the problems which are the result of an immediate past originating in the Cold War , as well as the colonial past .
The objective should be to contribute to the world enjoying a multipolar situation in which international law , peace and economic and social development - which is just and balanced - should have increasing importance , and human , union and social rights and democracy should flourish as an everyday reality .
China ' s access to the World Trade Organisation has been important and the European Union must therefore maintain a special relationship with China in this respect .
We therefore believe that , at the Fourth Summit in Copenhagen , parliaments , both European and Asian , must play an ever more important role as representatives of popular sovereignty .
Mr President , the ASEM process has a twin role , politically speaking .
It offers the Asian and European government leaders the opportunity of consulting each other every two years on truly strategic problems .
And it is precisely this fixed regular forum that can have an inhibiting effect on aggressive , unilateral action taken by one of the ASEM participants .
That brings us to the real fear which various Asian States experience within the ASEM process : that of the Chinese pursuit of regional supremacy , including territorial demands .
A case in point is the on-going controversy regarding Beijing ' s claim of sovereignty over the South China Sea .
Via multilateral forums , such as the ASEM process , those Asian countries hope to enhance , and mainly stabilise , existing bilateral relations with China .
It is therefore no wonder that these smaller Asian States advocate a higher level of commitment by the 15 EU Member States to the ASEM process .
I should like to add two minor observations regarding this resolution .
The first one concerns recital K , in which democratic Japan receives the very dubious honour of being blamed for an unprecedented , post-war political crisis and in which a very harsh judgment is passed on the country ' s political establishment .
On account of Asian pride , and not just that of the Japanese , such an arrogant Western judgment is nothing short of a slap in the face .
From this angle , the European Parliament makes anything but a constructive contribution to the ASEM process .
In addition , various other Asian ASEM Members probably deal with much more serious domestic problems than that in this day and age .
The ever more strife-torn Indonesian archipelago is a case in point .
All in all , due to political imbalance and careless use of language , recital K is completely inappropriate .
Finally , I welcome Paragraphs 16 and 17 of the draft resolution , in which an appeal is made to the European Council and Commission , as well as to the other ASEM Members , for an Asian expansion of ASEM parallel to the approaching European enlargement , namely the forthcoming accession of the candidate countries to the Union .
Three countries are mentioned in this connection : India , Australia and New Zealand .
However , honourable European intentions collide here with Asian realities , or rather national sensitivities .
In Asian eyes , Australia and New Zealand are still seen as foreign bodies .
In short , their ASEM membership will require the necessary time and , probably , Europe ' s power of persuasion .
As far as India is concerned , the People ' s Republic of China is not what one would call hospitable .
From that point of view , national barriers still need to be lifted .
Not only - as is currently so evident - in the EU ' s enlargement process , but also in ASEM .
However , when good intentions are coupled with political action to match , we are certain to make headway in Europe and Asia , even jointly , in fact .
Mr President , Commissioner , in October 2000 , in Seoul ASEM leaders gave a commitment to support human rights , democracy and the rule of law , as a cornerstone of future Asia / Europe cooperation .
However , our own actions rarely live up to our promises .
In the past , too many Member States have paid lip-service to the idea , but where there is a choice between trade and defence of human rights , economic self-interest has always taken precedence .
Furthermore , where a small country is involved , we have been quick to criticise , but when the offender is a large country , such as China , our response has been much more muted and I very much welcome Commissioner Patten 's recent remarks in this regard .
Therefore , I support the proposal contained in paragraph 10 of the report which calls for any state to be excluded which clearly fails to respect human rights , democracy and the rule of law from ASEM activities .
I also welcome the proposal for the political pillar of ASEM to encourage political dialogue in several areas , including between China and Taiwan .
If we want to play a role in this and want to be seen as honest brokers , then all Member States should follow the recommendation of this report and grant visas to the Taiwanese President and members of the government for private visits to the EU .
I welcome the reference to resolving the conflict in Sri Lanka given my recent involvement in this area as head of the EU electoral observation mission .
Over 70 000 Sri Lankans have died in this conflict since 1973 and any initiative to prevent further loss of life would be very worthwhile .
To conclude these brief remarks , I commend the Brok report to the House .
Mr President , this report makes it possible for the European Parliament to debate the ASEM process and comment on its results .
This new partnership between Europe and Asia gives both sides a golden opportunity to deepen and strengthen relations , in respect not only of the economy , but also political , social and cultural matters .
As early as the third ASEM Summit in Seoul political aspects such as human rights , democracy and the rule of law were successfully promoted from being the subject of a fruitful dialogue between the partners in the ASEM process to prompting relevant undertakings from leading ASEM politicians .
It will come as no surprise to anyone to learn that our Parliament , which has made these values the focus of its work for years , attaches quite particular importance to these same values being respected by the Council and the Commission and to the Council and the Commission doing all they can to make these values part and parcel of the ongoing political dialogue with our Asian partners in the ASEM process .
At a time when the European Union is almost talking about nothing else but enlargement , it is , I believe , very appropriate to say that this ASEM process and the circle of partners within it should also be extended to include states like India , which might also be deemed to have earned a place in this dialogue .
I should like to address two points which , in my view , have wrongly become the subject of talks with and occasional protests on the part of the Chinese Embassy .
Our requiring Taiwan 's politicians to have visas for private visits to Europe does not amount to recognition of the Republic of Taiwan or in fact anything at all ; it is the pursuance of a consistent policy which Europe has on the freedom of movement of people , consistent in particular if in the future Taiwan were also to follow in China 's footsteps and become a member of the World Trade Organisation .
Finally , Commissioner , I should like to draw your attention to an old demand of the European Parliament : we have always said that with a region such as Taiwan , with which we in Europe have very intensive economic relations , our relations are such as to warrant a representation , that is an information office , being set up there .
Mr President , rapprochement and cooperation will only be successful if we strive for mutual respect and partnership in the Asia process .
We know how much effort Parliament has put into producing this report .
I should like to point out a number of facts .
Firstly , the history of the 20th Century has left deep wounds in Asia which have not yet healed .
The bloody suppression of the Boxer Uprising in China , the occupation of Manchuria , the Korean War and the aggression against Vietnam are all inextricably linked with the names of states which belong to the exclusive club of the great countries of this world : the USA , Germany and Japan .
The EU has a peculiar way of perceiving the role and responsibility of states if , given this historical background , it wishes for example to assign Japan a kind of policeman 's role in Asia .
It is equally disconcerting that the EU is not distancing itself more decisively from the confrontation course which the USA is adopting , for example with its spy planes , against China .
I should like to make a second point . In Asia , the future depends largely on there being harmonious relations and a balance of interests between China , India and also Russia .
Any attempts to play these countries off against each other would seem to me to be very dangerous , including and even in particular for Europe !
A sustainable Asian policy must be directed at partnership and constructive dialogue , and not least with the People 's Republic of China .
Anyone who relies now on short-term interests and gaining a quick advantage will not in the long term be able to make a decisive political contribution to establishing peace , cooperation and partnership between Europe and Asia .
Mr President , the two superpower system fell apart when one of the superpowers broke up .
At the start of this new decade , a new multipower system is gradually taking shape before our very eyes and , as the European Union , we should make this our strategic choice .
In this sense , this proposal for the coming decade is clearly a political proposal with strategic overtones .
The single superpower system has entered its next stage and is being replaced by a multipower system and it is precisely at this stage that we , the European Union , should strengthen all the regional initiatives which bring about the rule of law , which bring about economic growth , which bring about social justice and which allow any differences to be resolved peacefully and without conflict .
Ásia , which is the subject of today 's debate , is an area in which numerous regions - Pakistan , India , Indonesia and others - are in conflict .
These conflicts have complicated root causes .
And we , whose job is to send a message not just to the nations of Europe with ideological and political problems , but to the entire world , must act as a force for peace , as a force for cooperation , as a force for progress and as a force for democracy by strengthening the procedures which civilise the world without creating conflict , without there being any cause for conflict and without starting by using military conflict or considerations in order to bring about democratic results .
In this sense , the committee report presented by Mr Brok is a serious text , far more serious than the Commission proposal , which will , I think , adhere closely to it , within the bounds of what is viable , in order to bring about the anticipated political results .
Mr President , no-one can object to equal relations being developed between all countries .
That is not the point .
Despite the amendments made to the original Dupuis report , the guiding spirit behind the Brok report is still crass intervention in the internal affairs of the ASEM countries in the name of the so-called rule of law , human rights etc. etc .
And just what human rights can anyone who proposes such things as respect for the world trade order be talking about ?
Crass intervention in purely internal affairs in the countries in the area up to and including condemnation of the democratic policy of the People 's Republic of China , a country which the European Union has obviously set its sights on .
Conspicuous by its absence is any reference whatsoever to the fact that peace in the area is in jeopardy now that the United States has stepped up its aggression towards China , as seen in the NMD , the new US defence philosophy , flights on spying missions , the visits by the Dalai Lama and the President of Taiwan .
But the report does not omit to call - twice - for visas to be granted to members of the government of Taiwan , thereby mimicking the American tactic on this issue .
I need hardly add that the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece will be voting against this report .
Mr President , both of these regions of the world , the European Union - or Europe - and Asia have opened up channels between each other and moved closer together .
As sensational as the first ASEM Summit was , relations in very many areas are in fact now perceived as normal .
It is particularly when I think of cultural relations and of the very fruitful work of the Asia-Europe Foundation in Singapore that I sometimes realise that there are more encounters involving schools , students , scientists and also managers than involving politicians .
That is why I should like to recall once more here that this European Parliament once said - and on one occasion it also made this a reality - that in the same way that there was a summit between governments there should be a summit between parliaments .
I believe that it is absolutely essential for contacts between parliaments in Europe and Asia to be intensified and that , before the next ASEM Summit in Copenhagen at the latest , we should put in place a stringent process to monitor these important joint political initiatives , even if some of them are based on conflicting principles .
I really believe that this is essential because both regions are playing an important part in reforming the United Nations and also the World Trade Organisation .
It is also in both regions ' interests for progress to be made on security for their people and mankind in general .
I am thinking here both of food safety and the fight against organised crime .
There really is no limit to the forms which cooperation might take here , and in this respect Europe really needs to move forward .
We are fortunate to have been able to initiate a process of reflection on security policy in ASEAN and throughout the Asian area .
A further matter which is of concern to me is that we should help to combat trafficking in human beings .
We are now faced with a situation where millions of people have been abducted , and they are no longer only women and children but also men .
I think that both regions of the world have a responsibility here to put an end to this form of freedom of movement on this earth .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as this debate draws to a close allow me to point out that there are considerable expectations of the way in which the European Union acts in this important part of the world .
It is not the case that we are free to decide with no adverse consequences whether to become involved there or whether to opt out ; no , the countries in this part of Asia have very particular and well-founded expectations that the Europeans will become engaged in their part of the world .
These expectations exist because there the power of the United States of America in terms of both the economy and security is an established fact and because China is next door and is gaining increasing influence .
In this power play , the expectations of many states in South-East Asia are focused on the Europeans considering establishing what the Asians call a strategic partnership , obviously with the aim of producing greater stability and creating a balance between the major powers there in the interests of the Asian states .
These have had their first experiences of rapid economic growth which was then slowed by the crisis , and now they see that they have an opportunity to leave this crisis behind .
At the same time they realise how essential it is for them to find their way out of the crisis in partnership with others , and not least with the European Union .
That is why , as I have said , it is not simply a question of our own interests , how and on what conditions we get involved there ; instead we are in a situation where expectations are pinned on us .
That is why we are not free either to say , no we will do that or we will leave that ; we are obliged to become involved in this part of the world .
This opens up huge possibilities .
If we behave there , not as colonialists as we did in the past , but as partners who are prepared to contribute their own experiences alongside those of another continent , we will be listened to .
Under no circumstances must we Europeans let this opportunity pass us by !
First of all may I thank the House for the attention that honourable Members are paying , not only to relations between the European Union and Asia , but also to the ASEM process in particular .
The significant interest that this report has triggered also demonstrates how important Asia is for our Union , a point very well made by a number of speakers .
As I am sure the House will understand , this is a subject on which I have certain views myself .
The Commission shares to a very large extent the evaluation and concerns expressed in the report , in particular those regarding the importance of further strengthening our dialogue with Asian-ASEM partners on political , as well as on economic and social issues .
We also think that ASEM should be concentrating upon issues of global concern .
One issue that we keep coming back to is the importance that we attach to the three pillars , political , economic and cultural-social , developing at the same pace .
Some of our Asian partners are more interested in having a predominantly economic dialogue , letting the political dialogue lag behind .
The Asian partners fear interference in their internal affairs and see the different levels of development as an obstacle to the advocated partnership of equals .
The Commission does not share this view and nor do other European partners .
Development cooperation itself is , of course , dealt with in other fora , but ASEM is and should remain a forum for dialogue among equal partners .
A few weeks ago I attended the third ASEM foreign ministers meeting in Beijing .
We addressed a multitude of issues .
We did not agree on all of them , but there would be no point in having a dialogue if we saw everything identically .
At the same time , the need to improve the management of the ASEM process is extremely clear .
These very broad agendas - there were 19 items on our agenda for the foreign ministers ' meeting - lead to a lack of focus .
That is why we have proposed to cluster activities .
That is why we have suggested informal , retreat-style meetings for the highest level of participants to allow them to concentrate upon a few key issues .
These issues should have some ASEM added value ; in other words it must make sense to deal with them on a bi-regional level .
There seems to be a high degree of consensus on the need for reform .
We agreed on the need to cut down on pre-prepared speeches and pre-cooked and usually over-boiled chairmen 's statements , which no one ever reads .
I become profoundly suspicious of the added value of meetings where most of the real dialogue takes place beforehand in discussions on the joint statement to be issued , and at which as many people are present as at a less important football match in my own country .
We need more focus , more dialogue , and more concentration on the principal participants and on fewer subjects .
There should be more scope for free discussion and bilateral meetings .
For example , I had a very useful first exchange with the new Thai foreign minister and we also held European Union troika meetings with Indonesia and with China .
Another positive step forward is that our Asian partners seem more inclined to increase the involvement of civil society .
We have also discussed the importance of involving parliamentarians in the process .
Young parliamentarians have met under the auspices of ASEF , the Asia-Europe foundation .
Perhaps it is time to go further and revive exchanges between parliamentarians from the ASEM countries , so I warmly welcome the intention to call a second Asia-Europe parliamentary meeting before the Copenhagen Summit in 2002 .
I was delighted by the calls for greater involvement of Parliament in the ASEM process .
This is the third time that I have had the opportunity to discuss ASEM in Parliament .
The first occasion was a very intimate one , there were two other Members of the House present that evening with me .
We shared a sort of post-candlelight supper together .
The second occasion we discussed ASEM , there were three other Members of Parliament in the Chamber with me .
Today we have seen what can only be seen as an exponential growth in the interest in ASEM and I hope that before my five years are up on 22 January 2005 the Chamber will be packed when we discuss the relationship with ASEM and with Asia as a whole .
I note the request for a new working document in advance of the Copenhagen ASEM meeting and I hope we will be able to have something further to say on EU-Asia relations generally .
I expect to return to Parliament shortly to discuss a new communication intended to update the 1994 Asia strategy .
This is scheduled for adoption by the Commission in July and it will provide us with an occasion for a wider debate on EU-Asia relations .
It will need to cover the sort of points raised by a number of Members in this debate , including the chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and Mr Marset Campos .
Our recent visit to the Korean peninsula demonstrated that the European Union has considerable interests well beyond the arc of instability which surrounds the Union from Kaliningrad in the north to the southern Caucasus in the south .
My own recent visit to China demonstrated the importance of the European Union there too .
It is worth recalling that today China has a 45 billion euro trade surplus with the European Union .
When I was in China I was delighted that I was able to meet members of the Chinese Parliament who , like me , expressed wonder at some of the continuing evidence of Chinese economic development .
But , as Mr Cushnahan said , we have to talk about other issues as well as trade and commercial relations .
We cannot have a frank political dialogue with China without having an equally frank exchange about human rights .
That is not meant to sound superior and we are not asserting that Europe somehow has a monopoly of wisdom on human rights . But it is our unshakeable view that human rights have universal validity and that a dialogue about human rights is appropriate in all our relationships .
I noted what the honourable Member said about the development of our external services in Asia .
I hope that is a point we will be able to be more open about in a few weeks ' time in the communication we are about to discuss .
I could have talked about Japan .
I could have talked about South-East Asia .
There are a number of subjects which we need to discuss in more detail .
There are many reasons for arguing , as the honourable Member did a few moments ago , that the relationship we have with Asia is an exceptionally important part of our external relations overall .
I very much hope that in the coming weeks and months we will have many further opportunities of discussing it in this House .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Development of the external service
The next item is the report ( A5-0199 / 2001 ) by Mr Galeote Quecedo , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission communication on the development of the external service ( COM ( 2000 ) 456 - C5-0629 / 2000 - 2000 / 2292 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , despite the changes , or perhaps because of them , we in the Community institutions must reaffirm our political commitment to strengthening integration .
The European Parliament has often reiterated the need for the European Union to play a solid role on the international stage and to be able to speak consistently in that context .
To this end , the Maastricht reform drew up the CFSP and for the same purpose various proposals are currently being considered with a view to 2004 .
Nevertheless , for the European Union to consolidate its external role , it is necessary , firstly , to organise and strengthen the external policy instruments which the Union already has and , in particular , its external service .
We must accept that the external service , which currently has such important functions , suffers from numerous shortcomings which have not been surmounted , despite the reforms promoted by the European Commission itself , and , therefore , this Parliament last September approved the own-initiative report ' Common European Diplomacy ' , with a view to greater efficiency in the exercise of the Union ' s external policy .
At that time we proposed moving ahead decisively on three fronts : firstly , improving the training of Community officials destined to be involved in external activity through the creation , eventually , of a Community diplomatic school and the linking of national diplomatic corps through a system of ' walkways ' which would be created for that purpose .
Secondly , we proposed the clarification and development of the legal status of delegations , their role and their relationship with the institutions ; and , lastly , we proposed the improvement of the coordination between the delegations and the external services of the Member States , for which we suggested , amongst other things , promoting the grouping together of the missions of Member States who so desire with the Commission ' s delegation whenever , wherever and however possible .
At that time , Commissioner Patten told this House that he would consider those recommendations very carefully and would prepare a communication on the external services during the first half of 2001 , which we are eagerly awaiting .
However , while waiting for more ambitious initiatives , Parliament must now give its opinion on the latest communication from the Commission on the development of the external service , which clearly has a much more limited objective , since it basically focuses on the network of delegations and their staff .
It is a welcome communication nevertheless , since it allows us to open a debate on that important issue .
In this communication the Commission confirms its will to make progress on decentralisation and on the deconcentration of external aid .
This can only be seen as positive even though it requires greater human resources and therefore an increase in costs , which , I believe , we must contribute to .
We indicate , however , that not all the difficulties in the operation of the delegations and the management of external aid are caused by the lack of resources .
The Commission must also adopt additional measures , such as contracting policies , training plans and a review of procedures .
With regard to the network of delegations , the Commission ' s proposal to move ahead with regionalisation seems appropriate , although we must consider opening up new delegations in certain countries of South-East Asia , the Gulf region and Latin America , as well as Switzerland .
In this context , we must express our concern at the recent rumour that the Commission is considering the possibility of closing its delegation in Costa Rica .
I therefore take a positive view of this communication from the Commission .
I believe that it takes us in the right direction , but it clearly does not fully deal with the issue .
We hope that in the coming weeks the Commission will approve a new communication , a more ambitious one , which takes account of the opinions of Parliament and finally allows us to rationalise , organise and improve the external service , so that it may become an effective instrument for a solid European Union external policy .
Mr President , I would like to make it quite clear that we are in favour of both the general lines of the policy proposed by the Commission and the general lines of the report which Mr Galeote Quecedo has just mentioned .
When I say ' we ' , I mean , of course , the Committee on Budgets .
The Committee on Budgets simply wishes to draw the attention of all those involved to two basic problems .
Firstly , there is the need to move quickly .
We believe that the reform should be carried out rapidly and ambitiously .
Reform means increasing deconcentration and grouping together a certain number of delegations which are fewer in number but better equipped administratively and extended by branch offices with minimum representation .
Secondly , reform means the active vertical redeployment of staff from Brussels to delegations .
We are well aware that there is some resistance among Commission staff , resistance of a human , social nature which we understand , as regards this redeployment .
This resistance must be broken down .
Thirdly , there is the problem of horizontal redeployment .
There are some delegations which are overworked , and some posts is which there is not enough to do , and we are not always aware of objective criteria having been used to decide on staff distribution .
Fourthly , we need a better balance , a more homogenous balance , between regular Commission staff and local agents who are less costly but who do not have , as it were , the ' central memory ' of the institution .
Both types of staff are necessary and the balance between the two needs to be rationally organised .
Therefore , Commissioner , we expect you to proceed more quickly and further in this direction , which we know is the direction you wish to move in .
We shall support you in that movement , but we shall oppose you if by any chance you should drag your feet , which I am sure you will not .
The second point that I should like to mention quickly is the budgetary aspect .
The Committee on Budgets is in favour of a qualitative reform which will give rise to higher costs , because redeployment has to be paid for , but the Committee on Budgets is against any increase in staff numbers in the external services .
Costs may rise , yes , but a rise in staff numbers , no , because if we increase staffing levels this would put the brake on redeployment measures .
Mr President , first of all , I want to thank the rapporteur .
He has prepared a splendid report , and I am , of course , also glad that he has accepted my action plan in its entirety .
I am , in general , very much in favour of the Commission ' s plans to provide its delegations with more resources , more employees and more powers but , all too often , we have seen examples of ' champagne delegations ' which have spent more time in diplomatic clubs than on their real work .
In their defence , it may be said that they have had neither powers nor resources under the old system .
Many problems with aid projects are due to the fact that the projects are administered centrally from Brussels .
In the future , the work is therefore to be done out in the field .
The new system is still not in place , but 24 delegations have , for the time being , been given direct financial responsibility .
I hope that , as soon as possible , we can see the valuable experience gained in , for example , Bosnia transferred to the remainder of the delegations .
The idea of giving the delegations more duties and more responsibility does in fact operate in practice , but we have recently seen examples of fraud and irregularities in the delegations in the applicant countries .
I am thinking especially of Slovakia and the Czech Republic in this context .
The Commission must issue Parliament with supervisory reports on the delegations , but I am not asking to see the reports themselves because I appreciate that they contain sensitive personal information . What I would like to see , however , are reports on the financial aspects .
The Commission has already promised me these in connection with the 1999 discharge , and I now hope that the Commission will go on to deliver the goods .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the view of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , it is important to remember that the European Union delegations originated with the delegate controllers who were in charge of implementing the agreements made in the Yaoundé and Lomé Conventions and that their duties were therefore initially based purely on development policy .
Over the years , their range of tasks and geographical coverage have expanded considerably .
Their internal structure has , however , not kept pace with this .
Now there is a need for radical reform which , despite all of the changes which the European Parliament has been calling for for years , will not be achieved through this Commission communication either .
Development policy is no longer the only area of responsibility of the EU 's external service , but it is still of huge significance .
The dissolution of political blocs and the changing political processes , including in developing countries , have considerably increased the political as well as the trade and economic dimensions of its work .
This is particularly true of the development partnership with the ACP countries , into which the Cotonou Agreement has introduced new aspects .
It is precisely in this respect , however , that delegation staff lack qualifications and training ; it is precisely here that there is a lack of the necessary schemes for flexible personnel deployment , which should definitely allow for the involvement of local graduates or external experts , if necessary with fixed-term contracts for a particular type of task .
In practice , however , delegations in the ACP countries have been and are being threatened with downgrading or even closure .
Many posts remain unfilled for long periods of time , without suitable local staff being considered at least temporarily .
Even the European Court of Auditors criticises this .
The Committee on Development and Cooperation therefore sees a danger that the formation of new regional centres and the move towards regional offices - and good reasons can certainly be put forward in favour of this - could in practice lead to a thinning out of delegation structures in developing countries .
That regional offices are more economical than several individual offices is obvious .
That they are also more effective has not , however , been verified .
Here too the conceptual weakness of the Commission communication manifests itself .
From the point of view of content the Commission is still in debt .
Mr Galeote 's report and the proposals of the committees which have drafted opinions will provide an excellent basis for paying it .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , may I firstly , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party , thank our rapporteur .
Once again he has tabled an excellent report on the external service and I hope , Commissioner , that you will listen to me and Mr Galeote Quecedo and that in the spirit of his report you will be so good as to give clear answers .
I believe - in fact we agree on this - that we need to leave history behind .
We need to consider the current functions of the delegation , based on the functions of the Union .
We have of course had Maastricht with the second pillar , the foreign and security policy , and we now have increased responsibilities in the field of world trade policy .
We therefore need to make sure that delegations are opened in all of those cities which are important political and economic partners .
This brings me back , Commissioner , to the debate of a few minutes ago .
I believe that it is precisely in Asia that we need more delegations .
Mr Galeote 's report proposes Singapore and Taipei as the places where we should open delegations immediately .
Coming back to Mr Sakellariou 's comments on Taipei , Taiwan is the EU 's fourth largest trading partner and an example of how a society in Asia can be transformed , at its own instigation , from an authoritarian regime into a living parliamentary democracy .
This is an excellent illustration of the fact that the principles of democracy , the rule of law and respect for human rights work in Asia and are even something which the countries themselves want .
That is why it is high time that we also open an office in Taiwan .
So , delegations in Singapore and Taiwan , and Mr Galeote also mentioned other regions in the world .
What I believe is important now is for you , when you send us the next document , to provide a clear list of countries and dates - in months and years - indicating where and when you think that delegations should be opened .
If there is no money then say : we need the money .
Then we will have to have a chat about it here and see whether we can have a friendly argument with Mr Bourlanges and win him over .
But we need a report in which it clearly states which countries and in which month of which year , and then we will also be able to lend you our support and build up a decent external service for the Union .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the matter we are discussing today is part of a much broader problem , one which involves not only the external image of the Community , but ultimately also the CFSP itself .
The situation of the Union ' s external image has been subject to criticism from various quarters in the last few years and still requires a concerted effort to achieve a major transformation .
The interrelation of its various aspects , such as trade , development aid , economics , politics and diplomacy is increasingly apparent in today ' s world and must clearly be seen , not so much as something inevitable , but above all , as an opportunity .
It is an opportunity for the European Union to improve its presence on the international scene , defending the principles of democracy and human rights , which give legitimacy to this objective .
We acknowledge that the concept of this reality underpins the Commission ' s concerns to improve its external service , which have been put into practice by the adoption of various communications since 1996 .
The package as a whole , however , lacks coherence and a great deal remains to be done .
I must confess that we are greatly looking forward to the Commission communication on the external service , which Commissioner Patten promised last September to send to Parliament and which , I think , needs to be a strategic framework for important future developments .
Although we must not lose sight of the fact that the issue we are considering today is actually very limited , improving and adapting the network of delegations , it has very real implications and , as I already emphasised , also affect the political and diplomatic spheres .
What is generally known as the deconcentration and decentralisation of external aid , and its rationalisation , therefore deserves our support , with the concomitant requirements for resources and technical support .
Nevertheless , I wish to state that I disagree with the almost excessively realistic aspect that still exists in certain ideas on the international role of the Union in development aid .
I would , consequently , like to stress three aspects : firstly , that of the importance of regional cooperation , which must , however , be increased to take account of political balances , processes of transition to democracy and of consolidating democracy and also of the relationship between the various countries themselves .
Another aspect linked to this is the need for coherence in fundamental guidelines , so that they do not become tied to and dependent on , sometimes almost exclusively , budgetary restrictions which are not necessarily crucial .
A further aspect is the importance of accepting certain political criteria , in particular , acknowledging the role of the various States in the processes of democratisation and in defending human rights in their own region .
We call on you to suspend the project to shut down our delegations in these countries , also bearing in mind that the cost of maintaining these delegations is a drop in the ocean .
The rapporteur , Mr Galeote Quecedo , considered these and other issues and has produced an excellent piece of work .
We therefore support his proposals for a resolution and we hope that the Commission and the Council will consider them .
Mr President , when you consider what happened under the former Commission , it might be said that there is not much to lose with this proposed decentralisation , and it is in any case crucial that something be done .
If , however , decentralisation is not accompanied by the necessary powers , it might well turn out to be a two-edged sword .
The delegations must have the right powers but so too , of course , must the headquarters itself , in the form of both knowledge and a talent for coordination . In my view , that combination is just a touch difficult to detect at the present moment .
I am not actually too bothered about diplomatic schools and other such facilities , whatever they are called .
I am , in fact , more concerned about more substantive and practical subjects , for example women ' s issues and issues relating to ICT , and I should like to illustrate what I mean about the problems in the light of these two subjects .
We most certainly have no guarantee , of course , that the delegations have any special knowledge of women ' s issues and any special knowledge at all of women ' s issues in relation to the developing countries .
It might be said that the Commission used not perhaps to have any such knowledge either , but Parliament did , at any rate , then have the opportunity to exercise closer supervision , and that supervisory function declines somewhat when it is farmed out to the various countries .
Nor is there any guarantee whatsoever that the delegations have any special knowledge of information technology .
Certainly , they know how to send e-mails , but information and communications technology is certainly about rather more than just sending e-mails , and when , at the same time , the Commission says that there is absolutely no necessity for any unit in the Commission with specific knowledge of this area but that it is just a question of mainstreaming and general knowledge , then one might well be anxious about how those skills are to be acquired , including in the delegations .
I would therefore hope that , in connection with the proposal to be produced by the Commission , the latter will be able to illustrate - for instance , with the help of the two examples I have quoted : women and ICT - how it is imagined that the development will take place .
Mr President , we agree with the need to strengthen the Commission 's external service and support Mr Galeote 's evaluation of the Commission 's communication .
This report is in line with the priority shared by the majority of my group and of Parliament : to improve the European Union 's presence on the international scene .
We see the development of an external service as an instrument to strengthen the EU 's foreign policy , although of course we still have to educate our national services in some respects .
Among the most embarrassing experiences I have had as an MEP travelling outside the European Union were those very funny meetings with the ambassadors of Member States where the Union delegate is still seen as an external element or , at best , as a sort of trade or economic attaché .
We are happy that the Galeote report includes our amendment asking the presidency-in-office to take some responsibility for verifying the willingness of Member States ' embassies to cooperate with the EU delegations and enhance their role for creating a real common European voice .
An improved Commission external service will bring the greatest benefits if we manage to set up a real common foreign and political service at European level .
The first step in this direction would be to make Mr CFSP part of the Commission : this is necessary if we are to have a common voice in the world .
Mr President , Commissioner , we in our Group agree with the good report by Mr Galeote , apart from one small detail which I will mention in a moment .
When one leaves the European Union , it is shocking to experience the paradox that the Union has a strong image from the outside despite having a practically non-existent image from within .
The necessary coordination does not exist within the European Union .
It is therefore essential for the Union to put its all its weight behind the external services and coordination .
In this respect , we must accept that , with a miserly budget , we are not going to be able to achieve the image , the appropriate coordination , an unequivocal presence in the UNO , or in other international bodies , and we should therefore revise the financial perspectives in that direction .
We should also concentrate on greater coordination of the information received so that we do not have to witness such sad spectacles as the Member States giving differing opinions .
That is why it is important to take the direction indicated by Mr Galeote .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Galeote Quecedo emphasises , in his explanatory statement , one essential point which was completely neglected in the Commission communication on the development of the external service , and that is the absence of any effective functional link between the embassies of the Member States and the Community delegations .
The Commission , as our rapporteur points out , quite rightly , ' does not appear to be aware ' that cooperation with Member States ' diplomatic services is ' totally inadequate ' .
He emphasises that the partnership programme created so that diplomats and officials from Member States could be seconded to the delegations has so far had very disappointing results : only seven national diplomats have been appointed to Community delegations under this scheme
Instead of moving towards the development of a Community external service which is completely independent from those of the Member States , which would give rise to considerable extra costs , particularly as regards training , pointless redundancies and inevitable conflicting responsibilities , the sensible thing to do would be to make use , at Community level , of the experience acquired in a bilateral context , particularly in the aid and cooperation service , the competence and expertise available within the national external services , and their familiarity with the diplomatic practices of their members .
We would then avoid the doubts , and the risk of drifting off course , which are linked to the concept of the development of a Community diplomatic service which would be composed , ex nihilo , of officials totally outside the national diplomatic services , which some people , looking at the matter from the point of view of substitution rather than complementarity , would like to see developing at the same time and completely separately .
Effectiveness and subsidiarity , on the other hand , require that we should move beyond the partnership programme and its current failure , and show some initiative and imagination , so as to create a real osmosis , at the level of human resources , between the embassies of Member States and the Community delegations , in order to encourage the development , in harmonious complementarity , of the closest possible relations with our external partners .
Mr President , it seems to me that we need to distinguish two aspirations which are contained in the Galeote report and which to some extent lead in different directions .
I refer on the one hand to the need to improve the Commission 's efficiency in achieving its priority tasks and on the other hand the ambition to create some sort of EU diplomatic service .
The emphasis should be on the first of these , and this is reflected very much in paragraph 1 of the Galeote report which , and I quote : " Insists that the overriding priority for the external service of the Commission must be the efficient organisation and management of EU external assistance programmes " .
At a time when enlargement of the Union is a priority - and we have large-scale pre-accession aid programmes to assist this process - it is essential that we have the right number of staff with the right qualifications delivering and monitoring this assistance .
The Commission obviously recognises the priority of reforming external assistance management , as we have seen over the last year or so .
But according to some estimates , there is a shortfall of something like 1 254 posts dealing with priority policy areas .
The Commission does not require more generalists and diplomats in its delegation , it needs competent managers , particularly those with expertise in tendering , contracting and , above all , project implementation ; personnel with business experience perhaps .
I wonder if the Commission 's recruitment and retirement procedures reflect this priority ?
The draft Council regulation on the early retirement of some 600 officials is under consideration at the moment .
I would like to know what steps the Commission is taking to recruit the right sort of people to replace those officials who will be retiring early .
Mr President , the report by Mr Galeote identifies certain shortcomings , which the Commission has already recognised in its communication relating to the reform necessary to improve the Community ' s external service and furthermore it puts forward a number of proposals aimed at achieving the best possible operation of that external service .
The importance of his work is accentuated by two factors which have arisen simultaneously in recent times .
On the one hand , the role , which is increasingly recognised and accepted by the Union , which we have to play on the globalised international stage , and , on the other hand , the cooperation which we must promote in pursuit of a North-South rebalance and which finds its most obvious embodiment within the framework of the new Cotonou Agreement .
As a member of the Committee on Development and Cooperation , I would like to support what Karin Junker said in her opinion , highlighting the essential fact that our external service contributes to the success of those countries which , through development , are seeking freedom and prosperity .
Through the amendments approved by the Committee on Development and Cooperation we ask that the rationalisation of the external service should not mean the closure of delegations in the developing countries .
The reform must take place with a view to increasing the efficiency of action rather than according to exclusively financial criteria .
To this end , the Commission must be present on the ground , the officials must have direct contact with the reality of under-development , with the development agents and the local authorities , and very much increasing support for , and support from , both local and European NGOs .
The creation of delegations with a regional scope is not an acceptable alternative to the closure of delegations in countries such as Cape Verde or Costa Rica .
We also ask that the multi-annual programmes for delegations , announced by the Commission , take account of the development objectives , that local staff be employed , that the officials have specific training and that greater coordination between the Commission delegations and the representations of the Member States be sought .
I believe it would be very positive to open a delegation in a country such as Cuba , which is a pre-candidate to the signing of the Cotonou Agreement and which has been accepted for membership by our partners in the ACP Community .
Mr President , the European Parliament should support the process of decentralising the Commission services so as to bring the European Union closer to its partners .
We are therefore in favour of increasing the number of delegations and increasing their staff numbers in line with their increased responsibilities .
However , cooperation on development should remain the priority of the delegations in developing countries , in particular as regards the planning of aid programmes .
It is important that the representatives who negotiate on behalf of the Commission should be on the spot and in direct contact with the real situation .
In order to do this they should develop relations with the local NGOs and with society in general , so that they can get to know and integrate the priority needs of communities , and not only those of governments in these indicative programmes .
In addition to consultation , we must also increase the number of local agents in the delegations .
It is vitally important that the delegation staff should have an extremely good knowledge of local conditions and should be able to speak regional languages , so as to maintain a permanent link with the various levels of the local community .
In addition , the delegations must propose special training programmes for local experts so as to encourage their recruitment .
Finally , it is urgently necessary to recruit staff who are qualified in social and environmental matters , which have so far been the poor relations of the aid and development programmes drawn up in Brussels .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like first of all to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Galeote , on his highly detailed and substantiated report .
Surely there can be no doubt that this is a particularly serious question which touches on a fundamental aspect of the work of the European Union , i.e. the common foreign and security policy and , hence , the active and efficient presence of the Union on the international stage and its ability to play a leading role in a consistent , coordinated manner , quite independent of any factors extraneous to Europe .
However , this objective cannot be achieved without a suitable , operational tool .
And this tool is none other than a well organised external diplomatic service , with specialised and highly trained cadres to man the Union 's delegations or embassies so that , by operating within an institutionalised regulatory framework of relations with the European Parliament and the Council , they can develop into real representatives of Union policy and interests and of the interests of the Member States as a whole .
And in order for this to happen , the diplomatic services and delegations of the Union and of the Member States will need to be properly coordinated . The report anticipates this by making provision for a system of cooperation and agreement to be developed between these services .
Of course , all this needs resources and a great deal of money , which will obviously need to be provided transparently and by carefully weighting requirements and the expediency and usefulness of each item of expenditure , accompanied by a real desire to strengthen the external service so as to ensure that it has the means to fulfil its mission productively .
Finally , special attention must be paid , as the report notes , to arrangements governing relations between the external service and delegations and the European Parliament , both as regards having systemised contacts , with reports and appearances by the heads of the delegations in Parliament and its competent committees , and as regards some of the delegations taking on the job of providing assistance in connection with visits and missions by members of the European Parliament to third countries .
Mr President , I welcome the Galeote report .
It is quite appropriate that we should be reforming the Commission 's foreign delegations and examining how they can perform in a much more efficient way , hopefully in the context of a much more coherent common foreign and security policy .
In that context I would like to make some very brief points .
Firstly , with regard to my own experience with the Commission 's delegation offices when I was in Sri Lanka , it was excellent to have it as a backup .
It was very helpful to us in discharging our work and coordinating the various EU ambassadors in that area .
In some other experiences I have had with the Commission 's external offices I sometimes felt that they can get too close to the local political administration and are somewhat reluctant to take a strong stance on policy and political issues .
It must be made absolutely clear that any of our delegation offices are there not simply to have a cosy relationship with the local administration but to represent EU policy in the wider sense .
My third point , and I am sure it has already been made by my colleague , Georg Jarzembowski , is whether the Commission would respond positively to our repeated request for the establishment of a delegation office in Taiwan .
We have pussyfooted on that issue for far too long .
We should have the courage of our convictions and I hope that the Commissioner would respond positively to the proposal that there should be an office in Taiwan sooner rather than later .
.
May I first pay a very warm tribute to the high quality of the work done by the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy and in particular by the rapporteur Mr Galeote Quecedo who has once again done an excellent job .

We should not forget the important contribution of the Committee on Budgets , with the ever-wise Mr Bourlanges as rapporteur , the opinion of the Committee on Budgetary Control - I have enjoyed discussing these matters with Mr Blak - and not least the opinion of the Committee on Development and Cooperation drafted by Mrs Junker .
All these documents are also timely as the Commission is now finalising its communication to Parliament on further developments of the external service as a follow-up to the one we presented last July .
I can assure Parliament that the recommendations made in the report are extremely important for the Commission .
I also take them as an encouraging sign that Parliament shares our ambition to make the external service an even more effective instrument of our external policy .
We will , of course , continue to report regularly to Parliament on the progress we make .
Let me offer a number of observations .
First , this Parliament stresses its wish to clarify its relations with the external delegations .
The House may remember that this point was already raised when we discussed Mr Galeote Quecedo 's report on a common Community diplomacy last September .
I assured this House that although delegations are formally delegations of the Commission , we have made it absolutely clear that they should regard themselves as serving Parliament , the High Representative and the other Community institutions as well .
In response to some of the points that were made during the debate , of course it is the case that our delegations and the embassies of Member States have to coordinate their activities far more successfully .
This is something that we have debated in the Council .
The delegations should indeed help to arrange programmes for visiting parliamentary delegations and committees .
I also agree that it would be useful for heads of delegations to appear occasionally before the Committee on Foreign Affairs and other committees of Parliament when they are back in Brussels to report on recent developments in their host countries and the development of European Union policy and programmes there .
A second major concern of this Parliament is the so-called deconcentration of our operational activities .
That , as the House knows , is jargon for devolving authority and responsibility where it belongs , to the people in the field .
Parliament will remember that this move to more deconcentration was an explicit commitment of the Commission in its communication of May last year on the external assistance reform , reiterated in the July communication on the external service .
We are now in the middle of the first wave of the deconcentration exercise .
Deconcentration concepts have been established for each major programme .
Staff requirements have been assessed for each delegation .
Officials are in the process of being selected and trained .
Last , but not least , accounting and management systems are being interconnected between headquarters and the delegations concerned .
More then 20 delegations will be strengthened this year , another 30 or so next year and the remaining ones in 2003 and 2004 .
I will , of course , report to this House in more detail on deconcentration later in the year , but generally speaking the work is on schedule .
There is one point that I want to emphasise very strongly .
There is nothing whatsoever to be said for deconcentration while retaining a collection of mothers-in-law in Brussels .
If one is going to deconcentrate , then that means management of programmes on the ground .
It does not mean many people second-guessing the people on the ground back in Brussels .
The problem of double emploi , the problem of whether or not we are really going to deconcentrate , is one I feel very strongly about .
As far as I am concerned and as far as the board of EuropeAid is concerned , it is imperative to ensure that among our performance indicators there is one which gives us an indication of progress made in moving all the management of projects into the delegations , where it should be .
We have seen , as somebody pointed out in the debate , the success of deconcentration in Sarajevo and I want to see that success replicated elsewhere , but deconcentration is not just a question of numbers and procedures .
To be successful it requires a real change of administrative culture in the external services of the Commission , at headquarters and in delegations .
In this respect , the rapporteur 's insistence on the need to improve and develop our training programmes is very opportune .
Although I am the first to admit that there is still room for improvement in this area , serious efforts have been made and will be continued .
I had the opportunity to take a look at the training programme for our external staff and I was very impressed by it .
It covers not only policy areas such as trade and CFSP , but also practical day-to-day topics and modern management techniques .
It does , of course , need to include all the subjects which are loosely described as gender mainstreaming , to which the honourable Member referred in the debate .
In parallel , the EuropeAid Cooperation Office has set up a very ambitious training programme specifically for the deconcentration exercise .
Parliament may also be interested to know that the first pilot session of the European Diplomatic Programme , which is a common training programme for European diplomats sponsored jointly by the Member States and the Commission , has recently been assessed and deemed to be successful .
The second session is starting this autumn .
This initiative may not be based precisely on the model of a college of European diplomacy , which the Mr Galeote espoused in his report last autumn ; but it is a sensible step forward .
I am also aware that the House is expecting to be fully informed by the Commission on the redeployment of human resources , regionalisation of the network and the opening or closing of delegations - a point which I want to return at the end of my remarks .
As these points still have to be decided by the College , I will merely say to the House that the recommendations made in the reports now under discussion will be carefully examined and analysed .
Finally , let me comment on the proposed action plan .
Some of its points , such as the proposal that starting in June of this year each head of delegation signs an annual declaration that adequate internal controls have been put in place , will be considered in the follow-up to the recent discharge resolution .
The House should be aware that heads of delegation already have to sign the new charter of authorising officers , which sets out the tasks entrusted to them , their obligations and their responsibilities .
Other points the House makes concerning , for example , mission statements , redeployment , new delegations , monitoring and evaluation will be tackled in the communication on the development of the external service , which we will be bringing forward shortly .
I hope the message is clear .
We take the reform and development of the external service very seriously .
I have said since I took up office that I want to see the emergence of a modern , effective and streamlined service , working as an integral part of the external relations structures of the Commission , and at the service of all the institutions of the Union .
This is still my objective , shared by my colleagues and by the senior management in the external relations services of the Commission .
But it is a long haul .
It must build on the trust and motivation of the staff , many of them working in difficult conditions far away from their colleagues at headquarters .
It requires careful planning , training and not least funding .
I trust that we can count on Parliament 's support and understanding in the work still ahead of us .
One or two honourable Members asked us not to be short of ambition , to be more ambitious in what we do .
I just want to make one very obvious point to Parliament , which may be a little prosaic .
Ambition depends on two things .
First of all , ambition depends on having the money to actually implement your ambitions .
Secondly , ambition depends on being prepared to take tough political decisions in order to achieve your ambitions .
One of my ambitions , and this may be regarded by some as an eccentricity , is to try to ensure that the ambitions in the area for which I am responsible are matched by the funds that we actually have to spend on them .
I also want to see us being prepared to take the tough political decisions that are required to modernise our external service .
But with great respect to the House , it is no good the House on one side telling me that we can never close a delegation ; then on the other side people tell us that we should open new delegations and the whole House agreeing that there should be a limit on the number of delegations we can have .
In the past Parliament has insisted that there should be a ceiling on the number of delegations .
I do not object to that , provided that if we have to close some delegations in order to open others , we have the understanding and support of the House .
But if we are to be ambitious , as I would like to be , there has to be an understanding between the Commission and Parliament as well as between the Commission and the Council .
We have to be absolutely open about any tough decisions we have to make .
Then all of us together have to share in taking the political responsibility for those decisions .
Please do not let us get into a situation in which everybody wants to be ambitious but nobody is actually prepared to spend the money to be ambitious or to take the necessary political decisions .
I am looking forward to this debate and to Parliament 's understanding as we try together to create the sort of external service which the European Union deserves .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken on Thursday at noon .
Proposal for a Council regulation on GSP for 2002 - 2004
The next item is the Commission communication on the proposal for a Council regulation setting up a generalised system of preferences for 2002 - 2004 .
Mr President , the Commission has just - and when I say ' just ' , I mean only ten minutes ago - approved the proposal for a generalised system of preferences for 2002-2004 and has also decided to refer this to Parliament .
I am therefore happy to be able to comment on the proposal briefly and to place it in the double context of the common commercial policy on the one hand and the European Union ' s strategy on sustainable development and the combating of poverty on the other .
The generalised Community ' s system of preferences ( GSP ) actually lies at the intersection between these two major policies of the Union .
Those of you who are familiar with this subject know that the GSP is exclusively a tariff instrument which was created about thirty years ago , following an initiative by the European Community of the time within UNCTAD , the object of which was to reduce customs duties on industrial exports from developing countries , since its principal raison d ' être was the industrialisation of the third world .
At the time , high rates of duty were the main obstacle to trade . Of course , things have since changed to some extent , because the average level of duty has gone down .
On the other hand , the non-tariff barriers have grown in relative importance , and we are trying to deal with this question in relation to non-tariff barriers by giving a certain number of countries the financial resources to enable them to improve their institutional capacity and by concluding ad hoc technical agreements with them , such as mutual recognition agreements or agreements on veterinary or plant-health matters .
However , we must not forget that some tariff barriers are still important , even now .
I shall quote a few examples .
In the textile and agriculture sectors , developing countries often have comparatively large advantages , and there we are retaining tariff protection .
In the primary processing sector we still have the combination of zero duty on imported raw materials and significant rates of duty on processed products , those rates corresponding to the degree to which those raw materials have been used .
This is known as tariff escalation , and quite rightly , because this method of calculating our tariffs has the effect of discouraging processing on the spot in the country of origin .
Then we also have certain tariff peaks which , despite the fact that we have made them less extreme - to a greater extent than they have done in the United States , for example - are still significant in some cases .
What the Commission is proposing , then , is the updating of the GSP in order to respond to three concerns .
First , there is the question of compensating for the erosion in preferential tariff margins which involves lowering the average tariff levels .
Then there is the need to simplify the system for tariff modulation , according to how sensitive the products are .
We have got rid of some categories .
There were four categories before , whereas now there are only two .
It is more simple , less complicated . It will make the work of operators and customs officers easier and will thus make it possible to raise the GSP take-up rate .
The third concern is that we need to carry out a graduation process , in other words to deal with cases in which we are withdrawing the benefits of the GSP from countries with a high GDP , for products in which their competitiveness has been demonstrated by the relative level of their share of the market .
We believe that , in these circumstances , these countries can do without the GSP for those products , in which case ' graduation ' offers new prospects for exports from other , less competitive developing countries , thus giving them a potential advantage in terms of development and the struggle against poverty .
We have carried out this updating of the GSP in order to try to find a balance between , on the one hand , the need to give a new , positive signal to the developing countries , to show them that we are determined to meet their expectations with regard to access to the market - this is a result of the ' Everything But Arms ' initiative ( EBA ) , hence the idea of recreating the preferential margins - and , on the other hand , the tactical ploy of retaining , with a view to the multilateral tariff-negotiations round , opportunities for additional access to the market .
I am sure we all agree that the developing countries generally , and rightly , acknowledge the special value of a concession which is given in a multilateral context , compared with a unilateral preference .
The former is certain and stable , while the latter remains uncertain .
If we take a rapid overview of the various GSP arrangements , we can see that there are four of them , the general arrangements , which apply to the countries of Asia and Latin America , the only continents not to benefit from bilateral preferential advantages like those which are reserved for the ACP countries and the Mediterranean countries .
In this area , we are respecting the economy in general , restoring the preferential margins , simplifying modulation and applying normal graduation rules .
The second arrangements are for the least developed countries , which were radically improved by the ' Everything But Arms ' initiative .
They are not affected by this proposal .
The third arrangements relate to social and environmental incentives , such as allocating additional tariff reductions to those countries which effectively implement the framework conventions of the International Labour Organisation and which undertake to ensure that there is sustainable management of tropical rainforests .
These additional tariff reductions have been strengthened , in the Commission ' s proposal , in order to correct their current weakness . We have done this , in our proposal , by doubling the preference margin in line with social and environmental commitments .
The fourth and last arrangements are the ' drugs ' arrangements for the countries of the Andean Pact and the countries of Central America .
These arrangements have been maintained and extended for a significant period of three years , until 2004 .
They deserve your special attention because they fit in with the Union ' s great ambition with regard to Latin America and , to some extent , the privileged alliance which links us to that continent , but also because the arrangements are the Union ' s main contribution to the fight against drugs , in which these countries are both the scene of operations and the protagonists .
In my view , we should regard the drugs phenomenon in these countries as a symptom , rather than the cause , of the poor level of development that is endemic to this region .
The ' drugs ' arrangements are very generous , very similar to the EBA initiative , because they consist in granting access to the Community market , at a ' zero ' rate of tariff , for the most important industrial and agricultural products of these middle-income countries .
When I say ' middle-income ' I mean with a per capita GDP , at current rates of exchange , of about USD 1 100 for Bolivia , and USD 4 600 for Venezuela , in other words well above the USD 700 per head in the least developed countries .
The primary objective of the ' drugs ' arrangements is not to directly replace illegal coca crops , but to promote development for its own sake , to create jobs and to diversify industrial and agricultural production , an area in which these countries are falling behind to an extent which gives rise for concern and which is , in our opinion , one of the factors that encourages the expansion of the production and trafficking of drugs .
We would expect these countries to respond to the special access that we are offering them to the European market by promoting - and in particular European - direct investment , tackling corruption and battling for social justice .
What we want these countries to do is to make more use of our GSP arrangements , while implementing more effective sustainable development strategies that address the root causes of the economic problems , and drugs and violence .
This is the concept of sustainable development , which hinges on job-creating growth , social progress - entailing the effective implementation of ILO framework conventions - and environmental protection , including the sustainable management of the tropical rainforest which is a crucial aspect in this region .
We are therefore proposing to our Andean partners the very close monitoring of their efforts with regard to the diversification of their exports , the anti-drugs campaign and the promotion of these social and environmental aspects .
Some people are already somewhat alarmed by this parallel which the Commission is drawing between the generosity of the ' drugs ' arrangements and the concern to evaluate the economic , social and environmental performance of our partner countries .
We must remember that it would be difficult , otherwise , to justify the special nature of the arrangements that specifically apply to Latin America , to which we are linked by a political and economic partnership that is very ambitious compared with our relationship with other countries , and Asian countries in particular , which have a comparable level of development and are also facing the task of combating drugs but do not benefit from the ' drugs ' arrangements .
The only way that we can justify this difference is by subjecting these exceptional tariff preferences to standards of implementation that are acceptable to just those countries sharing our European values on sustainable development .
We believe that , as well as being good things in their own right , the encouraging of sound policies , the monitoring that is carried out by the Commission and the resulting dialogue with each country are also the counter-concession which allows the ' drugs ' arrangements to escape being called into question , even by a WTO panel , on the grounds that it creates unjustified discrimination between countries benefiting from the Community GSP .
This monitoring is not , therefore , an abusive or offensive intrusion into the internal affairs of these countries .
On the contrary , in our view it is a kind of lightning conductor to deflect any complaints to the WTO by other developing countries .
We expect that at Doha our Latin American partners will be working in close cooperation with us in order to push ahead with the bilateral liberalisation and standardisation which should consolidate , rather than threaten , the ' drugs ' GSP arrangements which are specific to the Andean Pact and Central America .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , following the EBA initiative , this proposal on the new Community GSP , which we are putting forward on the eve of Doha , confirms the priority which the Union intends to give , via the new round , to the integration of developing countries into the world economy , with the aim of achieving a fairer and more sustainable development , and the Commission needs your support in order to achieve this ambitious undertaking .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first like to thank Commissioner Lamy very much for this initiative .
It is , I believe , an initiative which once again shows far-sightedness and which attempts to solve problems which we all know lie ahead before they even arise .
We all know that we can only enjoy success in world trade if we offer products and services which are also actually bought .
Hence my question : thanks to trade on the Internet we have now attained a very high level of activity internationally in the small consignments sector .
In Europe we have 18 million employers in a labour force of 250 million .
Could you envisage our putting in place appropriate measures for individual small consignments up to a certain number of euros , so that this small-scale trade is also able to develop completely freely , without barriers and without excessive bureaucracy ?
I shall reply briefly to Mr Rübig on two topics .
The first of these concerns the nature of the existing obstacles to imports .
Broadly speaking , there are two categories of obstacles , customs barriers , whether tariff or quantitative , and more technical barriers .
As far as tariff barriers and quantitative barriers and concerned , I believe that , with the ' Everything But Arms ' initiative and with the enhanced GSP which we are proposing now , the developing countries ' access to our market , particularly via modern , electronic means , is satisfactory .
Then there is the question of customs procedures , and in particular the implementation of inspections related to the rules of origin .
Inasmuch as we are giving specific customs advantages , as compared with a most-favoured-nation clause , we cannot risk ignoring the existence of rules of origin and therefore of certificates , which require customs procedures .
So , on the one hand we are dealing with tariffs , but on the other hand , because we are dealing with tariffs , we need rules of origin and therefore customs procedures , so customs procedures will continue to exist .
Having said that , I should explain that these customs procedures apply subject to exemptions which are conditional upon the value of consignments , and which to some extent transactions via the Internet will not pick up .
In other words , as long as you remain below a certain number of exemptions , Internet exports can go ahead without any customs procedures .
Beyond that , I think that for the time being , unless we run into any serious and dangerous problems over rules of origin , we should retain a certain number of formalities .
Mr President , I would like to thank Mr Lamy for his presentation .
I have a few questions .
I was very glad to hear what you said about tariff escalation .
Could say a little more about the specific actions that will be undertaken within this new GSP scheme and the particular margins that might be anticipated on that particular issue ?
Secondly , regarding enhanced GSP that will , hopefully , provide an incentive for improved social and environmental performance , could you say how successful the existing scheme has been , and whether you think a doubling is going to be enough ?
A doubling sounds very good , but we are starting from an extremely low base .
One can always say it is never enough but do you seriously think you have any indications that this is going to attract more people into the scheme than before ?
I also have a question about the longer term .
Given as you say that the value of GSP is being eroded all the time because of the lowering of tariffs overall , what other mechanisms would you foresee in order to try to strengthen social and environmental performance among different developing countries ?
The GSP , or its worth , is not going to be there for ever , as tariffs go down across the board .
Finally , could you say little more about human rights violations as a whole ?
The enhanced GSP system obviously works as a system of incentives .
Have you had any thoughts about whether it might be necessary to reform the GSP , so that those who are perpetrating human rights violations , Colombia in particular , are actually excluded from the scheme across the board ?
I shall reply to the various points raised by Mrs Lucas .
Regarding the problems of tariff escalation , inasmuch as we are increasing the preference margin , we are reducing , by that amount , the difference caused by tariff escalation . However , and on this point I am absolutely clear , we are not changing the tariff-escalation system to any great extent .
There will still be a zero rate for certain products .
Tariff escalation comes into play , but its impact is reduced by the preference margin that we are offering .
As for the generalised system of preferences , from the point of view of its providing an incentive for social and environmental performance , the Commission thought it would be useful to go further , in other words to double the preference already granted , because it shares what I think is the view implied by your question , i.e. that at the moment the scheme has not given rise to many specific projects .
As far as social matters are concerned , in our proposal we have introduced an innovation , to the extent that we now refer to the International Labour Organisation as regards what amounts , to some extent , to the certification of the advantages that we are granting .
This is an innovation which I would draw to your attention and which has the double effect of making the diagnosis more objective , if I can use that word , and also of giving the ILO a greater profile in this international social governance which is , as you know , one of our objectives .
On the subject of drugs we have also been innovative , because we have made provision , in the countries which benefit from the GSP , for ' drug-specific ' monitoring in relation to social conditions and also in relation to environmental conditions .
In the case of social conditions , this takes place with reference to the ILO framework conventions , and in the case of environmental conditions it takes place in the context of tropical rainforest management , which more or less coincides geographically with the region in question .
Therefore , from this point of view , conditionality via monitoring is increased , and I believe that I was attempting , in this proposal , to bear in mind , as you are doing , certain specific cases in which what was happening on the ground in relation to social rights did not necessarily comply with the spirit of the agreements between the Union and the countries in question .
To come to your last point , as far as preferences are concerned , whether for social performance or environmental performance , have we any alternative ?
As you know , we took a decision of principle , to the effect that , when taking into consideration social and environmental questions , we should not come down too heavily on the side of sanctions , but opt instead for incentives .
We are therefore increasing the incentive here . We are making it clearer and more objective , with reference to a certain number of standards , but we are not coming down on the sanctions side .
What we already have in unilateral and bilateral form , where we have greater room to manuvre , must be translated into multilateral form , though probably in a more diluted form , in the multilateral negotiations in preparation for the Doha round , and you know what the Union ' s mandate is there .
In view of the fact that the WTO is a multilateral institution , we are obliged to make certain compromises in WTO negotiations which we do not necessarily have to make in bilateral negotiations and which we do not have to make at all when it comes to unilateral measures .
Finally , on the problem of human rights violations , we are dealing with this on the basis of the specific ILO conventions , and in particular the convention on forced labour and slavery .
This proposal includes temporary withdrawal in the case of slavery or forced labour .
This was already included in the previous proposal .
We are now adding to it violations of the fundamental social standards covered by the five ILO basic conventions , so on this point we have to some extent added to what was already included and was also , as you know , applied in the case of Burma .
Mr President , thank you for your comments , Commissioner Lamy .
In making them you have already answered part of the first question which I am about to put to you .
I should like to come back once more to the system of incentives in the GSP , in the generalised system of preferences , which has of course been extended to social policy and the environment .
From what I have heard , this programme - which I consider to be very sensible - has not yet met with the desired response in the countries concerned .
At this early stage , and leaving aside the fact that the scheme does not of course impose any negative penalties , do you have any indications why the response has been so poor ?
The second question is : has an assessment been made of the extent to which the large free trade area from Alaska to Tierra del Fuego , which is of course planned by the USA and within which it is intended to reduce tariffs to zero would - if it ever becomes a reality - impair or stimulate trade with us in particular in the generalised system of preferences ?
Has the Commission already considered this ?
I have one final question on the WTO : recently it was written that people would actually welcome a decision in Qatar to open a new negotiating round in various sectors .
Can you say anything more about this ?
I shall reply to the three questions from Mr Kreissl-Dörfler .
On the first question , the current use of social or environmental incentive clauses , we have so far received four applications with reference to the social incentive clause .
These applications are from Moldavia , Ukraine , Georgia and Russia .
Of these four applications , one of them , and I believe I am right in saying it was the Moldavian application , was accepted immediately .
The others are being examined .
It is not a very long list , in fact it is a short list if you think of how many countries could be interested in the scheme in theory .
Why is it not a longer list ?
In my opinion there are two reasons .
The first of these is concerned with a matter of principle : a certain number of developing countries do not , as a matter of principle , wish to make a link between a commercial advantage and the observance of social standards .
This is not a unanimous position , nor is it equally firm in every country .
The spectrum is relatively broad , but it still poses problems sometimes .
We are aware of this , and it is a matter for the countries in question to decide ; that is their right , their understanding of the matter , and they are sovereign .
We simply believe that , by increasing the margin and the advantage that they might gain from ' matching ' these criteria , we can perhaps give some countries , who may be hesitating and who may be undecided between economic advantages and matters of principle , a nudge in what we believe to be the right direction .
On the second question , the North-South America free trade zone , at the moment negotiations are proceeding between the 34 countries of the American continent .
These negotiations have been going on for almost five years and will probably last another five .
In the short term , therefore , this is not a problem , and it does not affect the relative advantage that we give to countries in that region under the ' drugs ' regime , whether in Central America , the Andes region or the member countries of the Andean Pact .
In a sense , we are each making a contribution , the United States in various forms , in particular credits and operations , while our contribution is commercial in nature .
We each have our own way of doing things and I think that , from that point of view , the negotiations on the North-South America free trade zone will not change anything very much in the short term .
In the medium and long term , it will all depend on the level of tariff preference that they achieve , and this is still an unknown factor .
As for the last question , the prospects in Qatar , as you are no doubt aware , since you are one of the specialists on this subject , we are working flat out , with a number of developing countries , with a view to improving their perception of the advantage that would accrue to them as a result of starting a new round of multilateral negotiations in Qatar .
We are making quite good progress here .
For example , looking at the results of last week ' s meeting of APEC trade ministers from countries bordering on the Pacific , we can see that progress has been made on this subject .
In addition , we are working , at this very moment , with the new administration in the United States of America , again at full stretch , to try to ensure that the summit between the United States and the European Union which is to take place next Thursday morning , at the European Council in Gothenburg , will be able , on this point , to give a signal that will help to demonstrate that the movement has now been launched .
Thank you Commissioner .
We all recognise that you have an extremely important portfolio to carry out on behalf of the Community at the present time .
That concludes this item .
Question Time ( Council )
The next item is ' Question Time ' ( B5 ­ 0171 / 2001 ) . We shall look at questions to the Council .
Question No 1 by ( H-0437 / 01 ) :
Subject : Irregularities in SENSUS and EUROPOLIS projects The AVENTINUS project and its successor , the SENSUS project , have been subsidised by the Commission since 1996 .
Both projects seek to develop an information-exchange programme for European police and intelligence services .
Coordination is in the hands of Stephan Bodenkamp / Christoph Klonowski of the German Federal Intelligence Service ( Bundesnachrichtendienst ) .
On 25 May 1999 , the original Decision E / 1791 / 97 of 3 September 1997 was amended so as to enable Europol to join the project ( E / 696 / 99 ) .
In November 1999 Europol effectively joined the ranks of SENSUS partners Gesellschaft für multilinguale Systeme mbH ( Multilingual Systems Company , Ltd ) and the Italian firm Datamat .
Despite the conviction of coordinator Stephan Bodenkamp / Christoph Klonowski for forgery and the formation of the dubious SENSUS-Bundesnachrichtendienst-L & H-Sail Labs complex , Europol awarded a new contract worth 20 million euro at the beginning of 2001 .
Will the Council arrange for an external audit of the AVENTINUS , SENSUS and EUROPOLIS projects to be conducted in order to eliminate irregularities and come up with a transparent project ?
If not , why not ?
I will be very brief .
The honourable Member is informed that the projects referred to in his question only fall within the authority of the European Commission .
Mr President , you clearly need not have rushed , for the Council ' s response was indeed very brief .
It surprises me that this question should fall within the exclusive remit of the Commission , but that it was deemed admissible for this Question Time to the Council .
Ladies and gentlemen , the response illustrates that there is an urgent need for democratic control of Europol .
I am indeed familiar with Article 30 of the Treaty on European Union , but there is no denying the fact that the case file is as it stands .
It is likely that Europol uses stolen information technology , and this at the expense of a German firm which was led to the brink of bankruptcy .
The services of the German intelligence service were called in , and the case involved many tens of millions of European government money .
A Europol employee is being arrested as we speak , and other arrests may be imminent .
I would ask the Council whether it is prepared to agree on a drastic overhaul of Europol .
If not , what is the reason for that decision , and why does the Council give its blessing to police cooperation getting off to such a bad start ?
Let me stress that I share Mr Staes ' concern over information on irregularities within Europol .
Today ' s newspapers contain articles on incidents and arrests due to the alleged irregularities .
The problems which Mr Staes brought up are certainly real .
However , once again I would point out that it is the Commission ' s responsibility to deal with these issues .
I am also sure that Europol , which comes under the supervision of the Justice and Home Affairs Council , has regulations on auditing and accounts , etc. which are designed in a way which makes it possible to quickly discover the type of inaccuracies and irregularities mentioned by Mr Staes .
I am glad that he has brought up this important issue and I am sorry that , as President-in-Office , I cannot provide more details , as it lies outside the competence of the Council .
However , I hope that we will jointly ensure that we avoid hearing about such incidents in the future .
Mr President-in-Office , most of us can admire the tactics and future tasks to be conducted by Europol as an organisation .
We all know that it is a very necessary organisation .
You identified a new structure for Europol in the future .
Are there any plans to bring Europol under democratic control ?
The Council believes that Europol is already under democratic control . I am not aware of any proposals aimed at changing the control system for Europol .
Question No 2 by ( H-0439 / 01 ) :
Subject : Political dialogue meetings with Turkey In its answer to written question P-0054 / 01 , the Council stated that Turkey would ' remove any legal provisions forbidding the use by Turkish citizens of their mother tongue in TV / radio broadcasting ( short-term ) ' .
Turkey would also ' develop a comprehensive approach to reduce regional disparities , and in particular to improve the situation in the South-East , with a view to enhancing economic , social and cultural opportunities for all citizens ( short-term ) ' .
What progress has been made with realising those short-term aims ?
Has Turkey made a start in moving towards them ?
Has it given any serious thought to how it will achieve the long-term aims stated ( ' ensure cultural diversity and guarantee cultural rights for all citizens ' ) ?
Will the Council urge the Turkish authorities actively to implement the review announced by them of their policy towards the Caucasus and to open the borders with Armenia ?
In reply to a question from Mrs Frahm , at the meeting in February , I had the opportunity of presenting the provisions in the Accession Partnership for Turkey concerning the area brought up by Mrs Maes in her question .
As we know , the Council adopted the Accession Partnership on 8 March 2001 .
Turkey ' s response came in the form of a national programme for implementing the legislation adopted by the Turkish government on 19 March .
The Commission is currently examining the content of Turkey ' s national programme , including looking at the extent to which it agrees with the Accession Partnership on the points brought up by Mrs Maes in her question .
The assessment will be conducted by the Commission within the framework of the progress report to be presented to the Council in the autumn .
The Council has noted that the Commission ' s preliminary analysis proposes that , with regard to the political criteria , considerably more effort should be demanded in the areas of abolishing the death penalty and of cultural rights for all citizens regardless of origin .
In this context it is important to remember that the fact that something is included in the national programme for implementing legislation or that the legislation has been adopted is not sufficient .
The European Union makes greater demands than that .
It is implementation which is important , and we all know that Turkey must ensure that what is written in the programme is also put into practice .
Therefore , it is important that the various bodies for monitoring the Association Agreement really monitor the way the Turkish government is realising the undertakings contained in the programme in practice .
The Council will actively continue to urge and encourage Turkey to carry out reforms in the areas brought up by Mrs Maes , as there is much room for improvement .
Therefore , the issues taken up will continue to be top of the agenda in the improved political dialogue .
With regard to Turkey ' s policy on the Southern Caucasus , and in particular links with Armenia , the Council is urging Turkey to play an active role in efforts to strengthen peace and welfare in the area .
The EU Troika , led by the Swedish Minister for Foreign Affairs , visited the region in February .
After the visit , the General Affairs Council also adopted conclusions .
Consequently , the dialogue on the Southern Caucasus will regularly continue in high-level meetings with Turkey .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am naturally not entirely satisfied with your response .
That is hardly surprising .
I do have some understanding for the time aspect .
It is important for matters to be looked into thoroughly , but I share your view entirely that paper is not sufficient .
There is a saying in Dutch , ' papier is geduldig ' [ paper can wait ] , and I am certain that this proverb also exists in other languages .
Implementation is the most important aspect , and the inspectorates should therefore show a very high level of independence in order to actually monitor implementation .
Indeed , we often note that candidate countries go out of their way to create the impression that all is well .
Turkey is , in fact , unable to do this at the moment , for extremely tragic events are unfolding in Turkish prisons , and - although I do not wish to discuss this now - there are still people who are risking their lives , or having them endangered by others , on a daily basis because no dialogue is being entered into .
This approach seems to be at odds with the sound measures taken on behalf of minorities .
I hope that the Troika can be firm but fair in its conclusions .
Let me say , finally , that the Council naturally shares Mrs Maes ' concern over the situation in Turkish prisons .
If I remember correctly , the hunger strikes in Turkish prisons have so far cost 23 lives .
This development , which the Council is monitoring carefully , is deeply disturbing .
The trial of the Fazilet Party is also under way .
As a judgement has not yet been made , it is too early to express an opinion on any possible consequences .
However , generally speaking it can be said that banning political parties is hardly a solution to Turkey ' s political and economic problems .
On this occasion , as on previous occasions , I am grateful to be able to draw attention to this incredibly important issue , along with Mrs Maes , i.e. the way human rights are developing in Turkey .
We should all monitor this vital issue carefully in the future .
Question No 3 by ( H-0444 / 01 ) :
Subject : Bilingualism in Istria On 9 April 2001 the Regional Council of Istria ( Croatia ) adopted a regional statute which provides for parity between Italian and Croatian in all regional institutions and all procedures of administrative bodies .
Unfortunately , on 23 April 2001 these rules were suspended by the Croatian Ministry of Justice , which argued that their constitutionality had to be confirmed . This is despite the universal view that they are consistent with the spirit and letter of the Croatian constitution ( or Fundamental Charter ) .
There is great consternation and concern at the serious problems which would be created for the Italian-speaking population , given that Italy 's status as a friendly nation and founder member of the EU should ensure the existence of full Italian / Croatian bilingualism in the border areas .
Can the Council state what action it intends to take , and in what quarters , to ensure that :
the Croatian government acts to restore the suspended rules immediately , confirming their constitutionality as soon as possible ;
no ' political impasse ' develops which could block Croatia 's further progress in establishing closer relations with the EU should the decision of the Croatian government be such as to cast doubt on Zagreb 's pro-European stance ;
the basic principles and ' acquis ' of the EU are reaffirmed and there is no question of suspending the right of the Italian-speaking minority to recognition of its cultural identity or that right being declared unconstitutional .
Let me assure the honourable Member that respect for and protection of minorities is an important issue for the Council in general and the Swedish Presidency in particular .
Respect for and protection of minorities is a condition built into EU policy towards those countries covered by the Stabilisation and Association Process in South Eastern Europe .
Croatia is , as we all know , one of these countries .
The Stabilisation and Association Process , which will hopefully bring these countries closer to European integration , is followed and monitored carefully by the Council .
Mr Podestà can rest assured that developments in the region are monitored carefully also with regard to human rights and respect for and protection of minorities .
Let me point out that the General Affairs Council of 11 June approved a progress report on the Stabilisation and Association Process , including an assessment of Croatia .
In this assessment , the Council welcomes the progress already made by the new Croatian Government since it was sworn in last year .
Important results have been achieved in many areas , but we would also highlight certain issues which require more action .
One such issue is the adoption of a new law to protect minorities .
There is already draft legislation , and I am convinced that Croatia will adopt this and implement it appropriately .
The Council is already monitoring these issues .
The particular issue of bilingualism in Istria , where there is a fairly large Italian minority , and the position with regard to the regional statute recently adopted by the regional council of Istria are currently being dealt with by Croatia ' s administrative court .
We look forward to the court ' s pronouncement , and we will continue to monitor the issue carefully in our dealings with Croatia .
President Danielsson , thank you for that answer and I am pleased to hear what the Council decided yesterday on the matter .
However , you leave it to me to confirm that respect for minorities is truly part of the founding spirit of the Union , as is respect for cultural diversity , and multilingualism obviously represents an immediate aspect of that .
The ominous fact is that the regional statute adopted by the Regional Council of Istria on 9 April has been suspended , giving the constitutional court a further year to check for any unconstitutionality .
Considering that this was also a principal reason for the resignation of the Croatian Minister for Integration , I am wondering whether there is an internal struggle going on to the detriment of the Italian-speaking minority , or whether , instead - and this would be even more serious - the Croatian constitution really does not protect minorities and particular cultures .
I wonder how the Croatian government can think about moving towards membership of the European Union with such attitudes .
Let me stress the value of the Stabilisation and Association Process in carefully addressing this type of question .
We know that in many places in Europe protection of minorities and their rights is a very difficult issue .
I believe that the European Union is carrying out one of its many important initiatives , as this process and this agreement , even with countries which are not yet candidates for membership , enables us to follow developments and point out where we believe that developments are not progressing in the right direction .
The report adopted by the Council yesterday allows for a certain amount of optimism .
We are now waiting for the decision of the constitutional court and we are continuing to monitor the issue carefully .
Question No 4 by ( H-0446 / 01 ) :
Subject : Changes in fishing effort and increase in gillnet use affecting reproductive stock The hake fishery underwent a fundamental change over the second half of the 90s , notably thanks to the appearance of large numbers of gillnet vessels , which by 1999 accounted for over 20 % of landings , as opposed to only 4 % in 1994 .
Given that with this form of fishing the effort is measured on the basis of net length and the number of times the nets enter the sea , this shift in method has led to a significant increase in the actual fishing effort , in respect of a reproductive stock already affected by a fall in numbers to below the precautionary level over the 90s .
What action has the Council taken to limit this uncontrolled effort and its adverse effects on the reproductive stock ?
Have limits been placed on the number and length of the nets which can be used at each tide ?
The Council is aware of the critical situation for hake stocks in Community waters and of the impact which increased use of gillnets in hake fishing may have on these stocks .
However , there are specific technical regulations which control the use of gillnets for hake fishing or which specifically aim to limit the strain on fish which this type of equipment causes , e.g. limits to the number of nets , the length of the nets or the time they are allowed to be left in the water .
Mr Ortuondo Larrea is no doubt aware that it is the Commission ' s responsibility to monitor conformity with regulations in the Common Fisheries Policy and if necessary take suitable measures and also propose new legislation for this purpose .
In this respect , I would like to call to Mr Ortuondo Larrea ' s attention the emergency measures for hake stock recovery which the Commission is currently drawing up in close cooperation with Member States .
Question No 5 by ( H-0453 / 01 ) :
Subject : Debate on reform of the Treaties What accounts for the Swedish Presidency 's virtual silence and lack of significant initiatives regarding the reform of the Treaties and the planned EU Constitution ?
As the honourable Member knows , the European Council in Nice adopted a declaration which was appended to the Final Act , in which the measures which the Swedish and Belgian Presidencies would take were clearly set out .
In this context , on 7 March 2001 the Swedish Presidency , the coming Belgian Presidency , the President of the European Parliament and the President of the Commission made a joint declaration which formally opened the debate on the future development of the EU .
The hope is that , based on a number of operational centres and a variety of contributions , a debate will be promoted which has greater scope than ever before .
The debate will be concentrated on the fundamental challenges which the European Union is facing in the decades ahead and will stimulate proposals on how these challenges are to be met rationally when it comes to policy decisions , institutions and organisation of the work .
In order to be able to create a ' citizens ' forum ' - a place where all the elements of the debate can be collected and made available - the website ' Future of Europe ' was opened on the same day .
The first contribution to the debate was made by Swedish Prime Minister Göran Persson , Belgian Prime Minister Guy Verhofstadt and President of the Commission Romano Prodi in order to inspire others to follow suit .
On the same day the Swedish Prime Minister wrote to his colleagues in the Member States and candidate countries , inviting them to take part , for example by contributing to the website .
The Prime Minister also sent similar letters to the European Court of Justice , the Court of Auditors , the Committee of the Regions , the Economic and Social Committee , the Conference of Community and European Affairs Committees ( COSAC ) and labour market partners .
Opening the debate in this way has meant that , even at this early stage , a large number of initiatives have been taken in Member States , candidate countries and by the EU institutions , in various debate forums .
So far everyone has been interested in a truly open and broad debate on the future of the European Union in the spirit of the Nice Declaration .
I am convinced that the debate will take off over the next few months as more contributions are made .
In addition , the Swedish Presidency has drawn up a status report ahead of the European Council in Gothenburg , in which facts are presented on the initiatives taken at national and European level to promote wide-ranging discussions between all parties , including representatives of national parliaments , political , economic and academic circles , civil society , etc .
We also highlight in this report certain trends which we believe can be seen in the debate with regard to the next phase of preparatory work for the next Intergovernmental Conference .
When it comes to fulfilling the undertakings in the declaration on the future of the European Union , it is up to the Belgian Presidency to continue reflecting on the initiatives needed for this process to continue .
The plan is that a declaration on this issue should be adopted at the European Council in Laeken in December .
Therefore I believe that Mr Nogueira Román ' s comment regarding silence and lack of significant initiatives is incorrect .
On the contrary , the Swedish Presidency has followed the Nice Declaration fully in actively trying to stimulate an important debate on the future of the European Union through a wide range of initiatives .
I have asked this question now that the six months of the Swedish Presidency are coming to an end , aware that the Presidency of your country has not done enough to respond to the resolution on the Treaty of Nice , which you have mentioned , and to the anxieties of European society .
I believe that European society sees Nice as a total failure and I also believe that this failure , amongst other things , has led to the fact that Ireland has voted no in the referendum on the Treaty of Nice , in the face of the idleness of the Irish Government , and also , although this time in positive terms , the fact that Mr Jospin , Prime Minister of France , and Mr Schröder , Chancellor of Germany , proposed something which seven or eight months ago they would not have dared to propose , that is , the future existence of a European Constitution .

I believe that the Swedish Presidency has not been up to the task in this fundamental debate , and it should have been the Prime Minister of Sweden who took the initiative and not the Presidents of France or Germany .
Furthermore , the Swedish Presidency has not been up to the task in relation to the essential issue of the Structural Funds , an issue which is so important for my country .
I am sorry that the honourable Member has not visited the website on the debate on the future of the European Union , which I referred to earlier .
Had he done so , he would have been able to read the contribution from the Swedish Prime Minister , in which he considers the particular issues which Mr Nogueira Román has brought up .
He may not come to exactly the same conclusion as Mr Jospin and Mr Schröder , but I assume that Mr Nogueira Román does not want uniformity in the debate , but diversity .
This is exactly what you get on our website , where you can also read the opinion of the President-in-Office .
I have a follow-up question for the honourable Council representative .
You refer to the Treaty of Nice , but is it not the case that the Treaty states that if it is to be adopted , all countries must approve it in line with their constitution ?
Ireland has said no to the Treaty of Nice .
If the EU follows its own rules , should it not stop following the Treaty of Nice and realise that it has failed ?
The honourable Member is bringing up a separate issue .
I do not believe I referred to the Treaty of Nice in the way which Mr Sjöstedt suggests .
I was referring to the declaration of the European Council in Nice on the debate on the future of the EU .
Mr Sjöstedt is talking about events in Ireland , which is another important issue which I know there will be an opportunity to debate tomorrow , for example with the Swedish Minister for Foreign Affairs when she reports on plans ahead of the European Council in Gothenburg , where the issue of events in Ireland will naturally be an important component .
Even so , let me say that the ratification process for the Treaty of Nice will continue in the various Member States for another few months , possibly even up to a year .
I note the statements from the Irish government regarding the continuing process in Ireland .
Therefore , I believe there is reason to return to this .
I believe it is far too early to say that the Treaty of Nice " has failed " as Mr Sjöstedt suggests .
Mr Nogueira Román , I am sure that you know the Rules of Procedure and that you may , therefore , only ask for the floor on a point of order .
Mr President , I wish to take this opportunity to express my great surprise at the fact that , in order to find out what is going on in Europe , I have to look at a specific Web page !
Question No 6 by ( H-0456 / 01 ) :
Subject : Police action during the Gothenburg Summit EU summit meetings tend to be met with popular demonstrations which , in turn , provoke repressive police action .
This happened in Malmö when the EU Finance Ministers convened on 21 April , and it is expected to happen again during the Gothenburg summit in June , where President Bush will also be present .
It has been reported that Mr Bush will be accompanied by a large number of security staff .
It must be assumed that there has been consultation , coordination and cooperation between US security staff and Swedish security staff in preparing for the Gothenburg Summit .
Was police action in Malmö planned and carried out as a pre-Gothenburg exercise ?
Were US staff present or otherwise involved in the police operation in Malmo ?
Who has final authority and responsibility for the security of the Summit participants ?
Does it entirely rest with the Swedish Government , or does the US staff have any kind of autonomous authority as regards the security of President Bush and his entourage ?
Police action during the European Council in Gothenburg does not fall within the competence of the Council .
That is what I call a short answer .
However , I thought that the European Council was a matter for the Presidency .
It therefore surprises me that the Presidency currently has no answer to my question .
If things go well , as we and the Swedish police in Gothenburg , who appear to be prepared for a peaceful summit , hope , perhaps the issue will not become pressing .
If , however , things go badly , it would be extraordinary if the President-in-Office of the Council , who is also part of the Swedish Government , had no interest in or responsibility for this matter .
This is remarkable .
I wonder who does have responsibility .
As I assume that Herman Schmid does not require any interpretation of what I said , I would like to repeat that " police action during the European Council in Gothenburg does not fall within the competence of the Council " .
The European Council in itself is a Council issue .
I hope that Herman Schmid shares my view that police action should remain a national issue .
However , let me take this opportunity to explain that the Presidency is planning widespread activities in conjunction with the European Council in Gothenburg , which will involve dialogue with everyone who has views on the operation of the European Union .
Large sections of the Swedish Government will be on hand to meet and talk to various groups who have views on the operation of the European Union in general and the European Council in Gothenburg in particular .
The Presidency will do what is required of it , i.e. ensure that the European Council in Gothenburg is a substantial success and that it will also be a way of showing that it is possible to open up even Summit discussions and make them somewhat broader in scope than was previously the case .
Question No 7 by ( H-0483 / 01 ) :
Subject : Recording of details of members of the public in the SIS register in connection with the demonstrations in Malmö Demonstrations critical of the EU and EMU took place when the ECOFIN Council met in Malmö in April .
A demonstration by people critical of the European Union was attacked by police , more than 250 people were arrested and many were ill-treated by the police .
Those arrested had to identify themselves to the police .
The police also systematically made video recordings of peaceful demonstrators .
According to reports on Swedish radio , the Swedish security police is recording details of people who are critical of the EU ahead of the EU summit in Gothenburg .
Under the Schengen Agreement , details of people regarded as posing a threat to a country 's internal security may be recorded in the SIS .
Have details of anyone been entered in the SIS because they took part in the demonstrations in Malmö or because they are critical of the European Union ?
Mr Sjöstedt ' s question refers to the hypothetical recording of information in the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) .
Let me point out that in accordance with Article 105 of the Convention implementing the Schengen Agreement , responsibility lies exclusively with the Contracting Parties with regard to ensuring that reports entered into SIS are correct , up to date and legal .
In accordance with Article 104 , the law applying to reports will be the national law of the reporting Contracting Party .
It should also be borne in mind that in Sweden , as in other Member States which have adopted the Schengen Agreement , there is an authority with responsibility for independent monitoring of the national Schengen Information System .
Anyone is entitled to demand that the monitoring authority check the reports in SIS which concern them and the way this information is used .
This check must be carried out in accordance with Swedish law .
Let me take off my Presidency hat just for a while and put on my Swedish hat and inform Mr Sjöstedt that , for safety ' s sake , I asked the same question as Mr Sjöstedt about whether any people were registered in SIS by the Swedish authorities because they took part in the demonstration in Malmö or because they are critical of the EU .
A check revealed the answer to both these questions to be an unequivocal no .
I thank the honourable Council representative for that unusually clear reply .
I am happy with this answer , as I think it is important .
I would still like to ask , perhaps with my Swedish hat on , why the Swedish Security Police has systematically videoed peaceful anti-EU demonstrators in demonstrations where no incidents whatsoever occur .
Is this in line with the usual freedom of speech and right to demonstrate ?
As President-in-Office , I definitely have no authority to answer the question .
Nor do I have the authority , as a representative of the Swedish Government , to answer questions on exercising public authority .
As it has proven possible to swap hats , I also have a question .
Detailed information has been printed in the press , including Göteborgsposten , suggesting that US security services have been highly active in preparations for the Summit .
They appear to have been in position in Sweden for a number of weeks .
I do not know whether the information is incorrect , but it refers to named Gothenburg police officers . Nor have I seen any denial on their part .
Therefore , it would also be interesting to know whether events in Malmö were also part of the preparations made with the American security services .
Can we have any information on this matter ?
If not , the door is left open for speculation , which is hardly in the interests of the Swedish Government .
It is not in the interests of the Swedish Government to contribute to speculation . Nor , however , is it in the interests of the Swedish Government to speak on issues for which independent Swedish authorities are responsible .
As the author is not present , Question No 8 lapses .
Question No 9 by ( H-0462 / 01 ) :
Subject : Danone and Marks & Spencers closures If anyone was still harbouring the illusion that there was any life left in the ' mixed economy ' and the ' European social model ' , the brutal cynicism evinced by the announcement of closures by Danone and Marks & Spencers leave no doubt about the fact that those ideas have had their day .
Company restructuring was understandable in the context of undertakings facing real economic problems .
It is , however , utterly unacceptable on the part of healthy , wealthy undertakings who ' restructure ' purely and simply in pursuit of increased capital gains .
Our governments have reacted decisively to the agricultural crises ; wilful , savage action in the name of profits , resulting in the destruction of whole families - ought to elicit an equally decisive response - not least because if it does not , such action will snowball .
What are you going to do ?
The Council would remind the honourable Member that the Council is not authorised to monitor the implementation of legislation and therefore is not permitted to comment on events and developments in individual companies .
However , the Community legislation which must be followed in this area concerns the following instruments : the Council Directive on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to collective redundancies , the Council Directive on the establishment of a European Works Council or a procedure in Community-scale undertakings and Community-scale groups of undertakings for the purposes of informing and consulting employees and the Council Directive extending the latter directive to the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland .
With regard to the criticism which may have been levelled against the Community legislation , including the criticism that company management is not forbidden from deciding to close down unprofitable sections of their companies in situations where the company as a whole is profitable or that employers which have breached the requirement for information and consultation have not been punished sufficiently , the Council would like to state that it can only act on the basis of proposals from the Commission .
If the Commission were to put forward such a proposal for consideration by the Council , which has not yet happened , the Council would be prepared to act quickly .
I would like to emphasise that the Council took a decision yesterday on the Commission ' s proposal for a directive establishing a general framework for informing and consulting employees in companies operating at national level in Member States .
This directive is intended to apply to areas such as the situation , structure and probable development of employment in companies and to planned decisions from the management which are expected to lead to major changes to the organisation of work or to the associated contractual links .
During the review which can now be carried out , the Council will give due attention to the recent events which the honourable Member has brought up .
Mr President , Minister , I listened carefully to the reply that you gave and I too am pleased at the decision taken yesterday by the Council of Ministers for Social Affairs .
I also noted that you attributed the responsibility of many of our current problems to the European Commission , because , as you said , the Commission has not submitted for your consideration any measures to deal with the very serious situation which we are in .
I would like you to clarify two points - the first is on effective sanctions , in the event that the rules are flouted , as happened with yesterday ' s agreement .
I would like you to provide clarification on this point .
I would also like you to explain the situation of non-British employees working in establishments in the rest of Europe between 2004 and 2009 .
Mr President , my last question is what can I , as an MEP , say to the employees who are shown the door by their employers , who are making a profit , when they know that the only reason why they are being laid off is to push up the profits .
Can I be satisfied by telling them that the Council cannot do anything because the Commission has not made a proposal ?
I know that this is not what you believe , as a man and as a member of parliament , and I would like to have a slightly more firm commitment from yourself on this issue .
I believe that the decision taken yesterday provides exactly the answer you were looking for on the well-founded questions which you receive from employees who unlawfully lose their jobs .
The Council hopes that the Directive on information and consultation will actually become a meaningful instrument which provides a legal process for such issues in the future .
It is a directive on which we have worked hard throughout the Swedish Presidency . We therefore regard it as a major success that we actually managed to achieve agreement on this issue yesterday , which I must say I did not think would happen .
I must ask to return to your detailed questions at a later date .
The discussion in the Council went on until the very last moment yesterday .
A number of amendments were made late in the evening , and I have not yet been able to receive a full report from my colleague Mrs Sahlin , the minister responsible .
I would therefore request that I may get back to you with more precise answers to you detailed questions .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I , like you , welcome the decision that was taken yesterday in the Social Affairs and Employment Council to finally adopt this draft directive on information and consultation .
It is a great result for the Swedish Presidency .
There is still , however , a crucial problem which , in my view , is not simply a trifling detail and this is the problem of sanctions .
Yet , it turns out that the Council did not support the proposal made by the Commission and by Mrs Diamantopoulou , to provide for , in the form of sanctions , the overturning of decisions taken on mass redundancies , which could arise from a breach of the procedure on information and consultation and , therefore , as a result , to provide for the possibility of re-establishing the contracts of employment of employees who would have been made redundant , in breach of the European directive .
Are you willing , would the Council be willing , to re-introduce this point in the text if , at second reading , Parliament again adopts the proposal which was put forward by the Commission ?
A directive without genuine sanctions that work as a deterrent would be totally ineffective and would not protect workers .
As the honourable Member no doubt understands , it is very difficult , not to say impossible , to answer the hypothetical question .
I believe that the compromise reached yesterday was quite difficult to achieve .
As I said , we have worked long and hard on this issue in the Council , and we have had many difficult discussions .
I simply cannot predict what position the Council would take in the hypothetical discussion you describe .
For the time being , let us be happy about the progress represented by yesterday ' s decision .
It is certainly progress which can be further improved , but I still believe that this constitutes an important step for Europe ' s workers .
As the author is not present , Question No 10 lapses .
As they deal with the same subject , Questions Nos 11 and 12 shall be taken together .
Question No 11 by ( H-0469 / 01 ) :
Subject : Position of the Swedish Presidency on the introduction of a tax on international financial transactions In answer to the questions put to it last month , the Council stated that it had not included the subject of the ' Tobin tax ' on the agenda for the ECOFIN Council , even though Mrs Lena Hjelm-Wallén , Deputy Prime Minister of Sweden , had declared on 23 March of this year that she approved of the ' Tobin tax ' .
In recent weeks , certain Member States such as Finland have declared their support for a tax of this kind , while a number of members of parliament ( from Europe , Canada and the United States ) have issued an international appeal in support of the ' Tobin tax ' .
In view of these recent developments , has the Council decided to include the subject on the agenda of the ECOFIN Council meeting of 19 June and to propose , at that meeting , that some of the proceeds of the ' Tobin tax ' be allocated to meeting basic needs in the developing countries ( access to safe drinking water , primary health care and vaccination ) , which would cost around USD 40 billion per year according to UNDP estimates ?
Question No 12 by ( H-0486 / 01 ) :
Subject : Position of the Swedish Presidency regarding the establishment of a tax on international financial transactions Although the Swedish Presidency does not intend to take any initiative regarding consideration of the Tobin tax ( as it stated in reply to the questions it was asked at the European Parliament 's last part-session ) , can it nonetheless indicate the reasons which led Mrs Lena Hjelm-Wallen ( Sweden 's Deputy Prime Minister ) to state on 23 March 2001 that she agreed with the Tobin tax ?
Could it be on account of the regulatory role which this tax ( which applies to international financial transactions ) could play in relation to currencies , by damping down speculation and reducing the volatility of exchange markets ?
Or could it be ( in the mind of the Deputy Prime Minister ) on account of the attractiveness of a tax which , according to estimates , could bring in between 50 and 250 billion dollars per year , possibly for allocation to development-aid programmes in the world 's poorest countries ?
The view of the Presidency and the Council on this issue remains the same as in the reply given to questions on the same subject on 19 April .
I can only briefly repeat what was said then . We do not intend to put the issue further up the agenda for the coming Ecofin meeting .
So far no desire has been expressed on this from other parties .
Nor has the Commission put forward any proposal or other initiative on this matter for the Council to address .
Thank you for your answer .
I was expecting you to give the same answer as the one you gave in writing .
I would , however , like to point out to you that support for a Tobin-type tax is increasing .
This support is coming from organisations of economists , naturally , but also from political institutions , as a result of the fact that certain positions have been taken up in the Finnish and Canadian parliaments , and again in Argentina , quite recently , even in Great Britain , and here , in the European Parliament .
It is said that this type of tax could only be effective if it were chosen and implemented by several countries or areas of the world .
This is often the argument used against it .
It is certainly true but a first step in that direction is absolutely necessary in order to clamp down on financial speculation which is sweeping the planet , whereas new resources are urgently needed for investments to help people , particularly in developing countries .
We must be aware , and you know this , that USD 1 500 billion pass through the stock exchange every day and half of these transactions are made on the European stock markets .
There is no doubt that if the European Union decided to take this step , the impact would be considerable .
Do you not think , therefore , that the Commission could at least carry out a feasibility study ?
I am disappointed with the answer given by the Council , because Mrs Hjelm-Wallen , the Swedish Deputy Prime Minister , said publicly in Stockholm on 23 March 2001 that she was in favour of a Tobin tax , in spite of the usual objections .
I believe that the reasons given by Mrs Boudjenah are very well-founded .
How can we refuse to look into a tax which could be very low and which would thus not affect goods trade and investments , since it would represent 0.1 % , but which , on the other hand , would enable resources of an estimated USD 50 to 250 billion to be generated , which would considerably assist developing countries to deal with their problems .
You are aware that at the Conference on LDCs which was held recently at the European Parliament in Brussels , it was shown that 43 % of people in these countries do not have access to drinking water , 50 % of the population is illiterate , one child in six will not live beyond five years old , and that since 1990 , the debt of the LDCs has risen from USD 121 billion to USD 150 billion , despite the Cologne initiative .
I believe , therefore , that the Council should investigate the possibility of introducing this tax , particularly in preparation for the United Nations ' Conference on development funding which will be held in Mexico in March 2002 .
This morning I spoke to Swedish Deputy Prime Minister Mrs Hjelm-Wallén , who was referred to in the question .
She is highly honoured to have become a weapon in the debate on the Tobin Tax , but she has asked me to say that the description by the honourable Member of her speech of 23 March was not complete .
She said exactly what I believe the Council has said on previous occasions , i.e. that it is easy to share many of the fundamental values behind the proposed Tobin Tax , but it is also necessary to see the many practical difficulties involved in implementing this proposal .
I believe that the feasibility studies requested have already been carried out by a number of independent institutions .
Therefore , I am convinced that it will be possible to continue discussing this issue in an objective way .
I refer you to the reply I gave earlier with regard to the formalities within the European Union .
Mr President , I am as disappointed as my colleagues at the response .
It was always possible for the Swedish Presidency itself to put the item on the agenda .
It seems to me to be another example of politicians being out of touch with ordinary people , who are well aware of the enormous support for such a tax .
Although perhaps unfeasible , it enjoys enormous support , and I find the resistance of the Council and the Commission to discussion of this tax staggering .
If it could be implemented it would end the evils of global speculation that destroy so many jobs , communities and families , while promoting a good in the form of large amounts of aid and assistance to the Third World .
Perhaps the President-in-Office could respond to my concern and tell me why the Council is so afraid of commissioning a study itself or of encouraging the Commission to do so ?
At least we would have an answer if we could say that we had an independent study and it will not work .
I suspect that would not come up with such a result but , nevertheless , can I ask you whether you will look into the possibility of commissioning a study or encouraging the Commission itself to study the Tobin-type taxes , so as to see whether they are feasible and under what conditions they could work ?
I think I have probably already answered this question , but I am happy to repeat my reply .
As far as the Council is aware , there are already a number of independent studies of various aspects of the Tobin Tax .
Therefore , there does not seem to be any need for further studies .
As I said , there has been no proposal in the Council to take up this issue .
The Presidency does not intend to take it up and , as I understand it , there is no proposal expected from the Commission either .
Mr President , has the Council considered other means of achieving the same goals ?
We are probably in agreement on these goals .
They are essential and necessary - they stabilise the global economy and the economies of individual states and dominate and control the transfer of wealth from the north to the south .
In other words , if the Tobin tax is not the way forward , can you tell us what else has been done ?
I would remind the honourable Member that in the middle of May this year - I believe it was 14-19 May - a conference was held in Brussels , at which the situation of the least developed countries was specifically discussed .
The European Union and the Council played a leading role in this .
At the conference a number of different initiatives were discussed which will help ensure that the goals described by the honourable Member are achieved .
I suggest that you look at the discussions which took place during this conference .
This will provide you with a sample of proposals for measures which will hopefully , and possibly more quickly , lead to the highly deserving goals which are supposed to be the purpose of the Tobin Tax .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I am also extremely disappointed by this answer .
What you are saying is that there is no room for innovation in financial matters , in spite of the volatility of the markets , in spite of the bad reaction to the crises which have hit us recently , including the crisis in Asia .
How can we meet our commitments with regard to sustainable development which you encourage , as President-in-Office of the Council , when we know what it already costs the European Union ?
What is it going to cost and how is sustainable development going to be funded in developing countries ?
How are renewable energy sources going to be funded , how are we going to finance access to drinking water for the whole world , and lastly , how are we going to finance the elimination of dangerous waste ?
How are we going to take action , because it appears that merely raising the issue of managing various flows of money seems , in your view , to be impossible .
In September 2002 , a very important conference will be taking place in Johannesburg in South Africa , the World Conference on Sustainable Development .
Participants will be discussing the issues brought up by the honourable Member , hopefully in an in-depth and constructive manner .
At the European Council in Gothenburg at the end of this week , the Swedish Presidency will point out the need to discuss these issues within the European Union in order to develop a concrete basis allowing powerful action by the European Union on these vital issues .
I am convinced that there will be a number of opportunities , including during the run-up to the conference I mentioned , to show the European Union ' s will to contribute to sustainable development in these areas .
As the authors are not present , Questions Nos 13 and 14 lapse .
Question No 15 by ( H-0479 / 01 ) :
Subject : Human rights and democratic freedoms of women in Turkey In view of the serious delay in amending the Turkish Civil Code and removing institutionalised discrimination against women , the high rate of unemployment , illiteracy and domestic violence , and in the light of the undemocratic treatment of Mrs Sema Piskinsut , a member of parliament , and her son on 29 April 2001 during the congress held by Mr Bulent Ecevit 's party , when she was pressured to withdraw as a candidate for the chairmanship of the party and was subsequently removed from her post as chair of the Parliamentary Human Rights Commission , what steps will the Council take , in the context of the pre-accession process , to compel Turkey to comply with the European acquis and respect the human rights and democratic freedoms of women ?
The Council is aware of the problems which the honourable Member brought up and notes that , in its status report of 8 November 2000 , the Commission set out a number of equal opportunities issues which Turkey needs to address .
As the Council has already confirmed on several occasions before this meeting , human rights , including the rights of women , are an important part of the EU Accession Partnership with Turkey , which sets out the prioritised areas on which preparations for accession must be concentrated , bearing in mind the political and economic criteria for accession and the responsibilities of a Member State .
Among the medium-term priorities , the EU has particularly focused on the wording in the agreement stating that Turkey must " remove remaining forms of discrimination against women and all forms of discrimination on the grounds of sex , racial or ethnic origin , religion or belief , disability , age or sexual orientation " .
I thank the Council for its reply .
Of course , I have no doubt that you are aware of the situation as regards women 's rights in Turkey and that there is a problem with human rights in general , but I would have expected the Council to give a more specific response to the problems faced by women in Turkey today , especially in the form of institutionalised discrimination , i.e. legal discrimination against women .
It is a fact that no progress is being made in reforming the civil code and we know that there were numerous incidents in the committee which tried to discuss this reform .
I should also like to ask the Council how it intends to react to the fact that Turkey is being obstructive and refusing to enshrine equal opportunities in its constitution .
Women in Turkey expect the European Union to take more effective action to abolish discrimination and the inequalities which currently exist in Turkey .
The Council does not accept the type of phenomenon which you mention .
As I said in my opening reply , taking up and pointing out precisely the type of absurdity which you have explained remains a constant element of our political dialogue with Turkey .
We have a meeting with the Association Council for Turkey on 26 June . I am convinced that issues of the kind you mention will once again be brought up on that occasion .
Question No 16 by ( H-0481 / 01 ) :
Subject : Support for the women of Afghanistan Is the Council prepared to encourage urgent action to help improve the inhuman conditions being endured by over 11 million women in Afghanistan ?
The Council fully shares the honourable Member ' s concern over the catastrophic humanitarian situation for large sections of the Afghan population , particularly the situation for women .
The European Union , the Commission , through ECHO and EuropeAid , and the Member States will continue to provide urgent humanitarian aid for the population of Afghanistan and for Afghan refugees abroad , where the difficult circumstances in the area allow .
However , the Taliban position on women and the many obstacles which the Taliban régime has created for the non-governmental organisations which operate in the country make this task extremely difficult .
This is particularly true of operations aimed at improving the education and health of Afghan women .
Despite the difficulties , a few humanitarian organisations are able to support and run schools for girls .
Despite the continuing efforts of the EU and the rest of the international community , the terrible reality in Afghanistan unfortunately shows that the Taliban regime has remained impervious to argument and pressure from abroad .
The conflicts between Taliban troops and the Northern Alliance continue , despite the long-standing military deadlock .
In addition , the Taliban continue to reject the mediation efforts of the UN and others .
There is a pressing need to improve the situation with regard to humanitarian concerns and human rights , but under the conditions which I have described the outlook for improvement is unfortunately not particularly good .
The Council hopes that the sanctions based on Security Council Resolution UNSCR 1333 , and which the Council has implemented through the equivalent Common Position and EC Regulation , will help to reduce external involvement and promote a negotiated settlement of the Afghan conflict .
I would also refer you to the answers to questions on Afghanistan which I have given in previous Question Times in this house .
Thank you very much for your reply .
I would like to know whether , from your experience in the Presidency of the Council , you think there may be any possibility of creating an international peace committee made up of the parties currently involved in the conflict in Afghanistan .
You have replied by giving the facts , by quoting policies on cooperation and the monitoring of human rights .
I would like you to tell Parliament about the political measures , not so much of the United Nations , but of the European Union .
Mr President-in-Office of the Council , what could be done ?
What realistic political measure could the European Union take in order to make the tiniest contribution to improving the current conflict in Afghanistan ?
Do you think the Council may be in favour of at least promoting an international peace committee made up of the parties involved ?
The Council has not had the opportunity for concrete discussions on a proposed international peace commission . I cannot therefore answer your question on the Council ' s behalf at this time .
However , let me stress that I believe there is a need for innovative ideas to break the deadlock in the conflict which I have tried to describe in my answer .
As I said , the Council has not adopted a stance on whether an international peace commission could be such a solution , but I promise to put forward the idea to the Council for further discussion .
I would like to emphasise that there has so far been widespread agreement in the Council that the most effective way for the EU to help improve the situation in Afghanistan is to fully back the efforts of the UN .
The EU ' s approach must be to contribute to international coordination .
In many cases , the EU can and should act unilaterally , but in a situation such as that in Afghanistan coordination is required with others who are like-minded , in which case the UN is the best forum .
Therefore , I believe that we must focus our initiatives on this particular approach .
Question No 17 by ( H-0482 / 01 ) :
Subject : Italian election and the EU as a Union of common values Following the general election in Italy on 13 May 2001 , one of the EU 's largest Member States now has a government which includes representatives of parties such as the Alleanza Nazionale , heir of Italian fascism , and the separatist and anti-immigrant Lega Nord .
These parties have previously been in government in Italy but not since the entry into force of the Amsterdam Treaty .
Last year , 14 governments in the EU imposed bilateral political boycotts on Austria after the anti-immigrant FPÖ entered the new government .
Those measures were justified on the basis of Articles 6 and 7 of the Amsterdam Treaty concerning the Union 's common and fundamental values .
In September , the sanctions were lifted after a group of wise men had carried out a study of Austria 's conduct .
In what way does the Council consider that the Italian situation differs from the Austrian and what conclusions should be drawn in terms of precedent with regard to the application of Articles 6 and 7 of the Amsterdam Treaty ?
My reply will be quite short .
The Council has neither discussed nor adopted a stance on the issues brought up by Mr Sacrédeus and therefore cannot answer the question .
I would like to thank Mr Danielsson for his reply , which was , strictly speaking , legally and politically correct .
However , I believe we must realise that , despite Parliament being sparsely populated , much of the general public across Europe is asking these questions following the election results in Italy .
According to the Treaty of Amsterdam , the EU is a union of common values , as set out in Articles 6 and 7 .
Even if the Swedish Presidency does not take up the issue of the formation of the new government in Italy and the conclusions drawn from previous action against Austria , I still believe that there will be various public demands which will force scrutiny of what has happened in Italy and the parties and values of the country .
Let me say the following : Is it not the case that what has happened in Italy is due to it being a large country and that in Austria to it being a small country ?
I would just like to clarify what Mr Sacrédeus no doubt already knows .
It was not the Council which took part in deciding on measures against Austria , but a decision taken by the 14 Heads of State and Government on an ad hoc basis .
This decision only applied to bilateral exchanges - EU cooperation was not affected .
Let me point out that the Treaty of Nice - which we all know has yet to be ratified - contains proposed new legislation in Article 7 intended to be applied in situations of the kind which we had in Austria .
If anyone wishes to protest against a situation such as that described by Mr Sacrédeus , I would suggest that they use the mechanisms outlined in Article 7 .
The Treaty has not yet been ratified , but the option possibly still exists of citing this article if anyone wishes to bring the issue up .
The Presidency has not yet received any such request .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , I should first like to thank you for clarifying that the sanctions against Austria were not imposed by the Council or any other European institution .
I believe that this is very important because of course the decision of the Heads of State and Government had no legal base and was made without hearing the aggrieved party .
It was therefore an inappropriate course of action , the like of which has actually never occurred before in the European Union .
That is why I would be interested to know whether you , in your capacity as President-in-Office of the Council , believe that this decision against Austria was actually also the reason for the no vote in Ireland last week .
The Council has not discussed the hypothetical question brought up by the honourable Member at all .
Therefore , I cannot answer the question on behalf of the Council .
As the author is not present , Question No 18 lapses .
We hope that the Council ' s work ahead of the introduction of the euro bears witness to its desire to effectively protect euro notes and coins against counterfeiting .
I would like to remind everyone that Council Regulation ( EC ) No 974 / 98 states that the euro must be put into circulation from 1 January 2002 and that the participating Member States are responsible for ensuring that suitable sanctions are in place for counterfeiting euro notes and coins .
On 29 May 2000 , the Council adopted a framework Decision on using penal and other sanctions to increase protection against counterfeiting in connection with the introduction of the euro .
In order to add to and strengthen this , particularly with regard to taking action against euro counterfeiting through close cooperation between the authorities of Member States , the European Central Bank , the national central banks , Europol and in the future also Eurojust , the French government tabled , on 22 December 2000 , a draft Decision on the protection of the euro against counterfeiting .
As the honourable Member knows , Parliament gave its opinion on the draft on 3 May 2001 .
The draft , which is in the process of being approved , is linked to the draft Council Regulation on the protection of the euro against counterfeiting and the draft Council Regulation extending the effects of the latter regulation .
Parliament also gave its opinion on all these regulations on 3 May 2001 .
At the meeting of 29 May 2001 , the Council agreed to divide the draft decision tabled last year into one draft for a Council decision and one draft for a framework decision .
The European Parliament will be urged to give its opinion on both these drafts .
At the same time , the Council agreed on conclusions regarding Europol ' s role in protecting the euro , partly by providing Member States with the necessary aid to be able to carry out their work on preventing and combating euro counterfeiting .
On the subject of money laundering , the Council has , in previous answers to Parliament , clearly set out its view on the increased risk of money laundering on the introduction of the common currency and on the measures which the Council has adopted to reduce this risk .
These measures , along with the increased vigilance of the national authorities and financial institutions , are crucial to reducing the risk of money laundering on the introduction of the euro .
Mr President , we have a long catalogue of action by the Council and the Commission to deal with the problem of counterfeiting of the euro .
According to a report in the Financial Times on 22 May , Europol apparently thinks that these measures are still inadequate .
One of the particular concerns is the very high value of the 500-euro note , which is in danger of making the euro the currency of choice for counterfeiters and money launderers , because it is substantially higher in value than any other note in regular circulation in the United States , Japan or the United Kingdom .
Has the Council not considered the possibility of delaying the issuing of the 500-euro note because , with the introduction of the euro , there will be a particularly dangerous window of opportunity for counterfeiters potentially to have a field day , as millions of people around the world will never have seen these notes before .
Substantial counterfeiting will engender the severe risk of global damage to the whole credibility of , and confidence in , the euro .
The Council has had no reason to discuss possibly delaying or postponing issuing EUR 500 notes .
The Council believes that all possible measures have been taken .
I have counted the numerous different decisions taken by the Council .
I also stress that it is naturally also up to the relevant national authorities to take appropriate action against counterfeiting .
There has , then , been no concrete discussion of postponing the issue of EUR 500 notes .
As the author is not present , Question No 20 lapses .
Question No 21 by ( H-0490 / 01 ) :

Subject : Follow-up to second Interinstitutional Conference on Drugs Policy in Europe On 28-29 February 2000 the second Interinstitutional Conference on Drugs Policy in Europe was held .
Does the Council consider that it can now respond positively to the criticism made at the conference by the Europol expert , who said that cooperation was not yet effective as a result of a series of political , legislative and judicial problems , and what are the Council ' s views now on the emphasis placed on the need for improved cooperation between competent national authorities and the chemical industry to ensure regular and structured supply of information on suspicious transactions in precursor chemicals and , finally , is the Council satisfied with the level of cooperation with third countries in tackling the trade in illegal drugs ?

The EU action plan for drugs for the years 2000-2004 has been drawn up on the basis of debates at the Second Interinstitutional Conference on Drugs Policy in Europe which was held in Brussels in February 2000 and the EU Drugs Strategy which the European Council supported at its Summit in Helsinki in December 1999 .
This action plan was also supported by the European Council at its Summit in Feira in Portugal in June 2000 .
In this action plan , which is now being implemented , the Commission is urged to work with Member States to draw up a procedure for voluntary monitoring of non-scheduled chemical precursors of synthetic drugs in partnership with the chemicals industry .
The Commission is also urged to regularly report to the Council on the control of diverting illicit chemical precursors , measures which have been implemented in the previous year and measures which are proposed for the coming year .
On the basis of the Commission ' s proposals , on 5 June 2001 the Council adopted a regulation amending the previous regulation laying down measures to be taken to discourage the diversion of certain substances to the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances , to extend the definition of scheduled substances to natural products which contain such substances , extend the cooperation between Member State authorities and the chemicals industry to also cover non-scheduled substances and to give the Commission responsibility for drawing up guidelines to aid the chemical industry in achieving the aim of the aforementioned cooperation .
These guidelines are to contain a regularly updated list of non-scheduled substances commonly used in the illicit manufacture of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances , so that the industry will be able to monitor trade in such substances on a voluntary basis .
The EU is currently developing its activities in partnership chiefly with important countries of origin and transit countries in order to combat the illicit drug trade .
With regard to Latin America and the West Indies , the third top-level meeting within the framework of the cooperation and coordination mechanism has just started in Cochabamba in Bolivia .
An action plan for the EU / Central Asia will be approved in the next few weeks .
The fight against drugs has an important place in the partnership with the US within the framework of the Transatlantic Dialogue and with Russian within the framework of the Partnership and Cooperation Agreement .
Within the preparations for the accession of candidate countries , the section of the Phare Programme addressing drugs is an important element of the fight against the drug trade .
In addition , Europol has opened negotiations with 23 countries on entering into cooperation agreements .
Most cooperation systems are concentrating on measures against illicit trade in drugs , seaways , control of synthetic drugs and increased police and customs cooperation .
Mr President , I wish to put on record my thanks to the Minister for his willingness to engage with Parliament every Question Time and for his part-answer to my question .
As with all of these questions , the real substance is hidden elsewhere within the question .
In particular , I would like his views on the reflections of the Europol expert who said that there was no effective cooperation or coordination because of a series of political , legislative and judicial problems .
I thank him for his response with regard to the chemical industry and also to the agreements established in Central America , the Caribbean and Latin America and the forthcoming agreement with Asia .
But internally , within the borders of the European Union , there are continuing difficulties with regard to cooperation and coordination .
I would like a response on that .


I would like to take the questions on behalf of Mr Andrews , Mr Hyland and Mr Fitzsimons , who are at an ongoing Constitutional Affairs Committee meeting .
Mr Crowley , unfortunately , under the terms of the Rules of Procedure , I cannot allow you to take over the questions of Members who are not present .
It is difficult to give a clear answer to the more precise question from Mr Crowley .
However , in my opening reply I tried to point out that , since the conference at which the expert to whom you refer expressed such criticism , the EU and the Council have tried in various ways to implement measures intended to lead to more effective cooperation in this area .
I have also tried to describe the ways in which this is happening .
I am not in a position to make any clear statement on cause and effect .
However , I believe that the criticism from Europol ' s expert to which you referred , and many other critical comments , have led to us having more effective cooperation in this area within the EU .
But I believe we all agree that a number of steps must be taken in the policy area and concerning legislation and judicial cooperation .
There is much still to do , but I believe the EU can state that important steps have been taken in recent years towards more effective cooperation in the fight against drugs .
One final reflection from the Swedish Presidency is that there is much still to be done in the areas of judicial and home affairs cooperation .
At the European Council in Gothenburg on Friday and Saturday we will be proposing that the European Council agree to press to increase the tempo regarding cooperation in the areas of justice and home affairs .
This applies not least to drugs cooperation , as progress needs to be faster on this matter .
We hope that much of the groundwork carried out by the Swedish Presidency in this area will lead to concrete decisions during the Belgian Presidency in the areas of judicial and home affairs cooperation .
I would like to ask a follow-up question regarding what the President-in-Office said about judicial cooperation .
Belgium will be taking over the presidency after Sweden .
Belgium is about to introduce legislation on drugs similar to that of the Netherlands .
My question then is this : What real conditions are there for implementing cooperation against drugs and for combating their use and trade , bearing in mind that the Netherlands has , from a Swedish point of view , a highly relaxed and easy-going liberal view of drug misuse , which means that people from across Europe are drawn to the Netherlands ?
This is a policy which Belgium is now about to adopt .
Are there any real conditions for achieving results , when two countries set themselves apart in this way ?
As President-in-Office , I neither can or should judge individual Member States ' policy in this area .
Let me simply agree with what Mr Sacrédeus said regarding the difficulties of achieving effective cooperation in this area and also the desirability of making some progress .
Among the 15 Member States we have various legal traditions in this area .
During our Presidency we have , for example in an informal meeting between justice ministers and interior ministers , tried to contribute to a process in which we converge in our views in this area .
I can , with a certain amount of resignation , state that there is much still to be done .
I am sure that our Belgian friends will be perfectly able to take the discussion forwards .
I have a feeling that a number of presidencies after Belgium will also have to deal with the issue .
However , I believe that it is vital for us to achieve major successes in the areas of justice and home affairs .
As we have reached the end of the time allotted to Council ' s ' Question Time ' , Questions Nos 22 to 31 shall be replied to in writing .
Before suspending our sitting until 9 p.m. , I must express , on behalf of the Presidency , our enormous appreciation and respect for the work undertaken here during the Swedish Presidency by the President-in-Office of the Council , Lars Danielsson , and for the pleasant , straightforward , active and objective way in which he managed to interpret the ups and downs of this Question Time and others in his dialogue with the European Parliament .
We offer him our most sincere best wishes , both on a personal level and for the Gothenburg summit .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.35 p.m. and resumed at 9 p.m. )

Protection of Community forests
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0179 / 2001 ) , by Mrs Redondo Jiménez , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy ,
1. on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 3528 / 86 on the protection of the Community ' s forests against atmospheric pollution [ 14644 / 1 / 2000 REV 1 - C5 ­ 0072 / 2001 - 1999 / 0159 ( COD ) ]

2. on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Regulation ( EEC ) No 2158 / 92 on protection of the Community ' s forests against fire [ 14645 / 1 / 2000 REV 1 - C5 ­ 0073 / 2001 - 1999 / 0160 ( COD ) ]
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are now dealing with the second reading of Regulation ( EEC ) No 2158 / 92 on the protection of forests against fire and Regulation ( EEC ) No 3582 / 86 on the protection of forests against atmospheric pollution .

This latter Regulation , which established a framework for the observation , assessment and monitoring of damage to European forests , provided for a network of observation points , carrying out a periodic inventory of damage and publishing an annual report , as well as an additional network for the monitoring and control of the pilot demonstration projects .
The general tendency we have seen is an increase in the deterioration of non-coniferous species such as oak and beech and intense defoliation owing to the seriousness of atmospheric pollution , essentially in Central Europe , which also increases the acidity of the soil .
Atmospheric deposits cause serious concentrations of nitrates in the soil and increase the risk of drinking water pollution , thereby threatening the role played by forest soils in the filtration of water resources .
The budget for this Regulation in the Commission ' s proposal is reduced from EUR 40 million for the first five-year period to EUR 34 million for the second five-year period , from 1997 to 2001 .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy is once again proposing an increase in the budgetary contribution to EUR 44 million , in line with the increase in forested area and the cost of living .
There is no doubt about the usefulness of the programme and the monitoring networks , and to strengthen them would mean a huge increase in the service which the forests offer to European society as a whole .

With regard to Regulation ( EEC ) No 2158 on the protection of forests against fire , an action framework was established to reduce the number of fires and the surface area affected by them , providing for the co-funding of fundamentally preventive actions . In particular , these include the creation of protection infrastructures , such as firebreaks , forest tracks , water points , etc . , as well as an improvement in systems for monitoring and identifying the causes of fires .
Article 10 of this Regulation provides for a contribution of EUR 70 million for the period 1992-1995 , whereas the proposal presented for 1997-2001 considers that EUR 50 million is sufficient .
In other words , EUR 10 million per year .
As well as contradicting the Council ' s recommendations to the Commission in points 5 and 6 of the forestry strategy for the European Union on the possibility of improving Community measures for forest protection , this reduction goes against common sense , given that since 1995 , the date of the last enlargement , the forested area has increased from 21 % to 36 % of the total Community area , and I fail to see the balance in having more forest to protect and less money to protect it .
The amendments therefore propose increasing the budget to EUR 77 million , which I believe to be fully justifiable , and which we must not give up on under any circumstances , since at stake is the protection of the landscape , of nature , of biodiversity , of traditional cultures and multifunctional activities and , at the end of the day , of what we see when we close our eyes and think of forests .
In Europe , 60 million hectares are stated to be at risk of fire .
The Commission ' s proposal suggests EUR 0.16 per hectare .
Parliament is requesting EUR 0.23 per hectare .
The difference is EUR 0.07 per hectare .
Ladies and gentlemen , we are talking about peanuts in relation to the protection of our forests , and we are being refused even this amount .
There is a special mention in the report , which I do not want to leave out , of the Mediterranean forests which are much more seriously affected by fire , since they are located in hot areas , with long periods of drought , and are also seriously affected by desertification .
We must pay special attention to this issue in order to adequately weigh up the different actions relating to the forests : prevention , improvement , conservation and the restoration of burnt areas and forestation .
I therefore ask the Commission to declare its acceptance of these arguments in the coming proposals so that the Members of this Parliament can accept this report at this second reading .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Socialist Group is going to vote in favour and I agree with everything Mrs Redondo has said .
However , I would like to say that I consider it a failure that the financial contribution of the Regulation on the protection of Community forests against fire is being reduced from EUR 70 million to EUR 49.4 million , and that in the case of the Regulation on atmospheric pollution it is being reduced from EUR 40 million to 35.4 million .
This is a significant reduction and it is little compensation that our amendment referring to the Mediterranean forest has been accepted , given its importance in the southern countries and , in particular , in the regions affected by desertification .
If there is no genuine political will to increase , rather than reduce , the budgetary contribution , then these are mere words .
Experts from France , Italy , Greece , Spain , Morocco and Tunisia last week spent a day at the University of Valencia , and in their conclusions they highlighted that 40 % - almost half - the territory of the Mediterranean area is under threat of desertification , which , furthermore , may be aggravated by fires , erosion , pests and climate change ; that the average amount of burnt land increases each year by three thousand hectares , and that in order to combat this problem they will submit - they said , the poor dreamers - these conclusions to the FAO and the European Union , since , they said , prevention policies are needed .
That is to say , investment .
Atmospheric pollution , together with other problems , also needs to be solved through investment .
In this respect we have the problem of the Kyoto Summit .
I hope , at least , that you accept Mrs Redondo ' s proposal and that in future regulations you rectify this bad policy of reducing something which is initially considered correct politically , but which is then not adequately invested in .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , negotiations and discussions on these proposals for draft regulations on the protection of the Community 's forests against atmospheric pollution and fire have been ongoing within our institutions for almost two years .
The original purpose of these proposals was simply to change the legal basis of the existing regulations in this sector following a ruling of the European Court of Justice .
In addition , both measures expire at the end of this year .
The Commission supports the Council 's common position of 26 February , which for the most part is in fact in line with your own amended proposals on this matter .
I therefore hope that Parliament will be able to accept the rapporteur 's recommendation - and I should like to take this opportunity to thank her very much for her work - and also vote in favour of this common position .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Simplifying conditions for invoicing in respect of VAT
The next item is the report ( A5-0149 / 2001 ) by Mrs Torres Marques , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 77 / 388 / EEC with a view to simplifying , modernising and harmonising the conditions laid down for invoicing in respect of value added tax [ COM ( 2000 ) 650 - C5-0008 / 2001 - 2000 / 0289 ( CNS ) ]
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , since it has not been possible since 1992 to achieve greater harmonisation of value added tax , the Commission quite rightly decided to go for a different solution , which is to harmonise and simplify VAT administrative practices , as a result of the work carried out by the SLIM ( Simpler Legislation for the Internal Market ) Group .
The difficulty of this proposal is finding a situation of optimal balance which makes the work of companies easier , particularly SMEs , although the directive is aimed at all business in the European Union , and yet does not lead to a loss of income or make it more difficult for tax administrations to carry out audits .
We would do well to bear in mind that income from VAT is not only a very important source of income for national budgets , it is also one of the own resources for funding the European Union budget .
I therefore propose that we basically approve the Commission ' s proposal , as long as it meets three important political objectives .
First of all , the proposed harmonisation of compulsory statements in invoices would entail a considerable lightening of the administrative burden for traders operating across the European Union .
Currently , traders are faced with fifteen different sets of regulations and , in total , with twenty-five different compulsory statements .
We must , therefore , welcome the proposal to replace this patchwork of rules with a single list of compulsory statements , which will mean , in practice , that a trader would have to comply with only one set of rules for all invoices issued to customers in the EU .
Secondly , the introduction of a common framework for electronic invoicing will further lighten the administrative burden for companies , while at the same time making VAT audits more efficient .
In addition , electronic invoicing will result in savings for companies as the cost of sending and handling an electronic invoice is far lower than a paper invoice .
Thirdly , the introduction of a common set of rules for E-invoicing will also further the development of electronic commerce in Europe , not least as regards services provided by electronic means .
I therefore believe that the amendments we tabled in committee , my colleagues and I , have improved the draft directive .
Nevertheless , there are two aspects resulting from the vote taken in committee , with which I do not agree .
One aspect concerns an amendment tabled by my colleague , José Manuel García-Margallo y Marfil on the numbering of invoices .
The Commission is proposing a single number and I propose that this number should be sequential , in one or more series . In other words , we can adopt different series , according to the country or type of product , but always on a sequential basis .
I feel that this must have been Mr García-Margallo y Marfil ' s intention , but the version that has been adopted says exactly the opposite .
The other aspect concerns electronic signatures .
I agree with the Commission ' s proposal that the authenticity of the origin and integrity of the contents of invoices must be guaranteed by means of an advanced electronic signature within the meaning of the European Parliament and Council directive on a Community legal framework for electronic signatures .
The Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs voted against this proposal , or rather , tabled an amendment to remove this proposal .
I think that we should reintroduce this proposal , or in other words , that we should keep the Commission ' s wording .
Why do I say this ?
While it is true that electronic signatures come at a cost , this is relatively insignificant compared to the potential savings .
The level of security chosen by the Commission can currently be bought on the Belgian market for around EUR 15 per year .
This cost is expected to fall in the near future , in particular once the European Directive enters into force .
Parliament and the Council have adopted a directive to ensure that use is made of this simplified electronic signature .
We now have the opportunity to use this directive and to provide guarantees for tax administrations .
I think that this principle , proposed by the Commission , should be maintained .
What I mean is that this is a good proposal and that Parliament ' s amendments are all - with the exception of these two examples - a step in the right direction . This proposal will make the life of businesses and tax administrations easier through this project .
Madam President , I have little to add to what Mrs Torres Marques has said .
I would highlight that the Commission ' s proposal seems to me to be a good one .
My good friend Mrs Torres Marques has stressed this effectively .
I believe that it fulfils four of the fundamental objectives relating to simplifying administrative obligations .
As she has said , the harmonisation of the requirements for information to appear on the invoice will mean that traders operating within the single market will be subject to a single legislation , while until now they have had to know , comply with and apply fifteen different legislations .
Secondly - and the rapporteur has also highlighted this - this simplification will also mean significant savings for companies .
It is true - I agree with the rapporteur and the Commission in this respect - that the issuing of a traditional invoice is three times as expensive as the issuing of an electronic invoice .
This innovation is therefore welcome .
Thirdly , I also agree that this proposal will help to develop , strengthen and promote the electronic provision of services , which is one of the great objectives which the European Union established at Lisbon and which will be discussed tomorrow in Gothenburg .
Fourthly , I believe that this proposal , while achieving these objectives from the point of view of the simplification of formal obligations , savings in the financial costs to companies and the strengthening of electronic services , in no way jeopardises the administrative control necessary for the application of the tax .
I will not talk about some of the amendments which Mrs Torres Marques has mentioned , such as the electronic digital signature , because the author of the amendment is Mrs Kauppi , who will explain it much better than me .
However , I would like to say that the amendment which we are presenting in relation to the sequence has not in my view been properly understood by the rapporteur .
The Commission proposed that the invoice should have a single number .
What we are saying is that it should not necessarily be sequential , and there could be different sequences or collections by client or by country , in order to favour identification from the point of view of the company and , probably , also from the point of view of the administration .
I also share the rapporteur ' s regret , which this Parliament makes abundantly clear every time valued added tax is discussed : the Commission lacks audacity when it comes to progressing towards a definitive system for value added tax , which would simplify it enormously and which , at a time of so many problems for European integration , would provide clear and firm backing and a clear message that we are prepared to turn value added tax into what its founder , Maurice Lauré , called the first European tax .
This is a modest step , since it only involves administrative obligations , formal obligations , that is , certain secondary aspects of the tax , but it seems to me a step in the right direction .
My Group will support it .
I will end by saying that Mrs Torres Marques ' s report is a good one .
The preliminary report was also a good one .
And that report has been greatly improved since passing through committee thanks to the generosity of the rapporteur , who has accepted a good number of amendments .
The procedure we are now undergoing is a consultation procedure , it is modest , but this committee - given the number of amendments it has presented - has worked very seriously on drafting this report .
I hope the Commission will respond generously to the serious work of the European Parliament ' s committee .
Madam President , not every Council initiative seeking to harmonise tax rules works to the benefit of the public .
There are frequent announcements of good intentions to simplify tax rules .
In actual fact , however , the measures are instead directed at keeping tax competition within the Union in check .
This is particularly true of all measures which seek to harmonise tax rates , for the simple reason that it is highly unlikely that it will be agreed to align with those countries which have lower tax rates .
Usually only the opposite approach is possible .
This means that states with leaner governments and lower rates of tax are actually forced to levy taxes which they do not even need .
This Council proposal to amend Directive 77 / 388 should be seen in a quite different light , because the purpose of the proposed measures is actually to simplify matters for taxpayers throughout Europe .
The amendments seek above all to reduce companies ' administrative costs and thus strengthen competition .
For this reason we can support these amendments which contribute to a genuine simplification of our tax legislation .
Madam President , Commissioner Bolkenstein , the administrative burdens on businesses operating in the EU must be minimised .
The Commission ' s proposal and Mrs Torres Marques ' excellent report promote this trend .
Administrative burdens place particular pressure on small- and medium-sized businesses which , due to their small size , have to put relatively more energy into complying with regulations than large businesses .
Our Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is also already proposing , in its first amendment to the Commission ' s proposal , that the national authorities which have the authority to act must always ensure that complying with this directive will not cause SMEs additional , unnecessary administrative burdens .
Simplifying Community law must always have the consequence of reducing the administrative burden on SMEs .
Bearing this in mind , it is also very important that tomorrow we will be voting on the Committee ' s Amendment No 18 , which I initiated , becoming part of the final opinion of Parliament .
Honourable Members , legislation renewing and modernising requirements governing invoicing must constantly take into account the opportunities offered by growing e-commerce and the new demands this makes .
A recently published Nordic study stated that by 2005 approximately 80 % of company invoices will be transferred electronically .
At the moment this figure is 10 % .
Billing electronically is estimated to halve the cost of invoicing in the Nordic Countries .
So the significance is far from small .
Electronic signatures , referred to in Amendment No 18 , can be one way of ensuring that invoices transferred electronically are genuine and that their content has not been interfered with but it is not the only way .
The experience gained from Member States where electronic invoicing is permitted shows that the lack of electronic signatures has not caused problems for auditors or any other parties requiring this information .
Using advanced electronic signatures must not be compulsory .
It would be a retrograde step for those Member States which have already accepted electronic invoicing for some time without electronic signatures being required .
The question of the security of doing business over the Internet must not be combined with the legal requirements for Value Added Tax .
I also hope that Mrs Torres Marques will further consider her opinion before the voting tomorrow .
Madam President , it gives me great pleasure to discuss the Commission 's proposal on invoicing with Parliament today .
This proposal stems from the SLIM exercise , during which traders themselves identified the current divergent rules on invoicing in Europe as a major obstacle to the smooth running of the internal market and the development of electronic commerce .
It is an important element of the new VAT strategy adopted by the Commission last June focussing , in the short term , on simplifying and modernising the present VAT system .
Two problems have been pinpointed .
Firstly , there are the 15 different sets of rules on VAT invoicing that place an enormous administrative burden on business . Various speakers have already drawn attention to that tonight .
The compulsory set of requirements is indeed different in each Member State .
This means that when a trader makes taxable supplies to several Member States , he has to respect different obligations when drawing up invoices in each of those countries .
The second problem is that the current legal framework for electronic invoicing also differs across Europe .
In most cases it is very restrictive .
Electronic invoicing is sometimes not possible at all .
When it is allowed , it is subject to diverse technical requirements or to prior authorisation from the tax administrations .
It is therefore extremely difficult to use it in cross-border trade . Hence the need to set up a common legal framework , for both paper and electronic invoicing .
That is why the objectives of the present proposal are the following : firstly , to create a common set of 12 obligatory VAT requirements on invoices across the European Union ; secondly , to set up a common legal framework for electronic transmission and storage of invoices .
By creating a single set of rules , such a new framework will enable businesses to save on administrative costs .
Moreover , I should like to stress that this proposal will also enable tax administrations to carry out tax audits more efficiently .
I am pleased to say that this opinion is shared by the European Parliament - as evidenced by the report drawn up by the rapporteur , for which I thank her very much indeed , on of the Commission 's behalf .
The Commission would like , in particular , to welcome the positive contribution of the rapporteur for the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , Mrs Torres Marques , as well as the helpful ideas put forward by Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , in her opinion on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .
Given that the Council is currently considering this proposal , and in view of the Commission 's strong desire to address this issue in a timely manner , I believe that the most appropriate course of action at this stage would be for the Commission not to accept formally the amendments put forward by Parliament , but to endeavour to take them on board as much as possible during the negotiations with the Council .
However , it will not be possible , I am afraid , to take into account some amendments , in particular those relating to the advanced electronic signature , which the rapporteur proposes to make optional rather than mandatory .
I should like to stress that the Commission 's proposal is already a compromise between the most flexible and most restrictive legislation .
But I should also like to stress that the electronic signature is an important tool in securing the authenticity and integrity of what is , after all , a valuable commercial document granting the right to VAT deductions .
I share the argument that there is a need to postpone the date of entry into force , to enable businesses to adapt to the new rules .
But such a date could only be decided once the Council has reached agreement on the content of the proposal .
I personally am confident that such an agreement will be reached rapidly .
The Council has already started to discuss the proposal in detail and it will do its best to come to an agreement before the end of this year , as requested by the Stockholm Summit .
I should now like to make two remarks to Mr García-Margallo y Marfil and Mrs Kauppi .
Mr García-Margallo y Marfil has reproached the Commission for not supporting the strategy which would lead to a single VAT system .
The Commission 's ambition remains that of a single point-of-origin VAT system .
But the complaints and reproaches which Mr García-Margallo y Marfil directs at the Commission should be addressed to the Member States , since it is with them that the problem lies .
Mrs Kauppi made a remark about the costs of electronic signatures , in particular for small and medium-sized enterprises .
I remind her that the costs cannot be a real obstacle , since these signatures are inexpensive .
One can buy the cheapest ones for EUR 20 or EUR 30 .
The savings in administrative costs more than outweigh initial outlay .
In conclusion , Parliament 's support for this proposal is important in order to achieve a good result .
I thank Parliament and the rapporteur very much indeed .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I would not normally do this but I shall now give the floor to a Member who was due to speak , but who was slightly confused as to the timetable .
I shall therefore give the floor to Mrs Laguiller .
Madam President , please accept my apologies for taking the floor after the Commissioner . I am the unwitting victim of information technology , as I had the timetable up on screen and I thought that I was due to speak at around 9.45 a.m.
Thank you for allowing me to speak .
The current situation in the fifteen countries of the European Union is , in truth , absurd . There are 15 regulations and 25 different types of compulsory statements on the invoicing of VAT , but what is unfair is the very existence of VAT , and not the way in which it is invoiced .
Although we shall be voting against this report , it is not in order to oppose harmonisation , but in order to express our opposition to the very existence of value added tax , and , more generally , to any indirect tax on consumption .
It is a particularly unfair tax , because everyone has to pay it , including those who only earn a modest wage , even those who are living on unemployment benefit .
The consumer becomes a tax payer simply by making a purchase , even if it is just a loaf of bread .
What is worse is that VAT is not calculated according to the income of the tax payer .
A billionaire will pay tax at exactly the same rate as an employee earning the lowest income .
In a country such as France , VAT makes up almost three quarters of the government ' s revenue , in other words , twice the amount of tax on salaries .
This means that it is the working people within the population , those on lower incomes and resources who are paying the greater share of taxes .
It is unfair in itself , and all the more so because , with regard to State spending , on the other hand , there is a trend to increase spending to favour large employers and the wealthy , to the detriment of public services .
Whereas taxation should help to reduce the gap between the richest and the poorest , it is actually making it wider .
We are in favour of phasing out all forms of indirect taxation throughout Europe and of replacing it with a consistent increase of tax on company profits , as well as a tax on income , which increases steeply , particularly on high income from capital .
This would also have the added advantage of solving the problem of harmonising invoicing which is of concern to the Council .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Termination of service of Commission officials

Mr President , I would like to thank the Commissioner for the assistance I have received from him and his staff .
I would also like to thank the shadow rapporteurs , especially Mr Harbour , whom I again have had the privilege of working with ; we work well together .
As many Members will realise , this is the second phase in the reform of the Commission , a reform which this whole House has endorsed previously .
If we believe in the reform process , we must endorse this second phase , which concerns the introduction , on a one-off basis , of the early retirement scheme for officials within the Commission .
A proper retirement scheme will apply at a later date , but this particular one is on a one-off basis .
If we believe in enlargement to accommodate the officials from accession countries , we must reduce the number of existing officials and do so within the existing budget .
Also , if we believe in a modern , responsive , technically competent Commission , then we must look to bring in new blood to replace some of those officials who have not adapted or coped with the new technology .
All this adds up to some people taking early retirement and to allowing new people and new blood in .
But it also adds up to some of us within this House having to take decisions , which previously were not palatable .
We have , however , to live in the real world and therefore we must take those decisions .
Turning now to the amendments , that I will be supporting all the amendments except for two submitted by Mr Ferber .
Initially I was reluctant to put my name to some of the amendments , as I was concerned that the inclusion of the other institutions might delay the implementation of the early retirement scheme .
However , my fears have proved unfounded and I am hopeful that the scheme will be implemented in the second half of this year .
It will also allow the other institutions to go ahead with implementing their own scheme .
Turning to the two amendments submitted by Mr Ferber , first of all they have come in rather late in the day .
Secondly , they were never raised or discussed within the committee .
Apart from all that , I see these amendments as being submitted by a mean , narrow-minded individual who wants to put a spanner in the works .
This is the only way I can really describe it .
I cannot accept such a petty attempt to derail this whole process and I hope Parliament cannot accept such a petty attempt to derail the reform process of the Commission .
Therefore I would ask the House to support this report as it stands .
Madam President , I would like to thank Bill Miller for a very comprehensive and thorough piece of work .
It is a pleasure to see our roles reversed , since he shadowed me on the report on the overall strategy for the human resource reforms that this House approved at the end of last year .
Together we have gathered the experience on what are absolutely crucial issues , both for the future of the Commission and , indeed , for the future of the European Union as a whole .
It is good , from the point of view of the Legal Affairs Committee , that we are now getting on with the task of making the crucial reforms to the Staff Regulations that will be needed to implement these reforms .
We hope to carry them out thoroughly and quickly , as Commissioner Kinnock forwards them to us .
I very much echo what Bill Miller said about the importance of this measure as a one-off package .
It does need to be seen in that context .
It is encouraging that the Commission realises that this crucial step towards an entirely new human resource policy , means creating a whole new culture where people are promoted on merit , where we have a linear grading structure , where there is not an artificial ceiling for promotion , where there is much more delegated accountability .
This is part of that transitional phase and it is encouraging that the Commission wants to tackle this seriously .
The question we have asked in our committee , and the Committee on Budgetary Control and the Committee on Budgets have also looked at this , is whether this is the right package .
It is clearly a very generous package , but at the same time it has to be a powerful package because otherwise it will not work .
The worst thing we could possibly do is make an offer which nobody takes up .
That would frustrate what the Commission is trying to do .
In that context I can tell Mr Miller that I am not supporting the two late amendments .
They will not be on the EPP voting list .
We have a consensus on that .
So we believe this is the right package , but I commend the way that Bill Miller has sought to tighten up some aspects , particularly those relating to Commission officials who may take the retirement package and then go on to take up other jobs .
Clearly it is not reasonable that they should effectively be rewarded twice at the European taxpayers ' expense .
I hope the Commission will accept those sensible provisions that Bill Miller has put into the report .
Finally , I wish again to support the amendments that extend the application of this scheme to both the European Parliament and the political groups .
That is a recognition of our dual role .
We must not just hold the Commission to account for the progress of these reforms , but also look at our own management policies within this institution .
It is quite clear that we have to address exactly the same issues .
This is a once-off package that is not setting a precedent for the future reform of pensions policy . You will recall that in my report I attached great importance to the need to reform the standing pensions policy to introduce a permanent early retirement scheme .
But this package is disconnected from that , and quite rightly so .
This is a very important step in the reform of the Commission and I am pleased to give it , on behalf of my group , our full support .
Madam President , having listened to Mr Harbour , it seems to me that we are not going to have much debate tonight , because the Group of the European Peoples ' Party and the Socialist Group basically agree in their support for the Miller report and the proposals now being presented to us by the European Commission .
I believe that Commissioner Kinnock is demonstrating his great parliamentary experience by negotiating this rather complex issue in a very efficient manner and I will simply make an observation on what we might call Mr Harbour ' s obiter dictum .
From the point of view of the Socialist Group , it is essential that the rights of officials be recognised , including acquired rights , as well as the existence of an administrative career path , and that it be recognised that officials of the European institutions are of high quality and have carried out very efficient work .
Therefore , the officials should not be pursued , as it appears these last minute amendments intend to do , but this Community administration should be rapidly transformed without abandoning the essential principles of recognising an independent civil service and recognising an administrative career path .
Of course , we agree with the proposals in the Miller report on the extending the facilities enjoyed by Commission officials to the officials of the other institutions , including the European Parliament , which I believe will take a favourable view of the amendments we are presenting , which , in summary , recognise the good work done by the Commission .

So it only remains for me to congratulate Mr Miller on his report and Mr Kinnock on the skilful , capable and progressive way in which he has dealt with this first administrative reform .
Madam President , the ELDR Group supports the reform set out in the White Paper and which we have been able to discuss with the Commissioner .
We look forward to receiving the concrete proposals from the Committee on Budgets and the other committees .
Like the previous speaker , we accept this proposal as a one-off measure , a necessary measure in order to take the reforms forward .
We also believe that it is cost-neutral .
We are also pleased that the Commission has realised that the other institutions must have similar rights , that this will be included in the scheme and that it will be accepted .
When we compare our institutions , I would like to warn the Commissioner about one point , namely about accepting the promotion system which we have in the European Parliament .
I have heard that the Commission is interested in this , but I have unfortunately received indications that there will be no real assessment of the actual knowledge of various employees as the assessment is a " zero sum game " .
This is said by way of welcoming the continued reform work .
Madam President , I should first like to thank the rapporteur very warmly for his painstaking preparation of the report .
The shadow rapporteurs no doubt also had a hand in this .
Neither are my thanks diminished by the fact that the rapporteur has called 32 Members , of which I am one , a group of narrow-minded individuals .
Nevertheless you will of course allow me first of all to repudiate this description here .
On behalf of a minority in our group , I should like to express a number of reservations which we have on the proposal .
It is proposed , in the extreme case , that an official who has worked in the Commission for ten years and who is 50 years of age be given early retirement with an allowance of 65 % of his salary .
We do not believe that a lucrative , generous early retirement scheme of this kind can be justified to the European taxpayer .
When we have spent the whole day talking about the Irish referendum in the corridors and when we are always talking here about proximity to the people , may I please ask who can actually explain to a pensioner who has paid into a pension scheme for 40 years why a 50-year-old A3-grade official should be given EUR 5 500 to go for walks in the country ?
No one is able to explain to me why the Commission , which has 18 000 posts , is nevertheless not in a position usefully to deploy 600 officials who are obviously no longer productive .
Neither is anyone able to tell me why this should now be an essential component of this Commission reform .
I fear , you see , that there will be crafty , shrewd and smart officials who will succeed in benefiting from this golden handshake .
In the end the good ones will go , the bad ones will stay , EUR 16 million will be spent and everyone will be disgraced !
Madam President , at the beginning of this legislature , we all agreed , and we still agree , that certain sectors of both the Commission and the other European institutions need reform .
Inside the Commission , it has emerged that over 1200 posts needed to achieve fundamental strategic objectives are unfilled .
According to the Commission , part of that deficit can be made up by rationalising and redistributing the existing workforce .
That approach deserves support , but it anticipates that some members of staff are not capable of adapting to the new tasks .
To solve the problem , the need arises to give such staff incentives to choose favourable , mutually agreed early retirement as a unique , one-off package .
This hypothesis rightly recognises the past contribution of the staff involved , and gives them the option of alternative employment elsewhere .
The Union does not suffer economic overload and it is not obligatory to take the package .
To conclude , my verdict is positive .
However , I do not support the Ferber amendments .
Reform is an exceptional event and should be regarded as such .
I would like to express great appreciation of the rapporteur ' s really excellent and influential work , and the same appreciation applies to the proposals from the heads of delegations , which extend that solution to all the institutions of the Union .
Finally , great appreciation is due to all the employees of the Union , those who choose early retirement and those who remain in working life , because it is also thanks to their enthusiastic work that Europe continues to advance briskly towards the future .
I begin by thanking the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , and specifically the rapporteur , Mr Miller , for this very constructive report on the Commission 's proposal for a time and numbers-limited early retirement scheme .
I know that the speedy drafting and consideration of the report owes a great deal to the enthusiasm and hard work of Mr Miller , and indeed of his shadow rapporteur , Mr Harbour .
Whilst expressing gratitude to both of them I would also like to express my thanks to the House for agreeing to bring forward consideration of this report in plenary .
As several Members may know , that assists the Commission in its efforts to sustain progress with the reform and modernisation that Parliament has called for and to do so in good time , so that if everything else goes well it can to implement at least the first part of the scheme by the end of this year .
As the House may recall , in our reform strategy White Paper in March last year we announced our intention to undertake a reallocation of human resources across departments in order , specifically , to concentrate activities more precisely on core policy objectives and to achieve a better balance between the tasks assigned to the Commission and the resources available to it .
We then set up a Commissioners ' group under President Prodi to make a thorough analysis .
That assessment showed that even after the rationalisation efforts carried out in 1999 and 2000 there was a shortfall of 1 254 posts in relation to Commission staff members assigned to priority activities .
In order to make a significant contribution to closing that gap we then specified the ways in which further rationalisation of activities , productivity gains and internal redeployment would enable us to meet two-thirds of those requirements from within the Commission .
In addition to measures which enabled redeployed staff to perform other higher priority activities , we also proposed that explicit termination of service arrangements should be made available so that over a two-year period the Commission could offer reasonable severance conditions to 600 officials whose skills are not easily adaptable to the changed and changing needs and tasks of the institution .
The purpose of the proposed regulation being considered by the House is , therefore , to authorise such a termination of service scheme for 300 Commission officials in the course of this year , and another 300 in the course of next year .
The proposal is based on the same mechanism that has been used in previous termination of service regulations related , for instance , to successive enlargements of the Union or to renewal of responsibilities in the on research directorate-general .
Application for inclusion in the scheme is therefore voluntary , but the new scheme differs from previous ones , particularly on the following major points .
First of all , candidates for early retirement will be selected solely according to the interests of the services .
Secondly , financial conditions are set at a lower level - 65 % of final salary instead of 70 % - than has been customary in all previous termination of service arrangements .
Thirdly , this early retirement proposal has a neutral budgetary impact .
The difference between the cost of the total remuneration of 600 officials before termination of service and the cost of the allowance they will receive afterwards will finance the recruitment of 258 new officials .
The 342 remaining posts will be given back to the budgetary authority .
These elements of the new scheme will help to ensure the achievement of the overall objective of gaining a better match between Commission tasks and resources .
It will also ensure that the ceiling of Heading 5 of the financial perspective is fully respected .
In response to the amendments proposed by Mr Miller , the Commission cannot accept Amendment No 9 , which asks for the expenditure for the early retirement scheme to remain non-compulsory .
We cannot accept that amendment simply because of the statutory reality that allowances for officials who have left the service are legally defined as compulsory expenditure .
Having made this point , I turn to the more positive and more complex position of the Commission on the other proposed amendments tabled by Mr Miller in the report .
I will come to the amendments by Mr Ferber later on .
The Commission can accept Amendments 8 , 10 , 11 , 17 , 18 and 19 and which are aimed at ensuring that the arrangements of the scheme are properly implemented , that the measures under consideration do not preclude the adoption of a new permanent early retirement scheme for all of the institutions .
As Miller said in his speech , these arrangements should be drawn up and adopted at the earliest possible opportunity .
The amendments that I have just listed are also aimed at ensuring that further single measures of this kind should in future be unnecessary and , therefore , precluded .
All of the amendments tabled by the rapporteur are in line with the Commission 's intentions as regards the implementation of the scheme and introduce improvements and refinements to the proposal that we originally submitted .
We therefore welcome them very warmly .
Since the Commission will soon be proposing the introduction of a permanent , flexible retirement scheme into the Staff Regulations , further single measures of this kind are highly unlikely to be necessary in the future .
The House will know that the most important political points in the discussions on this early retirement scheme that have so far taken place in the Council and in Parliament relate to the fact that the proposed scheme only concerns the Commission , which is committed to implementing the scheme in a budgetary neutral way .
In this context , I refer to Amendments Nos 1- 6 , 12 , 13 and 16 , all of which seek to extend the field of application of the proposed regulation and require the participation of all European institutions and of Parliament 's temporary staff in the early retirement scheme .
I understand the interest of Parliament and Council as employing institutions in this matter and , as Members of this House will know , I am not unsympathetic to their objectives .
However , I wish to say most emphatically that , if progress is to be made to everyone 's liking , budgetary neutrality must be observed in all of the institutions that implement a scheme of this kind .
There are three reasons for that .
The first , very obviously , is the clear need for public understanding and acceptance .
That in itself requires that any developments in this area should be budgetary neutral .
Secondly , if the Commission alone guaranteed budgetary neutrality , the adoption of the scheme by the Council would be very unlikely indeed .
Thirdly , heading 5 of the financial perspective provides budgetary means for all institutions .
The margins for the years to come , which the Commission has promised to respect , would be further reduced if budgetary neutrality were not common to all institutions .
Taking these realities into account , it is clear that the success and the acceptance of the whole early retirement scheme may well depend on all institutions ' accepting budgetary neutrality .
In adopting Mr Miller 's report , therefore , this House would need to confirm that its participation in an early retirement scheme will be subject to the same conditions as those applied by the Council and by the Commission .
I am sure that that requirement is well understood and supported across this House .


Finally , before responding to the two amendments tabled by Mr Ferber , I must say that I heard Mr Miller 's comments on Mr Ferber 's amendments and think that , whatever glorious future offers itself to my good friend Mr Miller , I can safely predict that he will not be made head of the diplomatic service .

In response to Mr Ferber 's amendments , the Commission feels that Amendment No 21 would significantly reduce the effective scope of the measure by restricting the number of eligible candidates for early retirement .
Indeed the restriction would be so significant as to actually have an impact on the geographical balance of the scheme .
That would clearly be unacceptable to the Commission and to the great majority of this House .
Amendment No 22 by Mr Ferber would introduce new conditions , notably a 50 % tax so negative and complex as to significantly reduce the effectiveness of the Commission 's proposals .
We cannot , therefore , accept that amendment either , and I hope that , on reflection , the honourable Member , Mr Ferber , whom I know very well and have every reason to respect , will understand and accept the Commission 's view .
I am extremely grateful for the constructive approach taken in this report and , indeed , the improvements made on the original proposal , because it has received close and enthusiastic attention from Members of this House .
I am sure that that constructive attitude will continue to characterise our discussions on reform , since as honourable Members know , I regard the understanding and support of this House for all our reform proposals to be absolutely critical .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Universal service in electronic communications
The next item is the report ( A5-0202 / 2001 ) by Mr Harbour , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Directive on universal service and users ' rights relating to electronic communications networks and services [ COM ( 2000 ) 392 - C5-0429 / 2000 - 2000 / 0183 ( COD ) ]
Madam President , it gives me great pleasure tonight to be able to present my report on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market to the House on universal services and users rights relating to electronic communications .
This is a further element in what is a most crucial package of legislation that is now being considered by Parliament to create a single regulatory framework for electronic communications .
It is so important for the future of the European economy as a whole that we get this package right .
It has been a privilege for me to have been able to work for the first time in my parliamentary career here on a major codecision text like this .
This is a complex text and the procedure for review has also been complex .


I would like particularly to thank the rapporteurs of the three committees who provided me with opinions , Mr Papayannakis , Mr Aparicio Sánchez and particularly Mr Caudron , where we worked together under the Hughes procedure and where the amendments that were passed by the Committee on Industry were received by my committee .
We did not vote on any of them , they were accepted by us in our report .
I would also like to thank the shadow rapporteurs from the various committees I worked with for providing me with so much support .
Indeed , the final text before us has been the result of a lot of work by many people .
I am not proposing to accept any further amendments to the text , even though a number have come in rather late in the day from the Socialist Group .
I believe we have reached a good agreement on the text and I am not proposing to support any additional amendments in the vote tomorrow .
I should like to say a few things about the text itself .
It is a very comprehensive text because it contains four distinct measures .
There are the provisions relating to universal service itself , how it should be delivered , how it should be funded in an open and transparent way that does not distort the market place and a whole series of measures on users ' rights , including some important new measures reflecting the new technology which is coming our way .
It has a number of crucial measures related to market intervention and the ability of Member States to intervene very directly in the market place , and to set retail pricing for example .
Finally , it also has some measures related to digital television , particularly a package of obligations related to " must carry " provisions for public service broadcasts .
I do not have time this evening to go through all of those in detail but I would like to observe that I have specifically asked the Commission in the text that we will receive at second reading to mark out more clearly those four aspects of the text .
At the moment it is quite complex , particularly the market intervention measures which are regarded as transitory measures by the Commission , a view that I share .
They are there for the time in which the market is still being directly regulated , but this whole package envisages a time when the entire market will operate under normal competition aspects .
Those transitory measures should be clearly identified because hopefully we will not need them in a few years ' time .
My approach in considering this text has been to give strong support to the strategy behind the directive .
The Commission has not sought to enhance significantly the scope of the universal service remit and that is absolutely right .
In my work I have sought to clarify the text , to improve it in some aspects , but to be very selective about new provisions .
In the area of users ' rights it has been important to strike the right balance between a text that will be agreed centrally at European Union level and detailed work that should be done in the Member States .
Believe me , colleagues , I have had no shortage of people wanting to complicate this text , wanting to add extra provisions . I believe I have the balance right , particularly in the light of the fact that these provisions will apply to the applicant countries , where the technological base from which they start will be much lower than that envisaged at the moment .
I am confident that the proposals I put before you tonight are balanced and will stand the test of time .
They anticipate technical development .
They will be good for consumers because they sustain and develop competition .
They provide essential rights for consumers but they will allow a sector that is changing very fast to thrive and develop in the future without unnecessary and complex interference .
Madam President , the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport takes a positive view of the Commission ' s draft directive and the sensible report by Mr Harbour , whom I congratulate .
Some of the amendments contained in our opinion have been incorporated into the text , as he has said .
Others , however , have not been accepted , but have been accepted for voting in plenary by Mr Medina Ortega .
They are intended to improve the text from the point of view of electronic communications being considered as a general interest service .
The model of society developed by the Treaties has enshrined the predominance of competition and the market , but the thing that makes us proud of Europe , the thing that makes our social model unique in the world , is the compatibility of these principles with two irrefutable values or circumstances : our high degree of social protection and the strength and breadth of our general interest services .
People operating a communication network or service on the market are not dealing with any old product , but with services which have a high added value from social and cultural points of view .
Their universality and ease of access to them involve principles which affect democracy and human dignity .
The Committee on Culture ' s amendments have several objectives : to further develop the obligation to transmit to electronic communication networks , to impose information and transparency obligations on the companies providing these services , to increase the protection of disabled people , particularly the visually and hearing impaired , as users of these communications and , finally , to separate , from a legislative point of view , infrastructures and content in the audiovisual sector .
I hope that the rapporteur and his group will be generous enough to accept these amendments .
Madam President , we agree with the rapporteur 's description of the problem and thank him for that .
However , I think that we should not be too optimistic when it comes to competition .
Competition fosters - and it is only logical that it should foster - reductions in costs , consumer choice and discrimination depending on the customer 's status .
We all know the ways of the market .
That is why , without wishing to embark on general theories , Madam President , Mr Harbour , I should like to say that the series of amendments which we have proposed is designed mainly to protect consumers not from threats from others , but from competitive conditions per se .
In other words , we want a universal service which is accessible to all and of the same standard for all .
For example , a service which allows everyone to get on to the Internet at the same speed anytime , anywhere , without discriminating between customers depending on where they are .
Without discriminating between customers depending on how they want to pay their subscription .
We have seen it happen .
We have also called for proper consultation with consumer associations when reviewing the conditions under which licences are granted .
We also want terms in contracts to be simple , familiar , comprehensible and comparable and for this to be compulsory so that customers really can change suppliers .
We already have competition .
If a customer is to be able to change supplier , he must know in advance of any changes in price for example , so that he can opt out in time .
He must be able to keep his telephone number , which the Commission is quite right to propose , and he must be able to change company without incurring charges .
Account must also be taken of the need to warn customers about the dangers , for example , of mobile telephones .
Customers ' rights must be clearly set out somewhere and they must be able to read and use them .
All this is not intended merely to make the Commission 's life difficult , nor do we believe that it should be left up to each individual Member State .
We need general principles which specifically protect consumers because that is the way to make better progress here .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by praising the quality , breadth and importance of the European Commission draft directive .
I must say , however , that I regret that this text , which is , after all , an integral part of the Telecom package , has been withdrawn from the competency of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , to the benefit of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , which , in my view , seems to be becoming an extremely bad habit .
Ladies and gentlemen , I believe that , even if they are included in the same directive , universal service and consumer protection are two areas which are , admittedly , related and important , but they are different .
Consumer protection requires guarantees , clarity , simplicity and , above all , therefore , transparency .
The amendments voted in committee are a step in this direction .
Other amendments could have gone further still , if a majority in the committee had wanted this to happen .
Universal service is a much wider concept which has many other more complex goals .
Universal service requires a definition at a given time , but it also requires the means and mechanisms to ensure its development over time .
It of course requires planned funding .
Lastly , I would reiterate that it is independent of the legal nature of the company that provides it .
I welcomed the European Commission ' s text , but I remain convinced of the need for a framework directive for all European universal services .
I would like to finish with a personal comment , by reaffirming that universal service cannot and should not be what could be called the fading leftovers of liberalisation .
It has , for me and for my colleagues , a value and an objective in itself , which is one of the conditions of social cohesion , which provided the basis of our Europe .
It should , therefore , be desired , defined , affirmed and chosen on its own merits .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I should first of all like to thank Mr Harbour on his sterling report , but also Mr Caudron on his excellent contribution on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy .

Madam President , this is a report of extreme significance , for it regulates the rights of citizens in relation to the duties of companies .
Certainly at a time when everything develops so fast , it is of crucial importance to have such a report .
Allow me to make five observations .
First of all , it is essential to have a level playing field .
That is why , of course , Article 13 is of major importance .
It stipulates quite emphatically how alternative funding can be found for universal services if they were to create an additional burden for operators .
I believe that to be of crucial importance , certainly in cases where operators are in dire financial straits , as many currently are .
Secondly , Article 16 is important and , on that score , I am completely dumbfounded at the fact that the Socialist Group should table an amendment to confine the whole issue of number portability to the fixed network .
If there is one thing which has promoted , and has to promote , competition among operators , it is , of course , the possibility of number portability , and I would make an urgent appeal to our fellow MEPs not to adopt that amendment under any circumstances .
That would seem wrong to me .
I wholeheartedly agree that interventions in the market or in the price structure , such as we carried out with regard to international roaming , must form an exception .
But if you , the citizen , have to pay over the odds and are not given any information about prices for international roaming , which allows payment to be made between one country and another , then the only option available is legislation .
And it is precisely because we have threatened legislation that operators are now prepared to drop their prices , and that is , I believe , what this is ultimately all about .
A third fundamental point is caller location information where 112 , our European emergency number , is concerned .
That is important , but I should urge you to mainly use this location information for relevant cases .
The protection of privacy is of crucial importance , and I am pleased , therefore , that that has been provided for in Article 22 .
You may be surprised to find someone from the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy raising the following point , namely that , from the point of view of cultural policy , Article 26 , with its ' must carry ' obligations , is of major importance .
But once again , I am astounded that our Socialist group would like to extend that ' must carry ' obligation to cover commercial broadcasters .
In my view , that is a complete misunderstanding , and I truly hope that they are prepared to retract that amendment , for we must reserve the ' must carry ' obligation for public broadcasters only .
Finally , Madam President , you and I enjoy watching all kinds of programmes , also using set top boxes , and if we then fall victim to , let us say , one large consortium , then it is no longer possible to do that .
Set top boxes must be compatible with each other .
A common interface is required for that purpose .
This is legislated for excellently in Annex 6 .
We must pledge our support for this .
Madam President , the truth , and we have seen proof of it , is that it is often said by conservative politicians that we Socialists are opposed to the process of liberalisation .
Nothing could be further from the truth .
We fully accept a process which contains of good number of progressive perspectives .
One of them is that , when a sector is liberalised , the greater the number of companies amongst which the market is distributed , the more the concentration of economic power is being limited , and this is a progressive objective which these benches fully accept .
We cannot agree with monopolies which offer goods and services of lower quality and at higher prices than if they were offered within a competitive system .
But , while public monopolies are unsatisfactory , private ones are totally unacceptable and unbearable .
We therefore believe that services must be provided within a competitive system , but that that system must be subject to corrections in order to prevent a situation where the only people who have access to the services are those who , as a result of their levels of income or place of residence , are viable for the providers of the service , leaving out those who cannot pay the price for the services however basic they may be , or those who live in areas which are not viable for companies .
It is therefore necessary to impose universal service obligations , but naturally the discussion on the size and conditions of the universal service will have a high ideological content .
The Right insists , and always in defence of companies , that these universal service obligations should be as limited as possible .
The progressives must insist that the greatest number of services must reach all the citizens at accessible prices .
These considerations are reflected in this report .
Its rapporteur , Mr Harbour , has done a magnificent job , but I must not forget that he is a member of a political group whose positions seem more orientated towards defending the interests of companies than towards the operation of the market .
That is to say that , to use the American terminology , he belongs to a political group which is more ' pro-business ' than ' pro-market ' .
It is true that the report has positive aspects , and we are going to support those positive aspects without any doubt , but in other respects , it contains proposals which we find unacceptable .
To remove the reference , as in Amendment No 2 of the report , to the concern about the dominant position which the former monopolies maintain within liberalisation processes , seems unacceptable to us ; to remove the Commission ' s phrase that lays done that services must be provided at an accessible price , does not seem acceptable .
Neither does it seem to us acceptable to vote against , as happened in committee and which has been said will happen now , certain amendments which propose , for example , that a change in telephone service provider should not mean a change in the customer ' s number and that , if it does happen , it should be done without cost to the user and at a more than accessible cost .
It seems as though , in these respects , the desire is to hinder competition and the appearance of new economic operators , in other words to defend the interests of monopolies and that is something we cannot agree with .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , it has been interesting to draw up this report through a Hughes Procedure between two committees .
In most cases I believe we have succeeded in creating a certain cohesion between the committees and also with the previous reports on the same issue which were also mentioned earlier .
I also believe that the rapporteurs have tried to achieve such cohesion , particularly with regard to creating a bridge between the previously approved reports and this report .
That is excellent , but on certain points I believe we have not succeeded in this yet .
This is particularly true with regard to the TV standards which appear in some of the amendments .
We have also fought a great deal over the term " co-regulation " .
In this case I find it easier to and will accept what the rapporteur has put forward , but it does not sound quite as good translated into many of the other languages .
Co-regulation meaning an authority which in the final instance oversees the balance is acceptable , but some of the translations of the report talk loosely about common provisions , and that is not as descriptive .
Balance in this report is important .
I believe that , when voting tomorrow , we should ensure that there is a balance in the provisions between , on the one hand , ' must carry ' obligations and financial compensation for those required to follow them and , on the other hand , compensation for the telecommunications companies which have obligations under the other regulations .
I also believe that tomorrow we must ensure that there is still a comprehensive directory service , something which we can only achieve if there is a financial benefit to operating such a service .
We must not forget this when voting tomorrow or in the coming Directive on the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communications sector .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too should first like to extend warm thanks to the rapporteur of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , Mr Harbour .
The report is excellent and , by tabling constructive proposals and also holding intensive negotiations with colleagues , Mr Harbour has really managed to strike a good compromise , which met with broad support in the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Single Market and will - I am sure - also find favour tomorrow in the plenary .
Much has already been said about the content of the directive and I only wish to focus on what I feel to be the essential points .
The first is the scope of the universal service obligations .
Firstly , the fact that the universal service is to include simple but not broadband Internet connections is to be welcomed .
In some parts of the Community it will not be possible for the infrastructure required for broadband connections to be rolled out or upgraded to the necessary technical standard in the next few years .
In addition , in some places there is still insufficient demand for these kinds of connections .
It should in the first instance therefore be left to market forces to offer these connections without there being any regulatory pressure to do so .
Competition on the local network and thus in providing Internet access has been made possible by the regulation on unbundling the local loop .
It is now important to apply this directive consistently as quickly as possible so that a sufficient number of broadband connections can be made available quickly and at a reasonable price .
The Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market has tabled one amendment , Amendment No 9 on Article 4a ) , which unfortunately , in my view , takes us in the wrong direction , namely by including high-speed Internet access in the universal service obligations after all .
It states that the Member States should prescribe particular data transfer rates based on the latest technology .
For the reasons which I have stated I feel that this amendment goes too far .
I welcome the inclusion in the directive of a future European regional code ' 3883 ' .
I believe that this is an information measure which will also promote our internal market .
I also welcome the provisions on number portability in the mobile sector .
This too has already been mentioned by Mr van Velzen .
I can only hope that Mr Harbour 's report meets with broad support tomorrow .
All in all it is a really good piece of work !
Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Harbour , the whole Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market for the excellent report and I also want to thank all the other committees for their constructive contribution to this work .
We all know the importance of the entire Telecom package for the future competitiveness of Europe .
This report demonstrates a keen understanding of these fast-moving markets , their technologies and how and where they are developing .
In addition to this demonstrated technical and commercial know-how , Mr Harbour has included a number of amendments on behalf of an often-overlooked group of users in our society , the disabled .
I am very pleased to see the amendments put forward in relation to the disabled , which the Commission warmly welcomes .
The Commission shares the view that universal service is not just about getting geographical coverage right .
It is also about ensuring coverage of all groups in our society , including people with disabilities and special needs .
We are now working on a recommendation on web accessibility guidelines , which will help disabled people to use Internet services .
Due to limited time I will try to focus today on a few issues of special importance .
First , on the scope of universal service : the Commission supports the Harbour report on the proposed scope of universal service .
The key issues here , for example regular review of the scope of universal service and the financing of net costs using transparent and competitively neutral mechanisms , accord with the Commission 's own approach to these key principles .
Amendments Nos 4 , 6 , 8 , 10 and 15 are genuine improvements .
However , the Commission cannot agree to add " effective " to " Internet access " as proposed in Amendment No 9 , because of varying interpretations which could lead to market distortions .
The Commission welcomes amendments for the chapter dealing with the regulation of SMP designated operators , but cannot support provision such as " at least annually imposed on NRAs " in Amendment No 24 .
The framework must remain flexible and NRAs must be in a position to react to market conditions as they develop .
The Commission finds persuasive the innovations suggested put forward in Amendment No 26 that persistent market failure to satisfy requirements of users and consumers may be addressed by retail remedies if wholesale remedies are ineffective .
However , the Commission would link any intervention to the general objectives of the package rather than to well-justified complaints .
With respect to the chapter on users ' interests and rights , the Commission welcomes the support for the provisions of the directive and endorses Amendment No 31 to require operators to include prevailing tariffs in contracts with subscribers .
With respect to the implementation of a European telephone and numbering space , the Commission has already carried out a study .
We found that a European regional code would allow companies conducting business throughout Europe to use a single telephone number .
This would introduce competition between operators as well as create pan-European services and markets .
Therefore the Commission cannot support the proposed Amendment No 31 , which makes the implementation of ETNS subject to completion of a further study .
The proposals in Mr Harbour 's report relating to " must carry " provisions reflect the importance and sensitivity of the area .
His suggestion for remuneration of network operators is a welcome balance of the interests at stake .
However , the Commission believes that other amendments to this article duplicate other provisions in the package and are therefore not necessary .
Amendments Nos 45 and 46 are welcome in principle .
In conclusion , therefore , as far as amendments in the report are concerned , the Commission can accept in full Amendments Nos 4 , 6 , 8 , 10 , 15 to 20 , 22 , 27 , 29 , 36 , 38 , 39 , 46 , 49 , 53 , 57 , 58 and 60 .
The Commission can accept in part or in principle Amendments Nos 2 , 5 , 7 , 9 , 11 to 14 , 18 , 21 , 23 to 26 , 28 , 30 , 31 , 32 , 33 , 35 , 37 , 41 , 42 , 44 to 47 , 50 , 52 and 54 .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 34 , 40 , 43 , 48 , 51 , 55 , 56 , 69 , 61 and 62 .
In conclusion , the fact that the Commission accepts 50 of the 62 amendments in full , in part or in principle , indicates a most agreeable parallelism of thinking between Parliament and the Commission , which is reflected in the discussions that are taking place in the Council .
This convergence between the three institutions follows from a sense of a shared vision and commitment to which the European Parliament has an opportunity to make an important contribution in its vote tomorrow .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Structural business statistics
The next item is the report ( A5-0181 / 2001 ) by Mrs Lulling , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation amending Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) No 58 / 97 concerning structural business statistics [ COM ( 2001 ) 38 - C5-0031 / 01 - 2001 / 0023 ( COD ) ]
Madam President , on the basis of a 1996 regulation , Eurostat has been compiling structural business statistics in the industry , construction and trade sectors for five years .
Since 1998 , these statistics have also included the area of insurance services .
The proposal before us also seeks to obtain structural statistics in the area of credit institutions , pension funds , other financial intermediation activities which are covered by investment companies , such as leasing companies , mortgage credit , consumer credit and lastly financial auxiliaries , such as brokers , portfolio management ... the list is endless .
This list of areas allows you to see the importance of extending structural statistics , which will enable us to evaluate the development of the internal market in financial services , as well as the effect of the introduction of the single currency on the development of the internal market and on competitiveness and internationalisation of the sector .
Given all the years that we have spent in this House debating the single market in pension funds , and all the months that we have spent examining the first proposal for a directive on institutions for occupational retirement provision , I do not have to convince you of the need for us and other political decision-makers within the European Union to have reliable information in this area as well , such as information on the number of pension schemes , the number of businesses with members working in another country of the European Union , even within the European Economic Area , but also the number of members , by sex , of these funds or retirement institutions which complement the second pillar .
I have presented some amendments which received the unanimous blessing of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , to ensure that all these breakdowns will not be optional , as the Commission proposed , but that they are compulsory , and that the data regarding employment will also be broken down by sex , since I am a member of the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities , and I now always try to take a mainstream approach in my reports with regard to these issues .
I do all this to make sure that we are not badly-informed political decision makers .
As you know , political decision-makers who are badly informed make bad judgments and take bad decisions .
The Commission ' s proposal contains a second part , which seeks to add two additional variables on environmental protection expenditure , on structural statistics on industry , the construction and trade sectors .
Reliable information on investments in cleaner equipment and plant and current environmental protection expenditure will be broken down by domains ; the protection of ambient air and the climate , waste water management , waste management and other activities relating to environmental protection .
Data on investments will be compiled yearly , whilst the total current expenditure will be compiled every three years .
I would like to point out that a long transitional period is also planned and that small businesses may , in general , be excluded from the studies , because their impact on environmental protection expenditure is minimal .
I would also like to add that the data compiled by Eurostat are also used for sustainable development indicators .
As for the financial sector , excessive additional costs should not be feared because much of the data has already been collated due to careful monitoring of these sectors .
For other sectors , it has been planned to introduce these activities on a very flexible basis .
The first obligatory reference year and the deadline for transmission will be determined at a later date in line with the commitology procedure , which we hardly support , but which , in this case , seems to be the most reasonable and is , therefore , perfectly acceptable .
Madam President , this is a useful , even indispensable proposal and it is reasonable with regard to collating data ; it has been well prepared due to the pilot studies . I would like to congratulate Eurostat for all the preparation that has been done and I therefore believe , Madam President , that Parliament will be able to adopt my report in the safe knowledge that a good and swift piece of work has been done .
Madam President , I would firstly like to thank Mrs Lulling for her work .
I believe she has done an excellent job on a difficult technical issue which has allowed the presentation of amendments which , as has been said , affect all the basic elements of the Commission ' s proposal and introduce a series of criteria which we agree with .
She has insisted on the need to introduce references to the internal market , and not only to globalisation , when discussing this objective ; she has also commented on the need to highlight specific problems and , in this respect , also the distinction between sexes , which she believes to be a ' mainstreaming ' issue .
I believe that is something more . It is also a fundamental source of information for analysing the labour market and for providing us with data which may be useful to us in the future .
In summary , she has improved on the Commission ' s text .
Mrs Lulling has also referred to environmental issues .
She rightly says that it is true that the additional statistics may mean limited excess costs .
This is not always the case when new information is required , but it is true that the timescales proposed for this introduction are reasonably acceptable .
For this reason , the Commission considers that the proposal presented , and which it expects Parliament to approve , are useful and we are therefore going to support them before the Council , which will take the final decision , and we hope that it will accept the fundamental elements of it .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Silicone breast implants
The next item is the report ( A5-0186 / 2001 ) by Mrs Fourtou , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the petitions declared admissible concerning silicone implants ( Petitions Nos 470 / 98 and 771 / 98 ) [ 2001 / 2068 ( INI ) ]
Madam President , as you have mentioned , in 1998 , the Committee on Pensions received two extremely important petitions .
The first was submitted by a Belgian national , on behalf of the Self-help Group for Women damaged by Silicone bearing about 1 000 signatures , and the second was submitted by a British citizen requesting a ban on silicone breast implants .
At the beginning of 1999 , following a study , the Committee responsible sent a reply to these petitions which could be summed up as follows : the results of currently available scientific evidence do not seem to justify a ban of silicone implants .
Attached was information on the position of third countries and European Union Member States on this issue .
In March 2000 , the European Parliament Directorate-General on Research , sent the Committee on Petitions a working document on silicone breast implants .
This information on the status of research , along with international references from medical institutes , scientific organisations , universities and the medical press etc. lead to the following conclusion : there is currently no definite answer to the question of whether silicone implants are the cause of inflammatory reactions which indirectly cause an auto-immune response .
In other words , there is currently no scientific evidence that women who have received breast implants are more susceptible than others to serious diseases , connective tissue diseases , and that they have an abnormal lymphatic response .
Given the complexity of the problem and without wishing to end the investigation into such distressing petitions , Parliament requested STOA to carry out an independent scientific study and , in May 2000 , Doctor Moreno presented his conclusions , giving three options .
The first option was for a status quo and no ban .
The second option was an outright ban on silicone breast implants .
The third option was not for a complete ban , but the adoption and implementation of critical specific measures to develop and improve information for patients , tracking and surveillance , quality control and assurance and fundamental research .
The European Commission , the Committee on the Environment and the Committee on Women ' s Rights and Equal Opportunities were asked for their opinion and they chose the third approach .
In March 2001 , Mr Liikanen , the Commissioner , confirmed that the Commission was preparing a communication on silicone implants , with a particular view to strengthening European standards and surveillance , to introducing a system of patient consent and to undertaking research and development .
Lastly , on 29 May 2001 , the Committee on Petitions , having taken into account the complaints by the petitioners and the opinions of the committees consulted , who I would also like to thank for their thorough work and for their help , adopted unanimously , on the basis of STOA ' s third option , a resolution which will be voted on tomorrow in Parliament .
Its main recommendations are that all patients should have access to information free of charge , any advertising for breast implants should carry a health warning , surgical operations should be very strictly monitored , a database on implants should to be set up , research and development should be undertaken and there should be a ban on breast implants carried out for aesthetic reasons in patients under 18 years of age .
Madam President , this is the first time that the Committee on Petitions has presented a resolution to the House which is a direct result of requests from the citizens of the European Union .
The Committee on Petitions is pleased to have thus fulfilled its role of an active listening post for its citizens .
Madam President , it is very late , there are very few of us here and I guess all of us are very tired this evening , but actually we are striking a blow in this debate for a citizens ' Europe .
In the report by Mrs Fourtou , whom I congratulate , the Committee on Petitions is for the first time bringing a specific petition to the floor of the European Parliament .
I also congratulate Mr Miller , who gave a great deal of support to the petitioners on this particular item .
We have demonstrated that by petitioning citizens can get an item debated on the floor of the European Parliament and that the Commission will come to Parliament , as indeed it came to the Petitions Committee .
I thank Commissioner Liikanen for the initiatives that he has put forward .
A scientific study was inaugurated under STOA , Parliament 's assessment panel .
All this was achieved by the free opportunity that all citizens have across Europe to bring to their concerns before this European Parliament .
The outcome of this report is a good compromise and one which I hope will command universal support across the House tomorrow .
Having said that , it is important to remember that while some citizens come here with their particular concerns , there will be many others who perhaps have a different point of view .
Recently a very well-known celebrated TV presenter in the United Kingdom said to me : ' always remember that there are people who need breast implants ' .
This lady herself had to have a mastectomy for preventative cancer reasons and she has had a very successful implant .
So she said : ' do not stop it ; do make sure , however , that if there are to be implants , they are safe . '
In the proposals from the Women 's Rights Committee , the Environment Committee and the Commission , we have a compromise that I am sure we can work with and will be good for Europe and for a citizens ' Europe .
Mr President , over seven years ago a woman walked into my office in Glasgow .
She had been turned away by a wide variety of authorities - elected members and health authorities . Nobody would listen to her .
They treated her somewhat as an eccentric .
I sat down with her and over a period of about three-and-half hours she convinced me that there was a problem with the whole question of silicone and silicone implants .
The result of that conversation , over seven years ago , is that I am standing here tonight talking about it - not on behalf of Mr Miller , but on behalf of that woman and the hundreds of thousands of other women who have since joined together in a vast network , not just in Europe but throughout the world , to petition against the use of unsafe silicone implants .
It is a testament to the citizens of Europe that they can petition this Parliament and actually get heard .
This is the first time that I can remember an ordinary citizen raising an issue which has reached the floor of this Parliament .
I congratulate Parliament and the Petitions Committee .
As I said , this was not only down to Mr Miller , though I have pursued it through Parliament .
This has been down to the women themselves who have bravely fought against scorn and ridicule from a variety of sources and who have continued fighting their campaign against silicone implants .
That campaign has continued for years and they are still fighting .
Many of them believe that there should be a complete ban .
However , most of them recognise that at the moment there is not enough evidence to ban silicone implants so they are happy to settle , at this point in time , for stronger rules and regulations governing this whole question .
Regarding a couple of points in the report , I am glad to see the call for a ban on implants anyone under the age of 18 for cosmetic purposes .
When we talk about the quality of the implants we also have to talk about the safety of the implants .
I cannot stress that too strongly .
We talk about the information to prospective clients undergoing this operation .
That information has to be available from independent sources .
It is not good enough for that information to come from the surgeon carrying out the operation .
We also talk about registration .
We have to know the number of operations taking place .
We have to know the clinics that are taking these people in .
We have to know what surgeons are carrying them out .
Until we do so we will not fully realise the scale of this problem .
This is a tribute to Parliament , but moreover , this is a tribute to the thousands of women who have been fighting for years .
It has finally been recognised that there is a problem .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , this is an important issue , and it is important that we observe Community competence .
I am pleased that we have come to conclusions , having looked at ways to make implants safer .
My group supports these proposals .
At the same time , we would strongly defend the principle of subsidiarity and what is to be dealt with by Member States .
However , the proposal does not respect the prevailing principle of subsidiarity on all points , e.g. point 3 on the design of care .
I would also like to give a warning about systems of patient registers .
If I may take the country which I know best as an example , I can say that we have recently had a discussion because a large number of patients have been surprised at the fact that sensitive medical information has been recorded and then used in an unacceptable way .
Therefore , we cannot support what has been said about an EU-wide register , either .
This is something which each Member State must consider very , very carefully .
With regard to the age limit , we should perhaps avoid making this matter into something of a forbidden fruit .
By setting an age limit , I believe we are making it even more attractive .
It is a matter which we must take measures against in some other way .
I believe that many of us feel it is rather ridiculous and dangerous to have implants , but we should not decide about this at European level .
It has been extremely interesting to read the reports ordered by Parliament and the Commission .
I can only say that it is very difficult in practice to apply the precautionary principle .
I believe the reports on the entire issue have shown us this .
It can be seen , for example , that we have been on rather shaky ground when trying to introduce a total ban .
Madam President , I wish to express thanks to you , the rapporteur and my Scottish colleague , Bill Miller , for bringing matter before the Petitions Committee .
The issue of silicone gel breast implants is a sensitive one and this debate , as many have said this evening , is long overdue .
That is why we in the Environment Committee wanted to see access for all patients to free comprehensive information drawn up by independent experts , clear , bold health warnings in advertising , and an end to the before-and-after-pictures frequently used in women 's magazines .
We in the Environment Committee believe that all breast implant operations should be recorded in the EU and that , as a result , manufacturers should supply only to surgeons who use such a register .
The cost of breast implants should include precare , independent advice , alternatives , a cooling-off period and post-care .
Finally , there should be comprehensive national lists of registered private clinics and trained plastic surgeons .
I am glad to see that he rapporteur has taken on much of the Environment Committee 's opinion and I thank her for that .
Madam President , first of all I should like to congratulate the European Parliament on the way it has followed up the question on silicone breast implants , which was put to the Committee on Petitions , and in particular the rapporteur Mrs Fourtou .
I would say that I was privileged to take part in this procedure and I highly appreciate the respectful and professional way the committee dealt with the issue .
It gave a chance to the citizens to come with their serious problems and concerns .
The committee wanted to hear the scientific opinion on the issue , the experts , and then draw its conclusions .
This is a new departure for our institutions and I hope it will pave the way towards closing the gap between the citizens and the European institutions , a problem which faces all of us .
The draft resolution has a strong independent scientific basis in the report drawn up by Professor Moreno at the request of Parliament .
The draft rightly distinguishes between measures to be taken at Community level and those that should be taken mainly at national level as part of health and consumer policy .
The draft resolution reflects the consensus between our institutions and Member States , with whom we have been discussing the subject over the last few months and who share our concern to improve the situation that was highlighted in such an impressive way by the petitioners .
The Commission will adopt a communication on breast implants within the coming weeks , before the end of July .
It is now subject to internal Commission consultation procedures .
Our communication intends to reinforce the implementation of the medical device directive on issues such as conformity assessment , standardisation , monitoring , clinical data etc .
It also addresses recommendations to Member States that fall under the chapter of health policy , in particular on the highly important issue of informed patient consent .
Women have a right to the fullest possible information regarding the risks and benefits of breast implants before surgery so that they can take a well-informed , deliberate decision .
The Commission services had a meeting with the representatives of the petitioners , in particular concerning informed patient consent and we received a number of useful suggestions .
The Commission 's communication will be sent to Parliament as soon as it is adopted .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
( The sitting was closed at 11.10 p.m. )
Madam President , I would like inform you and this House that two citizens of my country , from my region - Castilla y León - have been held captive in Georgia since 30 November of last year .
Mr José Antonio Tremiño Gómez and Mr Francisco Jesús Rodríguez Cabal , who travelled to that country six months ago , have been held in an unknown location since then , and there has been no information from any source there .
Madam President , I would ask you to take note of this serious problem , which affects these two European citizens and their families , so that you may urge the Georgian authorities to immediately locate and free these two Spaniards , who are being deprived of their main fundamental right ; freedom .
Certainly , Mrs Redondo Jiménez .
First , we will look into the matter closely and then we will , indeed , consider how we can help your compatriots .
Preparation for European Council ( Göteborg 15 / 16 June 2001 )
The next item is the statements by the Council and the Commission on the preparation of the European Council in Gothenburg on 15 and 16 June 2001 .
I call Mrs Lindh , President-in-Office of the Council .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , almost half a year ago , I addressed Parliament for the first time on the subject of the Swedish Presidency ' s goals .
Since then we have had an in-depth and constructive discussion on future issues for Europe , the three " E ' s " of Enlargement , Employment , Environment , openness and reforms , crisis management and conflict prevention , the future , democracy , development and human rights .
Unfortunately , I must express my regret that Parliament has postponed the debate which we were to have had today on human rights , which was an important priority for the Swedish Presidency .
The issues surrounding the future of Europe will naturally also come up at the European Council in Gothenburg .
First , I would like to say something about enlargement - Europe ' s historic undertaking and most important issue for the future .
The credibility of the entire European Union rests on the completion of our work programme which , six months ago , was seen to be highly ambitious , by some even unrealistic .
EU Common Positions have been adopted on all nine chapters which made up the Swedish Presidency ' s road map , including several difficult issues such as the free movement of people , acquisition of property and , especially , the environment .
We have been able to complete the chapter on the free movement of people with two applicant countries and on movement of capital with seven applicant countries .
The environmental chapter has been completed with no fewer than four applicant countries .
We can therefore talk about real breakthroughs in the negotiations .
The whole internal market area has fallen into place .
The four freedoms , fundamental to the EU , can now be implemented with a couple of countries .
We have also laid a sound foundation regarding central issues such as nuclear safety , food safety and land transport and completed chapters which were actually to be dealt with in the autumn according to our road map .
We will be holding open negotiations in all areas with some of the countries which started negotiating last year .
As such , we can confirm the principle of differentiation .
Each applicant country is assessed on its own merits and controls the pace of the negotiations .
We held ministerial meetings with all the applicant countries on Monday and Tuesday .
They were all very pleased with the progress achieved during the negotiations .
At the same time , we could see clear concern among them following the referendum in Ireland .
Naturally , I and many others are disappointed with the referendum result there , but it is therefore even more important that the work on ratifying the Treaty of Nice progresses , as it is the very foundation for the enlargement negotiations .
It is also that much more important that the membership negotiations with the applicant countries are taken forward without any let up in the pace .
The uncertainty which the referendum may have caused and spread to the applicant countries must be dealt with by our showing even more clearly that enlargement will continue .
The progress we have seen during negotiations with the applicant countries would not have been possible if these countries had not implemented major reforms and put a great deal of work into meeting our requirements .
It could make and of course is making pro-EU governments even more open to populist attack if there is a sense that enlargement is about to stall .
I believe that we must draw three conclusions following Nice .
Firstly , the Gothenburg Summit must give a clear signal that enlargement will move forward .
Secondly , we all have a responsibility to send a clear message that the Treaty of Nice will be implemented and ratification will continue in other countries .
Thirdly , we must all become better at making our citizens feel more connected with the EU .
On this matter , we can also use the debate on the future of Europe to open up a general debate on Europe , and we all have a responsibility in this respect .
We discussed the issues for the future here in Parliament most recently on 30 May .
I would just like to add that the report for Gothenburg describes all the initiatives from Member States , applicant countries and institutions , especially Parliament ' s resolution of 31 May .
With regard to the continuing process , we can also state that many people are in favour of a convention in the preparatory stage .
Many are also of the opinion that such a convention should be combined with other measures .
This is also Sweden ' s view , and we should like to be able to highlight this direction in Gothenburg .
However , the exact make-up must be dealt with in Laeken .
In Gothenburg , we will also be addressing the Swedish Presidency ' s third " E " : Environment .
We will be taking some important steps to adapt EU policy to ecological development , sustainable in the long term , by establishing concrete targets , concrete measures and an effective monitoring process .
In this respect , we will be building further on the Commission report which proposes , for example , measures against climate change and health risks and for responsible handling of natural resources and improved transport systems .
The EU is , in fact , the only global power able to push forward environmental issues and sustainable development globally .
It is therefore also natural for climate issues and the Kyoto Protocol to be brought up at the Summit with the US president in Gothenburg , which we will be doing .
At the same time , we know that if we are to be able to play a leading global role , we also have to put our own house in order .
This is also true of other international issues on which the EU is now developing its instruments and becoming increasingly coordinated in its action in order to be able to exert influence .
As such , the common European security and defence policy , ESDP , is one of our most important processes .
Conflict prevention , civil crisis management and military crisis management are all brought together into a single unit .
We are adding to the positive development of the military area by also expanding civil crisis management with police , in the judicial area and with civil administration .
We have also developed work on preventing armed conflict .
The Gothenburg Summit will receive a report on progress within the ESDP and a European programme for conflict prevention .
In this work , the UN is our most important partner .
At a working lunch with UN Secretary General Kofi Annan in May , we identified a number of priorities for cooperation in conflict prevention and crisis management in which our growing military and civil capacity will constitute a major contribution to the UN .
We are strengthening our cooperation in the field through joint fact finding missions and cooperation between special representatives .
The Balkans , the Middle East and Africa are particular priorities .
Naturally , we are also developing cooperation with NATO , which we have been able to see especially in the current crises in Macedonia and Southern Serbia .
In Gothenburg , we will also be discussing important foreign policy issues , including the Middle East where the EU has been highly active .
Swedish Prime Minister Göran Persson has visited the region and High Representative Javier Solana has made a large number of consultation visits and is expected to present a road map for the EU ' s continued involvement and work in the Middle East at the Gothenburg Summit .
We will be discussing the Western Balkans , where developments in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , FYROM , continue to cause concern .
On the Presidency ' s behalf and in cooperation with Mr Solana , we have been active in keeping the coalition government together , isolating extremists , keeping the reform process for improving the status and rights of minorities going and continuing rapprochement with the EU .
However , as we all know , the situation remains critical .
In Southern Serbia , developments are more positive .
This is also an example of the way we can deal with conflicts through close cooperation between the EU and NATO .
We are approaching the end of our Presidency , but we have a great deal left to do and hope to take decisive steps at the Gothenburg Summit - on enlargement , jobs and the environment and the EU ' s global role .
We intend to be proactive and know that , in all the issues which we discuss , we will need the active support of Parliament .
( Applause )
Madam President , Minister for Foreign Affairs , ladies and gentlemen , tomorrow , the European Council will meet in Gothenburg .
There are many items on the agenda but I intend to focus on just two of them : enlargement and sustainable development .
However , another very important subject will also be discussed in Gothenburg : the outcome of the referendum held by the Republic of Ireland on the ratification of the Nice Treaty .
Two days ago , the General Affairs Council discussed this matter and the 14 Member States adopted a statement .
I would like to make a few brief remarks on the subject .
While not wishing in any way to interfere in the sovereign decisions of the Irish people , I am personally deeply saddened by the outcome of the referendum .
However , the enlargement process must not be held up .
As I will say again in a few minute 's time , it is a historical and political necessity .
The Commission will therefore continue to do its full duty to achieve this goal .
Nevertheless , there is a political lesson to be learned .
Every referendum tells a story .
However , despite the fact that the poor turnout makes it difficult to interpret the result , it cannot be denied that , in freely expressing their will , the Irish people have reminded us once again that our fellow citizens do not understand our method for revising the Treaties - the method used at Nice - and no longer want it .
They have told us so in the most democratic way possible - by voting - but they have also told us so by not voting , revealing the indifference and confusion they feel about the issue .
It is not enough to repeat , for the umpteenth time , that we need to communicate more and better with the citizens of Europe and that the real issues are often distorted or misunderstood .
That is not the point .
We need to take on board the lesson the citizens are teaching us .
I am therefore pleased to hear that Minister Lindh does not intend to propose a repeat performance of cliques of advisers and governments meeting behind closed doors at Gothenburg .
It is imperative that we stop this way of working .
( Applause )
Therefore , at Laeken , we must lose no time in marking out the only way forward acceptable to our citizens , which is to set up a structure which is representative of the States and the elected members of both national and European parliaments : a Convention which will work on revising the Treaties openly , in the clear light of day , fully reflecting the great debate which is now taking place in all the Member States .
We have been starting to talk about Europe again - I am glad to say - for six months now : let us do it properly !
The Commission is ready to make an active contribution to this structure .
Let me now return to my two original topics : sustainable development and enlargement .
I would like to outline what I hope the Summit will achieve in these two areas .
Firstly , sustainable development .
At Gothenburg , the Heads of State and Government will discuss a new policy line based on the Commission proposal , which represents a radical shift in our way of thinking .
Indeed , it uses the Lisbon strategy to create an ambitious , yet achievable process for sustainable development .
Our proposal is based on the premise that sustainable development is not just about the environment but about ensuring that economic growth , social cohesion and environmental protection progress hand in hand .
Far from being contradictory , economic , social and environmental objectives are actually complementary .
This is the core of the European model of society which we want to build and preserve for future European generations : if we do not do this it will be difficult to integrate Europe .
Our proposal brings these objectives together in a single , integrated strategy that seeks to find long-term solutions to the issues which are of real concern to our fellow citizens .
Let me give you just a few examples of what we want to achieve at Gothenburg .
As regards social policy , our proposed strategy incorporates all the targets set by the previous European Councils - at Lisbon and Stockholm - targets to modernise the social security system , to combat poverty and social exclusion and to deal with the problem of our ageing society .
As regards climate change , our aim is not simply to implement Kyoto but to go beyond it .
This will be a long-term process which cannot be decided all at once , but the line we are to take must be clear and consistent right from the very beginning .
As regards agricultural policy , we unambiguously restate the European Union 's latest objectives , focusing now on high quality , healthy food production rather than quantity .
Our aim must be to satisfy consumers while , at the same time , taking full account of farmers ' interests .
As regards transport policy , we intend to break the link between economic growth and the indiscriminate growth in road transport .
Enlargement makes action on all these fronts all the more urgent and every single citizen must be involved in making the changes happen .
The Members of this House have a vital role to play here : you have local roots and have close links with the regional and local authorities that will be primarily responsible for implementing sustainable development policy on the ground .
You are therefore in the ideal , crucial position to be able to explain and discuss the initiatives and to facilitate their implementation .
This strategy for sustainable development is essential if we are to bring about a balanced , just society in Europe .
We Europeans - and I would stress this - are right to be proud of our social model , although we do seem to have lost the thread rather in recent years have ceased to be proud of it , but this may well be a reason why we need to modernise it so that it will work for future generations .
Moreover , the future of our planet depends on sustainable global development , and the best way for the European Union to promote this is to implement our proposals and lead by example .
Even the other continents look to us , although this may not always be apparent .
Moving on to my second subject : enlargement .
I have never ceased to stress that enlargement is our historic duty : the duty of my Commission , of course , but also , in my view , the duty of Parliament .
It must happen now for the time is ripe .
The single market , the introduction of the euro , the now tangible fruit of the reform of our public finances and the progress we are making in economic and social reform all combine to make this a very opportune moment for enlargement .
We must therefore make every effort to complete the process swiftly .
The Commission is conducting the accession negotiations responsibly and rigorously , fulfilling its mandate from the Council .
Its impartial , institutional role ensures that the process is not thrown off course by short-term political considerations .
We are keeping to the principles of differentiation and progress according to merit , allowing countries that began negotiating in 2000 to catch up with those that began earlier .
We are scrupulously following the road map drawn up last year and endorsed at Nice , and I am pleased to report that excellent progress has been made .
Moreover , I am truly grateful to the Swedish Presidency for the impetus it has given to these negotiations and for the contribution it has made to them .
The road map is therefore appropriate and must be continued .
Thus , I have every reason to believe that we will succeed in concluding negotiations with the best-prepared candidates by the end of 2002 and complete ratification in time for the European elections in 2004 .
The Gothenburg Council should therefore note our progress and lay down the necessary guidelines for completing the negotiations .
The most sensitive chapters are now open . Basically , there are four of them : the environment , the free movement of persons , capital and services , the Structural Funds and agriculture .
I have listed them in ascending order of the difficulties they pose .
These are undoubtedly complex areas , but it is now clear that , in some cases , transitional periods will help to overcome some of the difficulties .
The Commission is therefore ready to propose the necessary technical solutions and the necessary political compromises .
What is needed now is flexibility on the part of all the negotiators and a strong political commitment to reaching agreement even in the most sensitive areas .
Flexibility and good sense now appear to be the qualities we most need on both sides of the table .
Ladies and gentlemen , the need for public support is clear .
Enlargement will increase the Union 's population by 30 % .
It will also be a much more diverse Union in many ways , and it will share extensive borders with large countries such as Russia and Ukraine .
Many of our fellow citizens are apprehensive about how all this will affect their daily lives - about its impact on employment , the environment , immigration and law and order .
The Members of this House have the crucial task of reassuring the citizens , explaining the problems calmly and objectively but also explaining the great benefits they will draw from the project to unify Europe .
Enlargement will be the driving force of our economy and the labour market for the whole of the next generation .
It will also be our one means of controlling the scourges that disregard national borders such as organised crime and the trafficking of drugs , arms and human beings .
Together , we can do more and do it better .
The enlarged Union will be a stronger and more influential actor on the world 's stage .
Ladies and gentlemen , enlargement is not just a technical process and we must never allow ourselves to become so engrossed in the technicalities that we lose the overall vision .
The vision of the Europe that our children and grandchildren can inherit is a common future in a Union which will stretch from the Atlantic Ocean to the Black Sea , from the Arctic Circle to the Mediterranean .
But this is not all . I want us to think in terms of a continent-wide Community of peaceful nations , consisting of the enlarged European Union and all its new neighbours , increasingly sharing common values and objectives .
This is not just a dream : the process has already begun , facilitated , as I said , by the Swedish Presidency 's major contribution .
In Moscow , last month , the leaders of the Russian Federation and the European Union agreed to begin work on creating a common European economic area . They began to examine the real possibility of adopting the euro , in the future , for their commercial and financial transactions .
We intend , at the same time , to pursue a similar strategy towards Ukraine .
On this basis , the enlarged European Union and its neighbours will be able to find common solutions to common problems in areas such as transport , energy and the environment , research , development , immigration and the fight against organised crime .
Only a wider Community of the kind we are building can enjoy lasting peace , prosperity and stability .
Ladies and gentlemen , enlargement and sustainability are thus the two keys to Europe 's future .
I am confident that you share my vision of that future and I am equally confident that Gothenburg will enable us to take significant steps towards making that vision a reality .
( Applause )
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen . Because of the referendum in Ireland , the summit in Gothenburg will be even more important than we thought it would .
As the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , we think that , because of the present uncertainties , because of the confusion , because the central European countries are worried about their membership , the message to come out of Gothenburg must be that the central European countries are welcome in the European Union and that the enlargement of the European Union is now our top priority .
And we must say as much , loud and clear , to the people of central Europe .
Our group has long favoured the first new countries ' being able to take part in the next European elections in 2004 , and rightly so .
We must send out this message .
We must also be flexible .
We are currently debating the Structural Funds .
Some people want to keep everything they had in the past .
Others want to do away with the Structural Funds altogether .
The PPE-DE Group believes that those most in need deserve our solidarity , which is why we shall continue to need the Structural Funds in the future and why they must focus on the countries in the future European Union which are worst off .
Solidarity should not just be a slogan ; it should be manifested in the form of specific deeds .
Yesterday I had a most impressive conversation , together with numerous colleagues from my group , with Bishop Alfons Nossol from Oppeln , formerly in Silesia and now part of Poland .
A minority of 300 000 people live there .
Since the demise of Communism in Poland , this minority has been able to worship in both their own and the Polish language .
These people in Poland , like the Hungarians in Slovakia or Romania , are looking towards Europe , hoping that we will not slam the door to our community of values in the European Union in their face and that we shall say : you are welcome , provided that you have set up the conditions needed by our community of values .
( Applause )
We also need to be flexible when it comes to freedom of movement , so that we do not create structures which are offensive to the central European countries .
Naturally , we need solutions that serve the interests of the European Union , but they must also be in the interests of the candidate countries .
I suggest that we make an effort to guarantee the flexibility needed here .
Now to Ireland . I think we should guard against meting out swift advice to Ireland .
It is up to the Irish government now to show the way forward .
In particular , I urge the larger Member States of the European Union , which have often erred in the past by thinking they could dictate to the small Member States , to hold back to start with and at least let Ireland respond .
Then we shall see what needs to be done .
( Applause )
Madam President-in-Office , you said - and it was music to my ears - that the Swedish presidency is now in favour of a convention .
We have come a long way together .
But please fight for it , especially if you fail to muster complete support .
Of course , the decisions will be taken under the Belgian presidency .
But if you are in favour of openness and transparency and two or three governments voice their opposition , name them openly so that they are forced to justify their opposition .
( Applause )
The American president , George Bush , will be in Gothenburg .
Our group values partnership and friendship with America .
We greet the American president and welcome him to Europe .
But having numerous common interests does not mean that we do not have differing views on several counts .
I urge you , Madam President-in-Office , and of course you too , Mr President of the Commission , to state in a measured but decisive manner that we Europeans want the Kyoto protocol and the reduction of emissions to be a success .
We urge you to represent this position clearly .
( Noise , heckling )
But I also say - one fellow member is famous for his heckling and I accept it gladly - that we do of course expect solidarity between Europeans and I am proud of the fact that it is our group , the governments which belong to us , which will be clearly expressing European solidarity in Gothenburg tomorrow and the day after tomorrow .
( Applause ) Were it any other way , you would hear our voice .
But , with your leave , Madam President , one last word .
The American president is right on one count when it comes to reducing emissions .
If nuclear energy is safe , it cannot be excluded from a reasonable energy mix .
That is why he is right on this count .
We do not think that nuclear energy , the peaceful use of nuclear energy , should be universally disparaged on ideological grounds , unlike numerous Socialist and other members .
( Applause )
Allow me to close by saying that it is developments in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia which concern us most at present .
Madam President-in-Office , I urge you to continue your efforts , as you have in the past with Mr Solana and Mr Patten , to bring about a peaceful solution .
We cannot afford to fail here , and the fact that today 's visit by the president of Macedonia , of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia has been called off should set the alarm bells ringing here .
I urge you to continue in your efforts to bring about peace , because if we are successful here , it will be a success for the European Union as a whole and a contribution towards a peaceful , free Europe .
Please help to bring it about .
( Applause )
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to thank the President-in-Office of the Council for her assessment of the Swedish Presidency .
Sweden has proved herself and her Presidency has been successful in many areas .
I would like to stress that you have acted transparently , graciously and amicably towards Parliament .
With you , we have been able to begin to update our relations with the Council , which were still at the level of the Single European Act - I am referring to codecision and the presence of the Council in plenary sittings - I believe that this should be welcomed as a positive step in our relations .
Like you , I regret that lack of time has meant that we have not been able to hold the debate on human rights today , but , in any event , human rights are a permanent element of our political commitment .
I would especially like to highlight the progress made in relation to sustainable development and in the social field , one very important element of which has been , after twenty years , to unblock the directive on information and the participation of workers .
With regard to the Gothenburg Summit , we are all reeling from the shock of the Irish referendum , which is a significant wake-up call .
The French National Assembly yesterday ratified the Treaty of Nice .
France has always been a very colourful and controversial country , but this ratification has not attracted our attention .
However , in the case of Ireland , I believe that two issues arise which we must examine .
The current members of the Union and those of the enlarged Union , because that is now our perspective , must re-affirm the terms in which we see our common destiny .
This means , as from the beginning of this European Union process , that we have to find a balance between our interests - or if you like , our egotism - and solidarity between all of us .
I believe that that is what is in question and that is what we have to address very directly to all the Europeans .
Therefore , on behalf of my Group , I have asked the President of the Commission for a Commission statement on economic and social cohesion and enlargement .
Because it is not simply a question of discussing whether the Structural Funds are maintained for some and not for others , but rather of finding out , firstly , how we can all contribute , and the President of the Commission has recently talked about the suitability of a European tax .
The people pay , but they do not know what they are paying and it would be a good thing , from a democratic point of view , to relate funding to citizenship .
Then we would have to consider how we can strengthen cohesion and solidarity between all of us on the basis of the principles in the Treaties .
I believe that this requires the Commission to participate , by exercising its responsibility and its right of initiative .
Secondly , I will refer to the conclusions which you have presented to the Council .
In my relatively long political experience within the European Union , this is the first time that we have proposed conclusions to the Council which the normal citizen can read , because they are generally written in what the French call langue de bois , a totally cryptic style .
The proposal of the French Presidency does justice to what the European Parliament has said , to what the COSAC has said , and there is explicit support for the convention method - you are prudent and talk about a ' forum ' .
However , in any event , I would like to say that if you see to it that we make progress in this direction , I believe that we can finally put an end to negotiation behind closed doors and move on to the democratic method by means of which all the constitutions of the Member States of the European Union are created , that is to say , openly and publicly , which , at this point in history , means via the Internet and the television .
That is how things are done .
Therefore , Madam President , I hope that you will make sure that the approach taken at the Gothenburg Summit , and consolidated at Laeken , will be one on which the European Parliaments , those of the Member States , the Governments and the Commission can all work together .
In that way we will be able to engage all of our people .
Madam President , I would like to make a final comment about the visit of President Bush .
The transatlantic relationship is a constitutional relationship , which is fundamental to both the United States and Europe and , indeed , to the whole world .
Now , we cannot hide our profound differences at the moment , which relate not only to the value of international commitments at world level , but to combating such an important factor as climate change .
We can make appeals for solidarity , but I would ask Mr Poettering to work with the current and future governments of his family , because it is not they who are supporting a united European position .
In relation to the anti-missile shield , to build new missiles can only lead to a return of the arms race .
In this respect also I would ask Mr Poettering to speak with his political friends in the governments in order to achieve a process of reducing tension , which is essential to the future of humanity .
Madam President , President-in-Office , President of the Commission , Ladies and Gentlemen , on behalf of the Liberal Democrat Group I should like to begin by acknowledging and congratulating the minister on the considerable number of actual results achieved by the Swedish presidency already , even before it formally concludes its work .
In particular , you are to be congratulated on the work and enthusiasm that you have put into the enlargement issue .
Your approach has been a breath of fresh air and will , I hope , reassure the candidate countries that we are indeed serious about this issue and have demonstrated as much during the Swedish presidency .
I also acknowledge and salute the defence which you , together with the European Commission , have mounted on the climate-change issue .
It is important that , in the transatlantic dialogue , we continue to champion the values and the desire for sustainability that we all share and believe in .
Your personal efforts and the work with the High Representative , Commissioner Patten and others , particularly in Macedonia , where the situation remains so explosive and difficult , show impressive commitment towards pressing ahead with a common foreign and security policy .
All of these areas and , of course , the work you have undertaken with the European Parliament on enhancing transparency , should be recognised as matters of importance and substance .
I acknowledge , of course , as you have reported , the heightened anxieties of the representatives of the candidate countries following the Irish " no " to Nice .
It is very important for me to state here today , particularly as an Irish European , that whatever the complex set of motives and reasons behind it , the " no " to Nice did not signify a " no " to enlargement .
Neither the " no " campaign nor the " yes " campaign made an issue of enlargement .
Indeed , it could be helpful before Göteborg - if it has not already done so - for the Irish " no " campaign as a whole to issue a single joint statement making it clear that their " no " campaign was not pushing for a " no " to enlargement .
I would encourage the minister to continue working towards a reassuring timetable in Göteborg .
Perhaps the shock of the Irish result will motivate those who a week or two ago were wondering whether this was necessary .
It has become more necessary now to reassure , act and deliver on the enlargement agenda .
With regard to the Irish result , I should like to make one or two detailed comments .
Members may be interested to learn that 50 000 fewer people in the Irish electorate voted " no " to Nice than voted " no " to Amsterdam .
The number of " no " voters in Ireland has not grown .
The critical question in Ireland is this : why did those who would normally have voted " yes " stay at home ?
That is a serious issue .
Yet the number of " no " votes was smaller than before , not larger , and so in this regard we should retain a sense of proportion .
I welcome the fact that the Irish Government is now going to establish a national forum on Europe to encourage everyone to reflect sensibly on the challenge , the message and the means of reconnecting people with the European vision .
After that there will eventually be a second referendum .
It is important that we have this period of deep reflection .
I take note of what has been said in the General Affairs Council , namely that the Council will continue with the ratification process .
Indeed , paradoxically , the Danish instrument of ratification of Nice will be lodged in Rome today ; the French , as we have heard , have also ratified the Treaty .
I hope that in Göteborg the Council will find the wisdom lacking in the statement of the General Affairs Council to include the European Commission in the search for a way forward .
In Ireland the Commission is regarded as an honest broker - someone who can always help when there are delicate textual and substantial political issues to be considered .
In conclusion , the real message that must emerge from Göteborg before all others - the first among equals of messages - should be clearly addressed to the candidate countries , and say : we are ready to do business .
I would ask the President-in-Office to continue to champion this issue and emphasise it consistently in Göteborg , especially with a view to enabling the Irish to say " yes " to enlargement there .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , I would firstly like to draw attention to President-in-Office Anna Lindh ' s statement that it was a pity not to be able to discuss human rights here today .
I also welcome chairman Barón Crespo ' s small penance , when he regretted that this discussion could not take place today .
This is a very great pity as I know that Sweden is very dedicated to human rights policy and now this opportunity to enter into dialogue with Sweden has unfortunately passed .
Madam President , to my group Gothenburg is above all a summit on sustainable development .
We have waited for this for a long time and we do not want to lose this opportunity .
The theme of sustainable development must not be overshadowed by a prominent guest but must now be taken seriously .
In this context I must make a personal confession .
I was a little impatient when the Commission did not seem to be preparing its own proposal on sustainable development and in conjunction with the Stockholm Summit I said that President of the Commission Romano Prodi was ecologically illiterate .
Now I have to take back that statement as I have got to know the President of the Commission ' s ideas on sustainable development and consider them to be very valuable .
He is proposing binding targets and he is ready to commit to binding action in order , for example , to break the link between economic growth and growth in traffic .
But unfortunately there is a risk that the summit will not be able to achieve this , i.e. set quantitative targets .
Here I am perhaps a little disappointed with the efforts of Sweden as the holder of the presidency , which could have taken things further .
The Kyoto Protocol is absolutely the key issue in Gothenburg .
I welcome the fact that President of the Commission Romano Prodi wishes to hold a discussion which already looks at the period after the goals of Kyoto have been achieved .
I disagree entirely with Mr Poettering , when he says that nuclear power must be included in the range of options .
There is no more out-of-date technology than this and I would like to warn against nuclear power enjoying a second coming in the guise of climate policy .
My group says a definitive no to this trend .
We want to focus on the alternatives .
Enlargement is also on the agenda at Gothenburg and my group would certainly like to emphasise that enlargement must continue irrespective of the result of the Irish referendum .
It must be clearly stated and signalled to the candidate countries that the Irish people in no way wanted to reject enlargement .
In my opinion , the result of the Irish referendum cannot , however , be ignored by thinking that we can continue as if nothing has happened .
Instead it should be taken as a clear signal that the European Union must be democratised and citizens must be able to take part in drawing up constitutional issues .
These can no longer be addressed behind closed doors .
For this reason , we must make haste in adopting this convention model so that we are able to reach decisions on it before Laeken .
This means that candidate countries too must be able to be fully included in this process .
We need more democracy , more referendums , and more participation not less .
Madam President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , it is too soon for any exhaustive analysis of the Irish ' no ' to the Treaty of Nice .
Yet it is possible to make a few comments on it without too much risk of being mistaken .
The first concerns the official reactions to this bombshell , which took all the leading European figures by surprise .
In Luxembourg this Monday , the ministers apparently devoted half an hour or so to this event , which one of them described as merely a hiccup .
That is what I would call burying one ' s head in the sand .
Surely the minister must realise that this rejection represents a new and serious symptom of the crisis that is profoundly undermining European integration .
Nearly three quarters of the Irish population said ' yes ' to the Community when their country joined in 1972 and today the same proportion is refusing to say ' yes ' to the EU Treaty of Nice - yet the national and European leaders did not even see it coming .
We are facing a problem that looms far larger than Nice and Ireland .
There were other warnings of the Irish ' no ' , in particular the growing rate of abstention in nearly all the EU countries at the European elections .
In my view , and this is my second comment , that ' no ' vote is first and foremost the price of building Europe without the citizens and at a distance from them .
Where are the wide-ranging public and pluralist debates , at which everyone lays their cards on the table , on the issues at stake , the difficulties to be overcome , the values to be upheld and , finally , on the political choices that need to be made completely transparently and democratically ?
There is one example that has a direct bearing on what happened in Ireland .
At the summit , the states concocted , at breakneck speed , a defence Europe with imprecisely defined missions and which public opinion , in general , regards as unlikely to be independent .
They often glorified this new achievement in tones that the neutral countries in particular , although others too , perceived as militaristic .
So this backlash is hardly surprising .
The same applies in other areas , especially the economic and social area .
What are we to think of those leaders of the richest countries who nonchalantly cultivate the net contributor syndrome and raise the spectre of the renationalisation of agricultural aid and the Structural Funds , thereby fuelling the pernicious ' each for himself ' trend ?
At the same time , the federalist overstatement of the ongoing institutional debate has played its part in creating confusion in countries that want to protect their place , their role and their identity in a future large complex of which they can perceive neither the nature nor the contours .
Added to that , there is the less than engaging spectacle that the Fifteen offered the public in Nice , so that it is not surprising to find a general feeling of disenchantment if not the return of a populist and inward-looking trend .
That brings me to my third and final comment on a question everyone is asking : what should we do now ?
First , in my view , we must respect the rules of democracy .
Whether we like it or not , the Treaty has not been ratified unanimously and we will have to make some improvements to it .
Next , this time we would do well to hold an in-depth debate with the citizens of all our countries on the kind of Europe to build and on the political , institutional and financial implications of our decisions .
Lastly , we must not let our opponents , who are ashamed of enlargement , use this crisis as a pretext to defer to an unknown date this pan-European project that is potentially great and splendid , but is obviously also complex and costly .
Here too , we need a responsible debate so that we can evaluate , in the clear light of day , the conditions under which we can all succeed .
Just as there can be no ambition without effort , there can be no European project without solidarity .
Madam President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , it is with great pleasure that I offer my congratulations to the Swedish presidency on the tremendous successes it has achieved on behalf of us all .
The European leaders in Göteborg will address two primary subjects , namely the enlargement of the European Union and how best to solve many of our environmental problems .
With regard to enlargement , it is most important that the European Union and the applicant countries get down to negotiating the more difficult chapters , which to date have remained closed .
It is in the interest of all the contracting parties that the bottom-line issues that remain outstanding are debated , resolved and finalised .
I would like to make a few comments concerning the outcome of the recent Irish referendum , that was held on the Nice Treaty .
I am very disappointed at the result of this referendum in Ireland but I fully respect the outcome of this democratic process .
I welcome the conclusions of this week 's Council meeting of EU Foreign Ministers ; they too stated that the will of the Irish people must be respected .
I firmly believe that the vast majority of the Irish people are committed to the enlargement process and I do not want to see the timeframe for the enlargement of the European Union to include countries from Eastern and Central Europe delayed as a direct consequence of the decision of the Irish people last week .
In Ireland we need time now to reflect upon this result in a calm and reasoned manner .
Ireland 's future relationship with the European Union is a critically important matter .
Time for deliberation will be needed if we are to address the complex issues and concerns which arose during the referendum debate .
This referendum undoubtedly underlines the need for greater efforts to be made by all of us to explain European Union policies to our citizens and to involve the citizens of the EU more thoroughly in the debate about the Union 's role and its future direction .
There are lessons for us all to learn from the results of the Nice Treaty referendum .
It is incumbent on the Commission and all the 15 governments of the Union also to reflect upon this result .
We must build a European Union that commands the good will and support and enthusiasm of the 370 million citizens who make up the membership of the Union .
I very much welcome the decision of the Irish Government , which last night established a national forum on Europe .
This forum will undertake the process of consultation and dialogue on EU policy with the Irish public on matters of concern to them .
This forum is also part of the debate on the overall future of Europe that is ongoing in all 15 Member States of the European Union in the run-up to the next Intergovernmental Conference in 2004 .
All political parties , the social partners and other interested parties will be represented on this forum , which is expected to begin its work very shortly .
Another very important matter is that Mr Bush , the President of the United States , will be in Göteborg later this week to meet EU leaders .
It is very timely , therefore , that this summit will be addressing key environmental issues which need to be tackled , both within the Union and in a more global context .
I was very disappointed when President Bush earlier this year stated that he wanted to renegotiate the Kyoto Accord .
The fact of the matter is that we need to reduce the level of greenhouse gases that are being produced in Europe and in the United States .
This is very important if we are to ensure a halt to the depletion of the ozone layer .
Madam President , the august Danish publication , ' Ugebrevet Mandag Morgen ' has a leader with the headline , ' Thank you , Ireland ! '
According to this leader , ' To try to get the Irish to change their opinion would be completely contrary to all the EU promises about the need for a wider public debate and for grassroots support .
The EU countries have jointly and unanimously decided upon the ground rules which clearly state that a treaty only comes into force once it has been ratified by all the Member States .
Following the Irish ' no ' vote , Ireland cannot and should not ratify the Treaty of Nice . '
How can the foreign ministers simply let the ratifications continue ?
The Treaty of Nice has come to nothing .
It is a constitutional violation to ignore a binding referendum , and it is contrary to Article 6 of the Treaty on European Union concerning the principle of the rule of law .
We call upon all countries at least to take a break from the ratification procedure and to reflect upon the reasons for the ' no ' vote .
It was not , of course , a specifically Irish ' no ' .
We would also see a majority of ' no ' votes in other countries , if the latter dared to hold referenda .
Nice is not , at heart , about enlargement but about shifting power from electors and elected representatives to officials and ministers .
Why should the electorate vote in favour of less influence ?
Nor has the European Parliament been fulsome in its praise for Nice .
The initial judgement of the voters is : Try again !
Next time , the negotiations must be bottom-up instead of top-down .
The Irish ' no ' vote was presented in the press as a ' no ' to enlargement , even though the ' no ' side too had said that the enlargement negotiations should continue .
Five countries may be admitted under the Treaty of Amsterdam , and the next group of countries on the basis of the places and number of votes stated in the Summit declaration .
The Treaty of Nice is only relevant to the 27th applicant country , and we are deprived of the right to a Commissioner .
There is nothing else about enlargement in the Treaty .
The declaration is a common position and not a part of the Treaty , and it has not therefore been thrown out in the referendum .
Let us now , rather , slim down the EU and create open , democratic cooperation that is close to the people .
I congratulate the Irish people on a courageous ' no ' vote and call upon the Gothenburg Summit to respect the people ' s choice instead of ignoring a referendum .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I will restrict myself to expounding three points .
Firstly , the environment : the Radical Party has been raising the matter of the greenhouse effect , the hole in the ozone layer and the related dangers for over 15 years now .
We feel that it is especially important that this matter is tackled resolutely and thoroughly in Gothenburg - as the Swedish Presidency intends to do - in the presence of President Bush as well .
Parliament will express its opinion later on and we shall see the political groupings going to the defence of the Kyoto Protocol .
We feel that it would , if necessary , still be possible to look into improving and fine-tuning the approach and objectives to be followed in order to avoid breaking the ties with our American allies , although they are the primary polluters of the planet , but we must certainly not give in to the temptation to perform further studies .
There is nothing left to analyse : studies have been carried out and they show that the planet is in danger and that it is therefore necessary to act and do so quickly .
The European countries should therefore put their hands on their hearts too and turn words into action .
I would also , Madam President , like to talk about transparency .
You have attached great importance to transparency , and so I have two questions .
The Irish referendum has shown that the system is absurd .
We cannot negotiate over Gothenburg or Nice in the same way that we negotiated over Westphalia when Swedish and other troops were fighting the 30 Years War .
Diplomatic negotiations have had their day : a European Union must be negotiated between citizens , between members of parliament , between players in internal affairs within our Union .
The Swedish Presidency could give the signal for this to happen .
Lastly , Madam President , I would just like to say a few brief words about the agencies .
Mr Persson is in danger of messing up in true southern Italian style if he distributes all the responsibilities at Gothenburg , maybe giving the Food Agency to Helsinki , to a country which , I would argue , is the least suitable location for it .
Practise transparency in this as well and , if time runs short , carry the issue over to the next summit to allow time for a more public , more open debate on the location of these major European agencies .
Mr President , the foreign ministers of the EU countries who chose to continue with the ratification of the Treaty of Nice on Monday , as though the Irish had never said ' no ' in the referendum , opted for the worst solution .
In fact this risks confirming the view of many people that the European institutions under construction are deaf to the citizens ' demands and that in the final analysis , beneath the ideological disguises , their real purpose is to confiscate the powers of the people .
The ' no ' vote in the Irish referendum , like the ' no ' vote in the Danish referendum last September , is a warning .
The people are turning away from a Europe in which they cannot recognise themselves .
To speed up federalism under these conditions would be the quick road to ruin .
The Gothenburg Council may still have a chance of getting things back on an even keel .
What should it decide ?
First , it should decide to suspend the ratification of Nice by cancelling the General Affairs Council ' s conclusions of Monday .
Secondly , it should send a strong signal to the candidate states , inviting them to join the Union immediately , without any additional treaty , by acceding to the intergovernmental part of the existing treaties .
It should then announce that the supplementary provisions on enlargement will be incorporated in the accession treaties .
Finally , it should convene another intergovernmental conference , this time with the objective of establishing a Europe that respects its nations .
This IGC would have to be based above all on the national parliaments and not on the new confiscation-based structure that is being invented just now .
That is what we propose in our counter-report on the Treaty of Nice .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am concerned about the result in Ireland .
It is a victory for those who wish to stop and say no .
Referendums encourage short-term , self-interested views rather than long-term acceptance of responsibility .
As Europe stands on the brink of a highly successful age , its citizens are vacillating .
Reunification can increase freedom , security and opportunities and we can show solidarity with people who have suffered under Communist oppression and the destruction caused by a planned economy .
However , reunification is just as important to us , as enlargement is not only a historical responsibility but also a necessary injection and a win-win situation .
In Gothenburg the EU Heads of State and Government must therefore now set a deadline for enlargement and ensure that its road map is confirmed politically .
This is the clear message which I believe is needed .
But we should also examine ourselves .
Citizens , not only in Ireland , are questioning what the EU is doing .
We are poor at explaining the heart and the successes of European cooperation .
Many people wish to foist tasks on the EU which can better be dealt with domestically .
This threatens self-determination , while at the same the EU ' s fundamental task of increasing freedom , ensuring peace , opening up markets and breaking down trade barriers becomes neglected .
Enlargement and expansion of the European Union requires focus , consistency and commitment from all those interested in making Europe a success .
There is another summit being held .
Sweden believes the summit with the US is a significant event and one that is important to the EU .
The leadership must focus on what unites us .
Understanding the interests of the US may ensure Europe ' s reunification and ability to manage crises .
Working with the US to ensure peace and increased free trade must be the primary task .
George W. Bush is good for the US and good for Europe , and we welcome him to Europe .
I hope that both summits achieve concrete results and wish everyone the best of luck .
I would like to add my congratulations to the foreign ministers for ensuring that the Presidency ' s six months , which started out looking rather grey will seemingly end a little more on the light blue side .
Mr President , the Gothenburg Summit will round off the Swedish Presidency which , as was mentioned previously , had an ambitious programme .
I would like to give the Swedish government full marks for its work .
I would like to talk about something not on the programme for Gothenburg and that is one of the " E ' s " - Employment - which was tackled at the Stockholm Summit in March , but which was supplemented in the social area this week with a hat trick of successes at the last moment .
I would say that it was perhaps one of the most successful Council meetings in terms of social issues , as the Council managed to solve three issues : the issues of noise , equal treatment and , especially , informing and consulting employees .
The work carried out was excellent and important for the EU ' s ongoing social initiatives .
I would also like to mention sustainable development and link it to the social issues , as much of the debate has centred on sustainable development and ecological issues .
This is the way it should be , but there is also a social dimension .
We have the issues of social cohesion between people and creating policies which reduce the divisions in Europe , not least the divisions between the generations .
We also have the issues of pension systems and how they will be developed in the future , and reducing the divisions between regions .
All this is required for sustainable development .
We need an economic policy which is not simply focused on short-term growth , but also on long-term growth .
Therefore , the ecological aspects must be included in all areas .
They must have an impact on transport policy , energy policy and agricultural policy as we develop a society sustainable in the long term .
The ecological aspects must also have an impact on us globally .
Internally , we will succeed in this through the methods we have used so far , but also through augmenting the Lisbon Process , by making the ecological aspects part of the process we already have in the social and economic areas .
But we must also act globally .
One opportunity will be the Gothenburg Summit and the summit with Mr Bush , at which the EU must stand its ground with regard to the Kyoto Protocol .
Of course , we want the US on board , but the EU must take the lead here .
Even if the US does not want this , the EU must take the lead globally on this issue .
We must also focus on these issues with regard to trade agreements with the WTO by adding ecological and social aspects to the development of global trade .
Finally , I want to say something about the most important of the three " E ' s " , which is undoubtedly Enlargement .
This is an historic opportunity which we must not let slip through our fingers .
I therefore share the view put forward by many others that , after what happened in Ireland , we must be even clearer in our dealings with the applicant countries .
The enlargement process must continue , we must set deadlines with the aim of applicant countries being ready to take part in European Parliament elections in 2004 .
This must be clarified so that the first countries can join .
Each country must join on its own merits and as few exceptions and transposition periods as possible must be requested in as few areas as possible .
Sweden has achieved a great deal of success during its Presidency .
Now the focus must be on further progress and building on this legacy .
Finally , I would also like to say something about the common European foreign and security policy , on which the Presidency has worked very well and for which Sweden has received great praise .
Anna Lindh in particular has succeeded in positioning Sweden as a leading nation in this process by introducing preventive measures .
The fact that we now have a leading role in world politics , in the Middle East , Korea , etc . , is to a large extent thanks to the work of Anna Lindh , for which I would like to thank her .
I believe that it was good to be so clear on the issue of a convention .
As it supports openness , Sweden must also support a convention , but not as the only method , but as one method of preparing intergovernmental negotiations next time .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , I would like to start on a completely personal note by thanking Mrs Lindh for the job she and Mr Solana and Commissioner Patten have done in Macedonia .
As a war baby , I am very conscious of the fact that peace is not celebrated with parades and that the arduous everyday work of maintaining peace does not gain huge headlines .
War is better in a media society .
However , I would like to thank Mrs Lindh for her excellent work so far .
The main theme of Gothenburg will be sustainable development , and in this context the Kyoto Protocol will be brought up .
President Bush is coming to Gothenburg .
Should those in power in Europe , including myself , not " put their own house in order " first ?
Within the EU , we subsidise energy systems which produce the highest levels of carbon dioxide .
Should we not first , or perhaps at the same time , do something about this ?
It is easier to negotiate once one has " put ones own house in order " .
The other major environmental problem in Europe is traffic .
There is also an EU project to create a good , environmentally friendly infrastructure in Europe .
The third and perhaps one of our greatest environmental problems is the common agricultural policy .
We are putting a little over EUR 40 billion into this area .
Around 5 billion of that will go into preserving cultural heritage and biodiversity , the rest is highly counterproductive from the point of view of the environment , so let us " put our own house in order " as we move forward .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , many important issues have been squeezed onto the agenda at the Summit : enlargement , the Middle East , a possible new WTO round , and so forth .
Remember that this summit was launched as the first ' green ' summit .
Thirty years after the UN Environmental Conference in Stockholm and ten years after the UN Earth Summit in Rio , the Heads of State and Government have a historic opportunity , an undertaking and a responsibility to adopt a credible strategy for sustainable development for the EU .
However , this strategy must also form the basis for further global environmental responsibility and undertakings ahead of Rio + 10 in South Africa .
The Commission ' s proposal is an important first step , I would say a minimum step .
Much , much more is needed in order to achieve a real breakthrough for sustainable development .
Major changes must be made in economic policy , transport and energy policy , chemicals policy , and agricultural and fisheries policy .
As faith in the EU fades , as was shown in Ireland ' s rejection of the Treaty of Nice , a fundamental debate is required on the future of Europe , a debate without preconditions in which European civil society can take part .
The summit must stake out such a path .
The summit not leading to a credible result on sustainable development would be another setback .
There must be a good result .
It is not just about us but about future generations .
I wish the summit well and hope for a successful , ' green ' outcome .
Mr President , I would like to start by congratulating the Irish people on the result of the referendum on the Treaty of Nice .
One country in the EU has allowed its people to vote on the Treaty of Nice and they said no .
If more countries had been allowed to vote , the result would probably have been no in a number of countries , not least in Sweden .
The European Council in Gothenburg must make it clear that Ireland ' s rejection will be respected .
This means that the Treaty of Nice has failed .
It is a case of the EU having to follow its own rules .
The right of Member States to say no to Treaty amendments is key to the fabric of the EU .
Without it , the national democracies lose control of the Union .
This is why it is unbelievable that the Swedish government can say that the Treaty of Nice still stands .
By doing so , it is ignoring the democratic rules .
If the Swedish parliament had voted no to a Treaty amendment , would we not want that to be respected by the other EU countries ?
I think that is a question which the Swedish Minister for Foreign Affairs should answer .
The people of Ireland voted no to the Treaty of Nice .
That is a no to increased supranationality , more power to the larger EU countries , a no to new steps towards a European State and EU militarisation .
As such , it was also a vote for a better and more democratic Europe .
Ireland ' s no was not , however , a no to EU enlargement .
Enlarging the EU will work perfectly well based on the Treaty of Amsterdam .
The influence of the new Member States in the institutions can be regulated in the Accession Treaties as was the case during the last enlargement .
Such a model can correct the discrimination which certain applicant countries experienced in Nice .
If Ireland ' s no is not respected , the message sent out will be clear , namely that the will of small countries is irrelevant and referendums are only respected if the result suits the power elite .
It would be a serious matter if this were to happen .
I would also like to say a few words about the strategy for sustainable development which is to be discussed at the Gothenburg Summit .
The Commission ' s proposal was unexpectedly concrete and good , not least considering its weak proposal for an Environmental Action Programme earlier this year .
The proposal contains a number of clear goals such as a continued reduction in greenhouse gas emissions , measures to preserve biodiversity , requirements to stop increases in traffic and abolishing harmful subsidies , for example for tobacco cultivation .
The risk now is clearly that the concrete elements of the strategy disappear during negotiations , while the rhetoric committing to nothing remains .
A compromise proposal is already being circulated , a non-paper from the Swedish government which looks exactly as I described .
I hope that the Swedish government will fight for and succeed in retaining the concrete content of the strategy .
Mr President , on 28 September last year the Danes plainly said ' no ' to the euro .
Last Thursday , the Irish unequivocally rejected the Treaty of Nice .
That means the people of the only two countries that have been directly consulted have expressed , with equal force , the growing dissatisfaction of all European citizens with a Europe that is tending more and more to treat its constituent nations simply as remote colonies .
Alas , as happened after the Danish referendum , the Union is loftily ignoring the message sent out by the people of Europe .
I wonder how long the President of Parliament and the President of the Commission think they can go on founding their Europe on contempt for the people , whom they treat as nobody would dare to treat children today ?
The Gothenburg Summit , to be held only six months after the Nice Summit , will have to take note of the Irish vote and the fact that the Irish people have exercised the sovereign right of veto that the governments did not dare to exercise in Nice .
It will therefore have to declare the treaty null and void , failing which the people will regard Europe as an alien enterprise and will soon see it as their enemy .
The Irish referendum and , even earlier than that , the Danish referendum are evidence of a certain hostility towards Europe on the part of the European citizens , at least on the part of those who were able to vote .
I hope that this does not indicate rejection of the idea of Europe , just rejection of a certain type of Europe , this Europe which is being built up with frightening speed , a Europe which must not on any account become the European Soviet Union , a Europe which must be more than just a Europe of governments - it must be a Europe of peoples as well - a Europe which must not be a Europe of bureaucrats but the Europe of the citizens .
In this regard , I hope that , at your Summits , in the forthcoming Treaties , greater influence , more space , greater responsibilities and greater powers will be given to the one body which genuinely represents the peoples and citizens of Europe : the European Parliament , which is currently belittled by the Treaties and the procedures .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the real value of the Nice Treaty is that it ushers in a phase of genuine reform of the Union - indispensable reform if the Community is to be prepared for enlargement .
I shall welcome any more accurate timetable for enlargement to come out of Gothenburg , although to name specific candidate countries would be irresponsible , given the negotiating chapters still outstanding and the Irish vote .
The Irish vote demands sensible reaction and analysis , even if only 33 % of the electorate voted .
This is not democratic fiddle-faddle .
Wrongly interpreted , the result of the referendum implies that the Irish voted against enlargement .
But what they voted on was the Nice Treaty .
There have been numerous setbacks in the history of the Union : Denmark 's no , Great Britain 's policy during the first BSE crisis , the resignation of the Commission and the illegal sanctions against Austria .
We must make a careful analysis of the reasons behind the Irish vote , which begs the question of what is wrong with the European project .
We do not just need a public debate on the reform of the Union ; we need more democracy and greater transparency on an integration process which is becoming ever more complex .
The involvement of the national parliaments as the representatives of European democracy is a key point here .
Mr President , may I at the outset offer Sweden my congratulations on its effective presidency .
I will be forgiven for concentrating on the Irish situation .
The Irish people have spoken .
The answer is " no " .
We must respect that decision .
Could I plead with the Commission , the Council and indeed the summit to be sure that decision is respected in what they say and in the signals they give .
They must analyse it and not treat it as an irrelevancy , sending a message that with or without Ireland they will proceed .
If that were the case , they would not need ratification from all 15 Member States .
If it is not the case , they must not treat the decision as an irrelevancy .
I say this to them as a passionate " yes " voter , because they are causing more damage with the post-Nice referendum signals they are sending than with any pre-Nice referendum signals they sent in Ireland .
Please be careful .
The complexity and the lack of clarity of the Nice Treaty allowed a huge range of issues to be tagged onto the debate during the Irish referendum , issues relevant and irrelevant to Nice , causing concern and fear among the people , which resulted in a huge abstention with a paltry 34 % turnout , of whom 54 % voted " no " .
In other words , 19 % of people entitled to vote voted " no " and signalled an unwillingness to proceed with enlargement , because that was what Nice was about .
Please believe me when I say that I do not believe that the Irish people wish to deny the accession countries the opportunities and support that we as a small under-developed country have experienced and put to great use over the last three decades .
Our government was obliged by a Supreme Court decision to spend as much money telling the public the reasons to vote " no " as the reasons to vote " yes " .
The media was likewise obliged to give as much coverage to the " no " campaign as to the " yes " campaign , without challenging the irrelevancies , despite the fact that all the major political parties , farm organisations , trade unions , press editorials and even the Conference of Bishops urged a " yes " vote .
There was an assumption that the outcome was a fait accompli .
Perhaps that explains why our government did so little , took the electorate for granted and was content to mine the Eurosceptic vote for the forthcoming general election , with several ministers in recent months giving very ambivalent signals .
Commissioner Solbes Mira 's reprimand angered middle Ireland and raised fears of Europe meddling in our tax affairs .
Statements from Mr Jospin and Commissioner Prodi during the campaign did not help , but the responsibility for investing time and energy in the campaign lay primarily with our government , and it failed .
The " no " campaigners , starting from behind with nothing to lose and no one correcting the irrelevancies and , worse , the scare-mongering , beavered away .
I voted " yes " and I resent the implication that by doing so I am pro-abortion , anti-neutrality , pro-NATO , pro-nuclear power , pro-euthanasia .
The list is endless - take your pick .
They are all issues worthy of debate , but nothing to do with the Nice Treaty .
We need time to reflect , to analyse the outcome , to learn from it , to respond to the legitimate fears and concerns and , above all , to try and understand why 65 % of the electorate stayed at home .
Was this an indictment of the European project or a mid-term wake-up call to our political establishment ?
The jury is out .
Following our government 's announcement last night of a new multi-party national forum to explain and discuss the European project in general and Nice in particular , I hope a more informed , reassured Irish electorate will allow our government to ratify the Nice Treaty in the next twelve months or so .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I very much hope that Gothenburg will be an opportunity for the Swedish Presidency to present a proper review of achievements .
I hope that the Gothenburg Summit , following the Stockholm Summit , at which full employment was once again confirmed as a European priority , will , on the home stretch too , make a major contribution to the sustainable development strategy .
But there is no denying that the Irish people ' s rejection of the Treaty of Nice could cast a major shadow on the success of Gothenburg if the Summit hides its head in the sand or proceeds with business as usual .
I should like to say the following to Mr Poettering : the signal that we Socialists expect from Gothenburg is not just that enlargement is a priority , but that it is enormously important for Europe to be strengthened , and that must be done with the full and democratic involvement of the people .
Those two things are not incompatible . Obviously the Irish must be allowed to work out their own solution to the problem that has now arisen , but the low turnout in the referendum and the negative results are not simply an Irish problem .
They are symptomatic of the dangerous gap that is opening up between European policy and the public in all Member States , not just Ireland , because of the lack of democracy , the lack of transparency and the lack of dialogue .
I am grateful to Mr Prodi for making it clear that Europe cannot be built by diplomats behind closed doors , and I particularly welcome the commitment of the President-in-Office of the Council , who is advocating a convention .
I do therefore ask you to make sure it does not become a watered down version .
But I also ask that you urge the Member States to step up the public debate on Europe ' s future and on enlargement .
It really might be a little more than the Member States are now reporting .
On the other hand , I would say to the President-in-Office of the Council that I also hope the Gothenburg Summit will be a red and green and not just a green Summit .
Mr Andersson has already mentioned the political breakthrough achieved in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs on Monday on the right to information and consultation , safety and health at work , more equal opportunities for men and women , all areas that relate to the quality of work which is so important to the Swedes .
Besides that , I sincerely hope that Gothenburg will give a clear mandate for the introduction of a European strategy on poverty , social exclusion and proper , decent pensions .
I think that if Gothenburg can demonstrate that , then it will show people that the European project is worth fighting for .
Mr President , the talk is of a Danish solution for Ireland .
That is perhaps the only way out , but it is a tragic solution that will lead to the country ' s marginalisation and to its acquiring the status of a colony .
It will be cutting itself off from influence but nonetheless complying with the decisions taken .
It is muzzling itself and shooting itself in the foot .
That is the fruit of the anti-European campaign run by nationalists and left-wing romantics and supported by reactionary Britons and former Danish communists who have always opposed European cooperation .
Mr Bonde has voted against every scrap of European cooperation .
He presents himself as the apostle of democracy and transparency but , until 10 years ago , he supported the most secretive system the world has ever seen and taught at the party schools in the East German dictatorship .
Do not listen to him !
Let us instead mobilise the large majority of citizens here in Europe who are happy to cooperate but who are dissatisfied with one thing or another and who cannot oversee what we are doing because the treaties are unreadable and unclear and because we too , here in Parliament , interfere in every conceivable matter , with the result that people cannot see an end to it .
Mr President , the Treaty of Nice is dead and must not be given the kiss of life .
To do so would be to show contempt for the voice of the people , not just in Ireland , but throughout Europe .
The rejection of the Treaty of Nice by the Irish people is not a rejection of enlargement .
No one campaigned against enlargement on the " no " side .
We want to show solidarity with the people of Eastern Europe and to give them the cohesion funds and agricultural funds that we ourselves received .
What people were asked to decide on in Nice are new ways of running the EU , which are unacceptable .
I should like to caution and warn EU ministers in Göteborg to consider carefully the effect that a second resounding defeat would have for the Nice proposals .
They should think carefully about the effects on their own electorates who are watching with increasing disenchantment the distant and cumbersome European superstructure .
The intergovernmental method of negotiating EU treaties where leaders wheel-and-deal behind closed doors on matters of importance for all our citizens has come to an end and is now also dead .
A new method has to be found which leads to results that are understood and accepted by all of us , involving national and regional parliaments and , indeed , civil society .
The Nice result is not an outburst of Euro-scepticism .
It is an indication of a serious rethink about Europe across the continent .
I woke up one morning to find that Irish soldiers were being sent to the Rapid Reaction Force .
I did not know how that decision was made .
None of our citizens knew how that decision was made .
We voted " no " because of those kinds of problems .
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , the Treaty of Nice is still not such a bad Treaty .
It is certainly well-balanced as far as the balance of power in Europe is concerned .
So why do the people of Ireland seem to think otherwise ?
It seems to me that , quite apart from their specific reservations , the Irish ' no ' is an expression of a Europe-wide phenomenon .
The public in the Member States are sceptical about the workings of the EU , or even totally indifferent to them .
That comes home to roost at critical moments .
And Friday was certainly not the first time .
It is disquieting .
It would be wrong to let the Irish carry the can .
After all , the question is whether the Nice Treaty would survive a referendum in other Member States .
We need more than just greater transparency if we are to overcome this European crisis .
It is nothing less than the political significance of the European Union that is at stake .
Our Heads of Government need to talk seriously to their opposite numbers about this .
The Gothenburg Summit has to be the starting point .

I only have one minute to congratulate the Irish people on their lucidity and courage and to thank them for saying ' no ' to the Treaty of Nice , and also to note that this means the treaty is now null and void .
Some people pretend to believe that this was just a passing whim .
In fact , it is the result of a popular referendum , something that ought to be the absolute rule on issues such as this .
For we cannot keep on singing the praises of the people of Europe and of democracy while denying those people their democratic right to speak .
By clearly choosing independence , freedom and national identity , the Irish have thwarted the dreams some people had of creating a federal super-state .
It will not surprise you that I welcome this .
Mr President , the applicant countries who are due to meet in Göteborg at the end of this week already know , in spite of the vicious analysis offered by the mass media , that , as Mr Cox , Mrs Ahern and Mrs Doyle and other speakers said , the Irish people welcome the EU 's enlargement .
In rejecting the Treaty of Nice , the Irish people have actually blown away the smokescreen that hides the real issues , for instance , that Ireland was moving away from neutrality and towards gradual cooperation into NATO , a move that erodes Irish neutrality , and would mean involvement in the armament industry and the rapid reaction force .
The Treaty of Nice not only damages the Irish people 's interest but those of every small nation in Europe , the applicant countries included .
The Irish lesson is a good one .
They have said " no " to removing democratic control from the hands of the people .
Thank you Ireland .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I was astounded when I heard the outcome of the General Affairs Council meeting last Monday .
The message was really something like ' business as usual ' , too bad , we shall just carry on , give Ireland another chance .
I would point out to Mrs Van Lancker that it was the majority of Socialists on the General Affairs Council that decided to go on with business as usual .
You do not need to tell us that strengthening is extraordinarily important along with enlargement .
We have always maintained that .
I hope you will tell your Socialist friends that business as usual is not acceptable .
However , I do believe that Gothenburg should be primarily an opportunity to reflect on what has happened and what the implications are from the point of view of involving our citizens more in Europe .
We must make sure our Heads of Government do not come out with all kinds of conflicting views after the signature of the Nice Treaty and simply add to the public ' s confusion .
Let us just think about what we have in common and what we want to achieve together .
Let Gothenburg also be the Summit at which , as you so rightly said , at last we shall be using a different method of operation , the convention .
But let Gothenburg also be the Summit at which we are ready to think about how we can speed up the process and how the public can become more involved in what is happening in Europe .
I think that is how we can benefit from the signal given by our Irish friends .
Madam President-in-Office , you mentioned the Middle East road map .
I sincerely hope that Europe is not going to go back to blueprints again . We need to use our diplomatic skills to help resolve the massive conflict between Israel and the Palestinians .
In my view , that must be the main issue and also , in particular , let us make every possible effort to find a solution for Macedonia .
Mr Poettering was quite right to draw attention to it .
That is the litmus test for Europe .
Mr President , yesterday afternoon , an extraordinary meeting of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs was held to discuss the serious implications of the referendum which has just taken place in Ireland .
After a very broad , coherent debate resulting in general political agreement , a declaration was adopted . This is the French text :
The result of the Irish referendum casts an unexpected and dramatic shadow over the method adopted by the Intergovernmental Conference last year .
This result shows a serious lack of understanding by public opinion in the Member States , which is due to the lack of transparency in the negotiations , the tortuous nature of the agreements concluded and the complexity of the issues relating to EU enlargement and the process of integration , all questions which have not really been discussed head-on with the citizens and therefore clarified .
We can certainly not leave any question marks hanging over the commitments we have already entered into with the candidate countries .
At the same time , when the national parliaments come to examine the Nice Treaty prior to ratifying it , they must not disregard the problem posed by the Irish vote .
Quite aside , however , from seeking solutions to the situation that has arisen , to which the Irish Government will make a vital contribution , the Committee on Constitutional Affairs wishes first and foremost to reaffirm , with even greater conviction , the positions it expressed in the resolution adopted in plenary on 31 May on the method to be followed from now until the year 2003 .
The Irish vote confirms the need not only for a wider debate on the issues relating to the Union ' s future but also for a mandate to draft texts that have a constitutional value .
This should be entrusted to a convention which , thanks to the participation of the national parliaments and the European Parliament , can guarantee the kind of transparency and complete legitimacy that have been missing until now .
Thank you .
Mr President , the Irish ' no ' vote must be respected , but when those who say no also say that the Treaty of Nice has come to nothing , that is not the case .
The Treaty of Nice will not have come to nothing until the moment when the Irish government formally tells the other countries that it will not be able to ratify it .
And that is something that the Irish Government has not done for the time being so , politically speaking at any rate , we have , in reality , the period up until the end of 2002 to see if we can get the Treaty of Nice ratified .
If that has not happened before 2002 , then we have a serious problem .
Denmark has already ratified the Treaty .
That is due to the fact that there is a broad political majority in favour of enlargement , and we have not wanted to place question marks over enlargement .
The instrument of ratification is being lodged in Rome today .
It is also important , however , for us to have a discussion about grassroots support , which was the Swedish Presidency ' s third key point .
It is therefore up to us seriously to get some impetus into this debate with a view to the periods both before and after Laeken .
Mr President , I do not blame other European governments for ignoring the decision of the Irish people .
The Irish Government themselves have ignored the mandate that they clearly got from the people .
As Mrs Dybkjær has just said , what they have done is to tell the other EU governments to carry on as usual ; they will then go back to the Irish people and get them to vote again until they get it right .
They are going to ask the Irish people to vote again on the same Treaty with declarations attached which are not legally binding .
That is completely unacceptable to the democratic process and our government is guilty of treachery in its approach to the Irish vote .
Enlargement can go ahead , but we want it to be fair and equitable .
We would like to see the new Member States come in under the same conditions as those offered to Ireland .
Instead , the doors have been tightly closed to keep those countries out until the rules are changed to suit the big and wealthy countries in Europe .
That is not acceptable .
The eastern European countries are being misled by those EU leaders who maintain that the " no " vote in Ireland was a " no " to enlargement .
That is not so .
As Mr Cox has said , we campaigned for enlargement but against the Nice Treaty , because it is not in the interests of the countries coming in , nor is it in the interests of the existing Member States .
It merely serves the interests of the more powerful , and that is not a Europe that we want to see emerge in the future .
, Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
( DE ) Mr President , I too should like to thank the Swedish presidency and , more especially , you Madam President-in-Office , for your cooperation .
The Irish vote proves that our citizens want Europe , but that they want a Europe they understand , a Europe that is transparent , capable of action and democratic .
So exactly how do things stand right now ?
We have a treaty which no one approves of , but which everyone says must be ratified because otherwise enlargement hangs in the balance .
But what will happen if the treaty is ratified in fourteen national parliaments - meaning that not a single comma can then be changed - and is then rejected by Ireland for a second time in the autumn of 2002 ?
That is taking a huge risk .
Perhaps we should be preparing other options , so that the formal conditions for enlargement , such as the number of seats and votes and questions for the enlargement treaties themselves can be negotiated , as we did on previous occasions ?
I think we should at least prepare such an option , so as to avoid delaying enlargement and sending out the wrong message and giving rise to uncertainty in the candidate countries between now and November 2002 .
We must ensure that the post-Nice process is speeded up through public debate and a convention and can be wrapped up by the end of 2003 , as the Méndez de Vigo / Seguro report suggests .
For the rest , I would advise the governments in the Member States to take a good look at this report , because it contains a whole series of tips on how to manage this crisis .
We have no use now for tricks , protocols , opt outs or anything else of the sort ; what we need is a treaty which clearly shows our citizens how they can play a part in Europe .


And although the Schröders and Fischers and Jospins and Blairs may have given brilliant visionary speeches over recent months , I for one should like to see them convert some of these fantasies into practical policy and for our social-democratic Europe not to go down in history as the Europe which was unable to resolve its problems , either present or future .
Mr President , as has already been said a number of times , the Irish " no " was not a " no " to enlargement .
Not one single political party in Ireland argued against enlargement , either on the " no " side or the " yes " side : only one organisation - a non-party organisation which campaigned for " no " - argued against enlargement .
The Irish people has spoken on Nice and its decision will be respected .
The people of the other fourteen Member States are also entitled to have their say on the Treaty in accordance with their constitutions .
For them it will be expressed through their democratically elected parliaments .
They must not be denied that right .
It is ironic , that the people in this House who argued against Nice , because Nice was too much Europe , are now saying that Europe should instruct its Member States not to ratify Nice .
It beggars belief that this undemocratic attitude is being expressed here by the Irish Greens and by others .
Could I put it simply for them , because it seems to be very difficult for them to understand : do they argue that the World Cup should be lost because the first team that plays should lose if it does not score the first goal , or should the game go its full term and should every qualified team play the complete game to the end ?
There is time for ratification , even if we need extra time , let us take that time .
As a democracy , where the people are sovereign , the Irish people is also entitled to decide to reconsider its decision and to confirm or reverse it .
We now need a sustained debate on Nice .
Those parties who supported Nice should seek a mandate at the next general election , which will take place by June 2002 , to present a new proposal on Nice to the people before December 2002 .
John Cushnahan and I have published a seven-point initiative on measures , which could help to clarify the issues and to assuage fears in Ireland .
I am happy to report that one of those initiatives , the establishment of a forum in Ireland on the future of Europe , has been adopted by the Irish Government .
That is a proposal which I tabled in December 2000 after Nice .
I thank the Swedish minister here this morning for her confirmation that there is going to be a convention .
It is not easy to discern the myriad of concerns , some domestic , some European , which gave rise to the " no " result in Ireland .
There is one overriding and general concern , the sense that people are losing control of their government and their lives .
People know that the European project is necessary and important , but they are at a loss as to how they fit into the scheme of things .
The bottom line is that if we want people in Europe in every country to initiate a new experiment in sharing their democracy , sovereignty , benefits of freedoms , then we , as their elected representatives have to lead courageously by spelling out in great detail how it will work .
In conclusion , the rights of each Member State and each person who lives in Europe must be guaranteed .
That can best be done through a new federalism based on a European constitution .
So far , we have only the vaguest outline of what that might represent .
We have a mountain to climb , but I am confident that the people in Ireland and the rest of Europe will rise to the challenge when they are given the chance .
Mr President , it is ten years since our Heads of Government discussed sustainable development at a summit meeting .
That is a disgracefully long time .
The Commission has submitted a good document , but why did the Swedish Presidency remove this Commission proposal to stop subsidising fossil fuels from the draft conclusions even before the Heads of Government arrived in Gothenburg ?
Why are they acting so cowardly ?
Why is Sweden scrapping sustainable development even before the Summit has started ?
The European Parliament voted by a 95 % majority for Europe to ratify the Kyoto Protocol , even without the United States .
I urge the Heads of Government to make it clear to President Bush that it is irresponsible for any country to remain outside the Kyoto Protocol .
It is bad enough that the United States still imposes the death penalty , as it has again this week , but that is after all a matter for the American people .
But President Bush ' s energy plan for more oil , more coal , more gas and more nuclear power stations is going to destroy the climate all over the world .
That is irresponsible and it calls for plain language and decisive action from our Heads of Government in Gothenburg .
Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I believe that you will leave this meeting happy because we are telling you that you are entering the final exam at Gothenburg well prepared .
I believe that today Parliament has recognised the efforts of the Swedish Presidency , and yours in particular , to carry out successful work .
And I also want to acknowledge this .
I believe that you have acted with political care .
For example , on the agreement on the memorandum on the cohesion funds you acted quickly , and that is positive , because Europe is not a Europe of traders , but a Europe of cohesion and of the common principles and values which we all share .
And I also believe that in the same way there has been a change in the Swedish Presidency in the latest preparatory documents on an issue which is of great concern to this Parliament ; the convention .
I believe that between the outset and today there has been a change , and that is that you have understood that the next Intergovernmental Conference should be prepared in such a way as to prevent what happened with the Treaty of Nice , and I believe that the convention model is showing the way : this models means participation , openness and transparency , all characteristics which you have a particular interest in .
I would like to ask you now to show a little more daring - as a French revolutionary would say , de l 'audace , encore de l 'audace , toujours de l 'audace [ what we need is to dare , still to dare , and always to dare ] .
You will notice that I am next to François Bayrou and I have been imbued with these revolutionary ideas .
Be more daring , opt for the convention , because I believe that that is the lesson we must learn from the Irish referendum .
We must count on the people , listen to them , hear them , and the convention is a useful method for doing this .
I therefore urge you to continue in this direction , which the President of my Group , Mr Poettering , has argued for , and to come back from Gothenburg with the good news that that convention has been launched to assess the future of Europe .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission . I intend to focus on foreign and security policy aspects which the European Parliament may care to recommend to the Gothenburg Council .
First , I should like to thank the Swedish presidency for its initiatives in the area of conflict prevention and civil crisis management .
They are a credit to the tradition of your country and they are right and proper for the European Union .
I should like to encourage you , Madam President-in-Office , to bring the project which you have started to a successful conclusion in Gothenburg in the form of a strong , specific programme which can be implemented at once .
One of the most difficult tasks , not just for the Council presidency , but for the European Council as a whole in Gothenburg , will be to convey to the American president just how worried and concerned we are about the new policy which he has adopted for the United States of America .
We are not just extremely worried about the rocket defence system , the rejection of the Kyoto Protocol and the USA 's attitude towards the International Criminal Tribunal ; the USA 's aversion to traditional cooperation with the European Union is a particularly worrying sign for anyone who sees this cooperation as instrumental when it comes to resolving huge international problems .
Madam President-in-Office , my closing point concerns a very sad and dramatic situation emanating from the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia .
We were due to receive Mr Trajkovski , the president of the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia , here within the hour .
He will not be coming - presumably because of the serious situation in his country .
And we must take our share of the blame , Madam President-in-Office , for the situation in his country .
We must take our share of the blame for the terrorist action of the KLA , which we have failed to disband , despite Security Council Resolution 1244 , and which is now attacking this country and undermining its very existence .
The European Union must do everything it can , Madam President-in-Office , to put an end to this terrorism and help this country .
Mr President , President Lincoln said you can fool some of the people all the time , all the people some of the time , but you cannot fool all the people all the time .
What is currently happening in the aftermath of the Irish vote on the Nice Treaty is unacceptable by any standards of Western democracy .
A Member State , under the provisions of the Treaty , has sounded out its people on the conclusion of Treaty changes .
They have for a number of reasons declined these changes .
This result cannot be ignored , either on the basis of a lower-than-normal turnout - what price legitimacy ? - or because some people feel that the only good referendum result is a positive one .
As the EU moves towards enlargement , we must not suggest to countries waiting at the door of the European Union that democracy and the rule of law can simply be overruled , by tacitly encouraging the Irish Government to hold another referendum sometime in the future .
No tinkering around with additional protocols will convince the sceptical public to vote in favour of Treaty changes which are difficult to explain and bring nothing of real benefit to improve the effective operation of the European Union .
There is only one way to reassure public opinion and maintain the vital goal of EU enlargement .
The Nice Treaty must in time cease to exist .
In these circumstances no treaty in these circumstances is better than a bad treaty .
Instead we now urgently need to hold a genuine , substantial debate about the future of the European Union .
The idea of a non-binding convention , to which other speakers have referred , is an idea whose time has now come .
This process will only be successful , however , if all European citizens are involved and consulted on these essential issues .
By the end of 2003 at the latest , the national parliaments should then be able to ratify either the relevant provisions of the Nice Treaty or those of the convention .
Should the European Council not follow this course and be seen to be trampling on the democratic procedures in small Member States , this will only serve to further alienate a European public which is genuinely in search of more information .
Europe and its institutions can only be built with the long-lasting support of its peoples .
Mr President , I should first of all like to thank the Swedish Presidency for conducting the enlargement negotiations so skilfully and for preparing so well for the Göteborg Summit .
I want to take up two subjects so that everything else is not drowned out by the referendum in Ireland .
First and foremost , sustainability .
I believe that getting this overall strategy on sustainability adopted will be a very positive contribution to European development .
We need to see incorporated into European cooperation a compulsory system for integrating environmental considerations into all areas , something which will happen with the Sixth Environmental Action Programme as the environmental pillar for the strategy during the next few years .
As we specified in Parliament ' s decision , sustainability must be seen in a global context .
At the moment , there are no other powerful parts of the world , outside the EU , which are in a position to take on that role , and I therefore hope that the presence of President Bush , who is perhaps the least sustainability-minded of all , will paradoxically make the EU more strongly united regarding this task .
And now a couple of words about enlargement .
We must be careful of rhetoric .
I believe we must show respect for the decision taken in the Irish referendum .
I am also listening , however , to the Irish politicians on both sides of the referendum debate who say that it was not enlargement as such that was the problem in Ireland . I therefore think it is very important that , following the referendum in Ireland , it should be clearly accepted that the enlargement negotiations can continue at the same pace until such time as a solution is found in relation to Ireland .
It would be an historic mistake if , because of this referendum , enlargement were to come to grief or were to be postponed when it was not this that was the problem for the Irish people .
I would therefore call upon the European Council , headed by the Presidency , to show flexibility , provide maximum support and make time for finding a solution that is satisfactory to the Irish population .
Mr President , Minister for Foreign Affairs , Mr President of the Commission , enlargement is more than just an economic matter , it is a great political event rooted in the history of the European peoples , in the culture they share : Roman law , Christianity , the universities and Enlightenment .
It is now our duty to rediscover this cultural unity which must consolidate the necessary and , I would argue , right and proper , irreversible decision to enlarge the Union .
The Commission , the Council and Parliament have the task of involving the citizens in this process , as President Prodi has stressed .
The Irish vote must certainly make us stop and think : we must not get things out of proportion but it is certainly our duty to involve the European people in the important matters concerning the Union .
In its endeavours to achieve the goal of enlargement , the Commission can count on the full , firm support of my political party and the new Italian government , which is involved in a fresh , incisive Europeanist initiative , as Mr Solana and Mr Giscard d 'Estaing have stressed and acknowledged today as well .

However , because it is our duty to involve the peoples of Europe , I feel that an initial stage should be also envisaged in the reform process in which the European Parliament , the national parliaments , the governments and the Commission work together to prepare for the 2003 Intergovernmental Conference .
President Prodi , I agree that the debate must not be confined to an elite : there must therefore be less elitism and more parliamentarianism in the reform processes .
As regards the other matter , relations between the United States and the European Union , I feel that we must foster transatlantic dialogue and , therefore , I welcome President Bush 's visit .
Finally , we must be committed to the Middle East peace process .
The European Union must do everything in its power ; in the future , once the most difficult stage is over and recourse to terrorism has been avoided , it should take action to assist the economic growth of the territories surrounding Israel as well , for they must not be subjected to economic as well as ethnic and political tension .
I feel that the European Union will be able to play a major role in this matter .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the 15 Heads of State and Government will be meeting this week for the European Council that will close the Swedish presidency of the Union , a presidency everyone agrees struck a positive note , especially in regard to transparency and citizens ' access to information .
This summit will also have to evaluate the unexpected results of the Irish referendum on ratifying the Treaty of Nice .
We are sorry the Irish people said ' no ' to this treaty ; although far from perfect , at least it resolved the left-overs of Amsterdam and , above all , opened the way to enlargement of the European Union to other countries .
So what are the Irish saying by abstaining so heavily ?
That all too often the citizens see Europe as some nebulous abstraction , with no bearing on their daily concerns .
If there is a message in this vote , it concerns the urgent need to hold a real , popular grass-roots debate on these issues .
I am confident that the Union can rise to this challenge .
We hope the Treaty of Nice will enter into force before the end of the year 2002 , so that the Union can welcome the new Member States in 2004 , as it has undertaken to do .
All the existing Member States must hasten to ratify this treaty without delay , and I am glad that by its vote in the National Assembly yesterday , France is now one of the first countries to do so .
Our priority , which the Gothenburg European Council must solemnly reiterate , remains to prepare for enlargement .
We will do our utmost to ensure that the post-Nice situation lives up to the European citizens ' expectations with regard to the purpose of the Union , in the light of its political project and its democratic deficit .
We will say ' yes ' to the post-Nice situation , prepared by a convention made up of the national parliaments and the European Parliament , the governments of the 15 , the Commission and civil society .
We will say ' yes ' to a European constitution that reaffirms our common values , respect for human rights , cultural diversity and the social model , and that defines the respective competences of the Member States and the Union .
We also say ' yes ' to a federation of nation-states in which each state will retain its specific nature and its competences .
Mr President , enlargement has been the main focus of this debate , which I believe is quite natural .
I am very pleased about the widespread support in Parliament for enlargement .
Parliament has played a vital role so far , for example with its requirement that the applicant countries will be able to take part in the European Parliament elections in 2004 .
You will also continue to have a key part to play in moving enlargement forward .
I will now return to Gothenburg bearing your stated wish for clear signals from Gothenburg , including a clearer timetable .
I will also return with the large majority in favour of ratification of the Treaty of Nice continuing .

I would like to say that I particularly appreciate Mr Poettering , Mr Barón Crespo , Mr Cox , Mr Collins and other group leaders expressing this view .
Of course we will take the referendum in Ireland seriously .
We must become better at obtaining more grassroots support for European issues and the European project .
We must take the referendum result seriously .
It is a common responsibility and common lesson for us all .
We will naturally all offer Ireland whatever help it and the Irish government decides it requires .
However , in order not to damage the European project any further and not to weaken faith in the Union , we must also move forward on ratification of the Treaty of Nice and enlargement .


I would like to say how fortunate it is that group leaders Mr Wurtz and Mr Bonde do not have a majority either in the European Parliament or in the national parliaments when they argue against ratification of the Treaty of Nice , for it is precisely this that is causing concern in the applicant countries .
The Treaty of Nice is , of course , the precondition for enlargement .
A no to the Treaty of Nice is a no to enlargement and , with friends like that , the applicant countries do not need any enemies .
It is also important for enlargement that the process of addressing the points at issue continues .
President of the Commission Prodi and several others have today emphasised the importance of addressing the seriously difficult issues and starting to deal with them , e.g. issues concerning the environment , free movement of people and free movement of capital .
I believe it is important to state before Parliament that , following the negotiations which we had at the start of this week , we have now not only created common positions among the Member States on these difficult issues but have also started negotiations with the applicant countries and even completed negotiations with several applicant countries .
We have successfully addressed the environmental issues with four applicant countries .
We have also successfully addressed free movement of people with a couple of applicant countries and free movement of capital with a couple of applicant countries .
Let me particularly comment on free movement of people , as this has been a very sensitive issue .
In this area , we have sought a flexible solution which entails our providing the opportunity for transposition periods for those countries which are absolutely sure that they need them , while allowing flexibility for others .
The Swedish and Dutch governments have recently declared that they will open themselves up to the labour force of new Member States right from the start , so that the labour force from new Member States will have the opportunity to work with us on the same terms as the labour force of current Member States .
I hope that many other countries will follow suit and give equivalent declarations as soon as possible .
In this respect , I also believe that you European parliamentarians can help bring pressure to bear on your national governments .
Many people have also mentioned sustainable development and the environmental issues .
I can guarantee that we will stand by the Kyoto Protocol .
We will be addressing climate issues at the summit and discussing them with President Bush .
We will do our best in Gothenburg to ensure that we take important steps forward on environmental issues .
At the same time , I think it is important to take up social issues , as Mr Barón Crespo and some others have suggested , and establish that we have made progress on these issues and the situation of the labour force .
With regard to foreign policy , we will continue to work with the Western Balkans and the Middle East .
We have seen the way the EU can play an important role .
Naturally , this work must continue .
I regret that we are unable to meet Mr Trajkovski today in Parliament but , on the other hand , I believe that he has made the right choice in these difficult times of ensuring that he takes the negotiations in the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia forward towards a peaceful solution .
I also believe that we have good instruments , and will have good instruments , from the Union for future work through the European programme for conflict prevention which Mr Sakellariou brought up .
This is also something which we in Sweden are keen to do further work on , even after the Presidency .
Finally , I would like to thank everyone for the kind words on the Swedish Presidency .
I would like to reply with my own thanks for excellent work and constructive cooperation with the European Parliament .
Unfortunately , this is the last time I will be speaking in this capacity , but I hope to enjoy continued cooperation with Parliament as an " ordinary foreign minister " .
( Applause )
Mr President , a brief response to some of the points that have emerged during the debate .
Firstly , I am extremely pleased to see that Parliament has taken the will expressed by the Irish people very seriously , not just because it is representative - although the turnout was not very high - of the wishes of an entire people but also because it represents the wishes of an entire country . Most importantly , this will encourage us all to find new ways of governing Europe .
It is a lesson , and I welcome the fact that a common desire has been shown - by Parliament , the Commission and the Swedish Presidency , as well as in the statement by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs read out by Mr Napolitano - to turn the page and change the way we run summits and legislate in Europe .
This is the real lesson we must learn , and therefore the great , transparent Convention which we are working towards must be the new approach , the approach upon which the European peoples can express their opinions in an informed manner , with peace of mind , familiar with the matter under consideration .
In an aside , Mrs Doyle touched on the statements made by Mr Solbes , myself and Mr Jospin , and their effect on the outcome of the Irish referendum .
My answer relates to the Commission 's statements .
The opinion expressed on the Irish economy and on certain problems which had arisen was based on a large number of criteria to which we must adhere .
It is the Commission 's duty to adhere rigorously to these criteria , which were , moreover , agreed upon by the 15 countries , including Ireland .
Our duty is not to make exceptions for some countries : our duty will be to apply the rules to small and large countries alike , for the Commission 's duty is to be the guardian of the interests of all the European peoples and countries .
This is what we have done thus far and this is what we will do in the future .
I would like to take the opportunity afforded by this brief answer to make two observations .
Firstly , we must not disregard - and I would like to thank the Swedish Presidency once again - the great progress made in resolving the sticking points of the social guidelines .
There had been an impasse in this area for a long time and they were a genuine problem : now another step forward has been taken .
In this connection , I would also like to thank Mrs Diamantopoulou for her work .
Lastly , a reference has been made to the speech I made a few days ago on the need for a European tax .
I would like to reiterate this concept , clear up any ambiguity and open a discussion with Parliament on this very sensitive matter .
The Commission is working on it , it is analysing the possibility and feasibility of introducing such a tax , which will have to replace existing taxes and will not be an additional burden of any kind for the European citizens .
We were quite clear about this from the very first time the matter was raised and we must continue to be so now .
We must also , however , make it clear that this initiative is a response to an explicit request from the Council and Parliament .
We must reflect on these matters , for the institutions must be democratic in matters of taxation as well , and thus the purpose of this hypothetical future tax is to replace the current - complex , obscure , non-transparent - system of contributions from national States and to make the citizens more aware that we have a democratic way of acquiring resources and a transparent way of spending the resources acquired .
This is our absolute duty for , apart from anything else , we must combat as far as possible the attitude , often common in our Member States , of " I want my money back " , the rather circumspect kind of accounting practised by the national States which leaves European institutions at their mercy .
In my opinion , this must change and , I repeat , it is a compulsory step for all democratic institutions : they must be able to count on clearly-defined resources - which can , of course , be transfers from national taxes to European taxes but must be clearly defined and specifically dedicated to the European institutions - and to answer equally transparently to the European citizens .
In my view , these are the methods that we must always use .
If we use these methods , the attitude of the European peoples will become much more positive and much more sympathetic , for they will understand what we are doing with their trust and their money .
Finally , we must also take the lesson of the Irish referendum and the subsequent deliberations to heart .
The European peoples want and must have an incisive , ambitious project on which to express their opinion .
They want to have a comprehensive project to assess ; they want to know what part of their future it is they are going to share with the other European countries .
They harbour no preconceived hostility , they have not suddenly become narrow-minded : they simply have the right to understand , the right to be aware of every new step that takes place , every new step that will affect their lives .
Since we have to take decisions , now and in the near future , which are important for all the European citizens , we must set this course , we must move in this direction .
And the convention is - or will be - the first tentative stage in this new era for the European institutions .
Thank you very much , Mr Prodi .
The debate is closed .
I have received six motions for resolutions , pursuant to Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , to wind up this debate on the statements by the Council and the Commission on the preparations for the Gothenburg European Council .
The vote will take place at 12 noon .
We have concluded this morning ' s debates .
I therefore suspend the sitting until the vote at 12 noon .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.33 a.m. and resumed at 12 noon ) .

Madam President , my point of order refers to an issue which I have raised on other occasions in this House and it relates to the fact that African people are continually dying on Spanish coasts .
Recently , fifteen Africans died when the Spanish Civil Guard attempted to board their ship off the coasts of the Canary Islands and this week another person has died .
We are terribly concerned when Mexicans die in the Arizona desert , but we are completely indifferent to the fact that people looking for work in Europe continually die off our coasts .
I believe it is high time that this Parliament and the other European institutions took measures to combat this serious problem which affects all of us .
We shall take note of what you say , Mr Nogueira .
VOTE
( Parliament approved the Commission proposal )
Procedure without debate
Report ( A5-0182 / 2001 ) by Mrs Redondo Jiménez , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive concerning statistical surveys in order to determine the production potential of plantations of certain species of fruit trees ( COM ( 2000 ) 753 - C5-0637 / 2000 - 2000 / 0291 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0204 / 2001 ) by Mr Xaver Mayer , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( EEC ) No 1696 / 71 on the common organisation of the market in hops ( COM ( 2000 ) 834 - C5-0768 / 2000 - 2000 / 0330 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution on the preparation of the European Council on 15-16 June in Gothenburg
Before the vote on the fourth indent of the preamble
Blokland ( EDD ) .
( NL ) Madam President , the fourth indent of the resolution refers to the Hulthén report and the Myller report .
There is no mention of the Blokland report on the Commission communication : on bringing our needs and responsibilities together - integrating environmental issues with economic policy .
I suggest that that should be added .
I have discussed it with those who tabled the motion and they have no objection .
( Parliament agreed to take into consideration the oral amendment )
Before the vote on paragraph 8
Madam President , I would just like to bring this paragraph into line with the paragraph we adopted last week , and therefore propose , once again , that the term ' Intergovernmental Conference ' be replaced with the term ' reform ' .
( Parliament agreed to take into consideration the oral amendment )
Oral amendments to paragraph 40
Madam President , I have an oral amendment which will further detail Paragraph 40 , particularly at the beginning , where it refers to the UCK .
The oral amendment reads " from the UCK and armed groups associated with it " .
I hope it is clear that this renders the text more specific .
Madam President , we have discussed this at great length and negotiated with Mr Oostlander in person .
We do not agree with this oral amendment .
Unfortunately , it is the UCK , not the ' so-called UCK ' , and they are ' armed groups ' , not ' allied groups ' which is why we oppose the oral amendment .
( More than twelve Members rose to oppose these oral amendments being taken into consideration ) - On the subject of Amendment No 41
Madam President , we have registered an amendment to paragraph 41 replacing Macedonia with Former Yugoslavian Republic of Macedonia .
I hope that this is noted before we hold the final vote .
Of course , this is a most important linguistic correction , which will be noted .
So we do not need to vote on it as it has been duly recorded .
Madam President , the text reads " Macedonian government " .
This is an oral amendment and we should ask if there are any objections to it .
No , that is not at all the case . It is a matter of consistency to use the term FYROM throughout the text .
( Exclamation by Mr Posselt : ' No , that is not true ! ' )
So it is in that spirit that we have made this change .
It really does not need to be put to the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , this is a highly political issue and I would therefore ask that you arrange for it to be examined by the relevant committee .
These linguistic shenanigans are in fact political points .
Otherwise what we put in before was also a linguistic correction .
Yes , Mr Posselt , once again let me assure you that we really have checked this : it is not a question of taking a political position but of consistency .
There was a linguistic error in the text , which has now been corrected .
Madam President , I think Mr Posselt is quite right .
Our Parliament has taken a political decision to stop using the term ' ARYM ' or ' FYROM ' , which is meaningless , and to call the country by its real name , which is ' Macedonia ' .
Madam President , I do not like the result of this vote .
Could we have it again , and maybe set up a forum to discuss it first ?
That is what we are asking the Irish people to do on this issue .
The correction in question is designed purely to make the text consistent .
We cannot use one word for something and then use a different one elsewhere in the same text .
That is obvious .
Having said that , if on some other occasion the European Parliament wishes to proceed differently , that is a political decision it will have to take .
We cannot , however , take a decision of this kind on one word in a text .
I therefore assume responsibility for the vote that has been taken .
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0187 / 2001 ) , by Mr Davies , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common position adopted by the Council with a view to adopting a European Parliament and Council directive relating to ozone in ambient air ( 13114 / 1 / 2000 - C5-0090 / 2001 - 1999 / 0068 ( COD ) )
( The President declared the amended common position approved )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0179 / 2001 ) , by Mrs Redondo Jiménez , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the common positions adopted by the Council with a view to the adoption of a European Parliament and Council regulation amending :
I. Council Regulation ( EEC ) 3528 / 86 on the protection of the Community 's forests against atmospheric pollution ( 14644 / 1 / 2000 REV 1 - C5-0072 / 2001 - 1999 / 0159 ( COD ) )
II .
Council Regulation ( EEC ) 2158 / 92 on protection of the Community 's forests against fire ( 14645 / 1 / 2000 REV 1 - C5-0073 / 2001 - 1999 / 0160 ( COD ) )
( The President declared the two common positions approved )
Report ( A5-0202 / 2001 ) by Mr Harbour , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on the proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on universal service and users rights relating to electronic communications networks and services ( COM ( 2000 ) 392 - C5-0429 / 2000 - 2000 / 0183 ( COD ) )
Before the vote
Madam President , when it comes to this report , the Finnish amendments for the part- session were only received this morning , i.e. I only received the 14 last amendments for this part-session in my native language this morning .
In my opinion this is unsatisfactory .
However , I am not demanding that the voting on this report be delayed because of this but I would just like Parliament to know that having these amendments arrive in my native language so late just will not do .
Thank you , Mrs Kauppi . I agree with you that this is quite unacceptable .
Thank you for your understanding and I will ensure that it never happens again .
Before the vote on Amendments Nos 47 , 48 and 49
Madam President , before we vote on Article 26 , colleagues have pointed out to me that the English wording of my Amendment No 47 , which I hope the House will adopt , is not entirely clear in other languages .
Therefore I should like to read out the English-language text , which refers to radio and television broadcasts .
The text , for clarification , reads : " ... in pursuit of a public service broadcasting remit " .
I emphasise the last word because that is intended to include both public service broadcasting and private sector broadcasters who work under a public service remit .
I believe that is not clear in every language .
I ask you to ensure that the final translation in other languages - assuming that my amendment is accepted - covers that point .
Certainly , Mr Harbour .
In that case , we will , of course , make the necessary checks .
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Welcome
Ladies and gentlemen , it is my great pleasure , on behalf of the House , to offer a warm welcome to Mr Olivio Dutra , Governor of the State of Río Grande do Sul , who is seated in the public gallery .
( Loud applause )
Report ( A5-0181 / 2001 ) by Mrs Lulling , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council Regulation amending Regulation ( EC , Euratom ) 58 / 97 concerning structural business statistics ( COM ( 2001 ) 38 - C5-0031 / 2001 - 2001 / 0023 ( COD ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0149 / 2001 ) by Mrs Torres Marques , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the proposal for a Council directive amending Directive 77 / 388 / EEC with a view to simplifying , modernising and harmonising the conditions laid down for invoicing in respect of value added tax [ COM ( 2000 ) 650 - C5 ­ 0008 / 2001 - 2000 / 0289 ( CNS ) ]
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Report ( A5-0194 / 2001 ) by Mr Miller , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , on :
I. the proposal for a Council regulation introducing special measures to terminate the service of officials of the Commission of the European Communities as part of the reform of the Commission ( COM ( 2001 ) 50 - C5-0057 / 2001 - 2001 / 0027 ( CNS ) )

II. the proposal for a Council regulation amending Regulation ( Euratom , ECSC , EEC ) No 549 / 69 determining the categories of officials and other servants of the European Communities to whom the provisions of Article 12 , the second paragraph of Article 13 and Article 14 of the Protocol on the Privileges and Immunities of the Communities apply ( COM ( 2001 ) 50 - C5-0058 / 2001 - 2001 / 0028 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the two legislative resolutions in successive votes )
Report ( A5-0207 / 2001 ) by Mr Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the Commission Working Document : Perspectives and Priorities for the ASEM Process ( Asia Europe Meeting ) into the new decade ( COM ( 2000 ) 241 - C5-0505 / 2000 - 2000 / 2243 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0186 / 2001 ) by Mrs Fourtou , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on petitions declared admissible concerning silicone breast implants ( Petitions 0470 / 1998 and 0771 / 1998 ) ( 2001 / 2068 ( INI ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Madam President , I refer to paragraph 21 of the Brok report .
We voted on this paragraph and I rather thought that we rejected it .
But you say that this paragraph was adopted .
Could you please check exactly what happened ?
You are right , the original text was adopted by an equal number of votes , since the amendment was rejected .
Madam President , I refer to the vote on paragraph 21 , not the proposed amendment .
Mr Sakellariou , I have had it confirmed that it was adopted by a large majority .
I am sorry , but we cannot re-take votes .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Gothenburg European Council
I voted against the second part of paragraph 23 of the joint motion for a resolution on preparation for the European Council in Gothenburg for the following reasons :
First , because there is no official Commission proposal on the gradual abolition of tobacco subsidies , merely a reference by the President of the European Commission , Romano Prodi , to the debate on sustainable development .
The wording of paragraph 23 is therefore incorrect .
Secondly , because abolishing tobacco subsidies in order to combat smoking is a hypocritical approach .
It is hypocritical because any such measures in a European Union with a tobacco deficit will achieve two objectives : first , they will punish tobacco farmers in southern Europe and , secondly , they will strengthen tobacco farmers in other , third countries , from which tobacco will be imported to make up the resultant tobacco shortage , which in turn will affect the balance of trade of the European Union .

Thirdly , because there are areas in Europe , such as the prefecture of Xanthi in northern Greece , where the rare Basma variety of tobacco has been the only crop cultivated for several generations and where it is the sole means of support for over 20,000 farmers who work in small , remote , mountain plots measuring between 30 and 300 square metres , where nothing else will grow , and who will be plunged into total poverty if the ideas being promoted are put into practice .
Madam President , I voted for this resolution on the forthcoming Gothenburg Council because it contains an important point on the undertaking to secure pensions in Europe - as the report says - which are sustainable and enable those who have worked to live a dignified life .
I feel that Europe must be close to its citizens , not just in terms of the economy but also when they have finished working and have a right to a pension which allows them to live comfortably even when they are too old to continue working .
I therefore hope that we will genuinely take this path .
Madam President , I voted against this resolution .
There were some good things in it , on enlargement and sustainability ; but in relation to defence policy , I just could not accept the idea of welcoming the rapid reaction force and wanting it to be operational before the end of 2001 .
I do not support the militarisation of Europe .
There are a number of aspects of this resolution , in relation also to defence budgets , which promote the militarisation of Europe .
There is one point that I voted against in the roll-call votes , in relation to the US missile defence system .
I feel the point was not made strongly enough .
It seemed to accept the missile defence system .
Just asking to be kept informed about it is not enough .
We should not go along with the US missile defence system .
We should oppose it at every opportunity rather than saying : just keep us informed about it .
In general I feel this resolution points in the wrong direction .
It supports the militarisation of Europe - something I do not support .
I voted " against " .
Perhaps , if you put it to me again , under a lot of pressure , I would change my mind , just as the Irish Government hopes the Irish people will do with regard to the Nice Treaty .
Madam President , the young people of Europe see this Gothenburg appointment as extremely important , for the Treaty of Nice and the Irish referendum are in danger of compromising the future of many of them .
This , therefore , is why , in expressing an opinion on the Gothenburg Summit , we have called upon the Council - and it is an appeal that I am also making in this explanation of vote to you , Madam President , who will be going to Gothenburg and who will certainly be able to refer this request with great authority , given that it would appear to come from Parliament - for a change of direction , for it to be taken into account that we cannot conduct European politics or achieve European unity in the same way as the diplomats of the 16th and 17th centuries .
Europe is different , and we must ensure that it is built by the elected representatives of the people , by an ad hoc body which is close to the citizens and young people , in particular .
Madam President , I voted against the joint motion for a resolution on the preparation of the Göteborg Summit because paragraph 8 thereof , on the future of the Union , calls for a Convention to be established to prepare the forthcoming IGC at the end of 2003 or 2004 .
As worded , the common position excludes all " stateless nations " inside the European Union . Basques , Corsicans , Sardinians , etc .
In all more than 50 million people will have no opportunity to participate in this debate .
That is quite undemocratic and most regrettable .
That is why I say clearly that it is a big mistake to exclude all these people .
Last week a similar amendment to the report by Mr Méndez de Vigo and Mr Seguro was excluded .
It is regrettable that we have made the same mistake today .
. ( EL ) Once again the leaders of the ÅU will meet behind closed doors in order to decide on our future .
Military and civil " crisis management " , the fire which has broken out in the Balkans and the increasingly acute destabilisation of the area and the enlargement of the EU are just some of the items on the agenda .
They will also receive the President of the USA in order to carve up the world and broker an understanding with him on the new Star Wars .
However , in reality , the summit will be held under the shadow of the recent referendum in Ireland , in which the people rejected the Nice Treaty .
However much the leaders of the EU try to play down the results of the Irish referendum , they cannot alter the fact that the Irish people have spoken out against the barbaric and inhumane policy being imposed by the interests of big business on our continent .
Their reactions show exactly where the limits of civic democracy lie .
They have provocatively stated that the timetable for ratifying the Treaty will be adhered to , the results of the referendum notwithstanding , thereby confirming that their democracy is a dictatorship of big business .
The state of the European economy , the fall in the euro and other economic issues will be addressed with even stricter anti-grass roots measures than before , at the expense of the workers , by speeding up capital restructuring and hitting the insurance systems , so as to safeguard the competitiveness and profitability of big business in Europe , thereby creating more poverty , unemployment and insecurity for the people of Europe .
This is the Europe of their visions ; by no stretch of the imagination is it the Europe of the workers .
The reference to the environment and what is euphemistically called " sustainable development " is a smokescreen to hide the fact that neoliberal policy is invading the collective sector which we call the environment .
The motion for a resolution by the European Parliament not only accepts these guidelines , it goes even further .
It distorts reality in a desperate bid to convince the people that all this is for their own good .
It plainly commends the militarisation of the European Union and expresses the hope that the Rapid Reaction Force will start demonstrating its operational capacity before the end of the year .
It calls for the Member States to spend vast sums on military expenses and on the European Council to approve a strong and efficient conflict prevention programme .
It hypocritically condemns terrorist action by the KLA and applauds the pressure being exerted on the government of the FYROM via Mr Solana and Mr Patten .
And to prove just how meddlesome it is , the European Parliament has seen fit to commend the Commission 's proposal that tobacco subsidies gradually be abolished .
It is for these reasons that the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece voted against the motion .
The referendum in which Ireland said ' no ' to the Treaty of Nice has given rise to all kinds of biased interpretations , which only goes to show how anti-democratic the federalists can be .
Some of those who want to pursue the ratification process as though nothing had happened have questioned the ' relevance of the referendum ' , on the grounds of the low turnout .
Perhaps they think that decisions taken by Eurocrats alone are more democratic ?
At any rate , the low Irish turnout was due mainly to the demobilisation of the ' yes ' voters , which is , of course , something else to be put on the debit side of the Treaty of Nice .
The second misinterpretation is that the Irish said ' no ' for specifically Irish reasons , i.e. because they wished to retain their neutrality in relation to defence , did not want to become a net contributor financially , wanted to retain their restrictive legislation on abortion , and so forth .
But these individual explanations do not suffice .
There is only one real reason for the open or underlying ' no ' vote : the Irish people 's wish to retain their freedom of decision faced with an invasive Europe , which would become even more so with the Treaty of Nice .
The third misinterpretation is this : we are told that in rejecting Nice , the Irish rejected the intergovernmental method of negotiating treaties on the grounds that it is too obscure .
That may be true , but we certainly must not conclude from this that in future we will have to take these powers away from the governments and introduce more supra-national methods of preparing or reviewing treaties .
On the contrary , we must give the nations greater powers .
Lastly , worst of all , perhaps , are those who regard the Irish vote as a reaction against a Europe that is indifferent to its citizens and explain that the only remedy is to establish a European constitution , as soon as possible .
Of course , this remedy would only make things worse by reinforcing the supra-national aspect .
So let us take a sober and simple look at the result of this referendum : it signals the rejection of a federal Europe .

- ( DA ) We abstain from voting on paragraph 5 about the pleasure felt at agreement ' s having recently been reached on a common EU position in connection with the negotiations with the applicant countries . That is because we cannot support the common EU position ( the Treaty of Nice ) , but are in favour of enlargement of the EU .
We voted against this proposal because the Europe of which it depicts some aspects is not our Europe , does not relate to the world of work .
It is the Europe of the traders , the bankers and the large industrial groups , a coalition between their respective states .
This Europe , laboriously established over the past fifty years by the bourgeoisies of European countries condemned to get on if they were not to disappear from the international economic stage , and yet competing among themselves , was built purely in their interests .
The difficulties it is facing in its attempts to enlarge to the countries of Eastern Europe are simply a reflection of its fundamental nature .
The future certainly lies in the unification of Europe , of the whole of Europe , on the basis of total equality between its peoples and the abolition of borders .
It cannot , however , be founded on an agreement between capitalist groups that are concerned solely with making profits , while totally disregarding the interests of the people .
A truly unified Europe under the democratic control of its people will emerge only if profound social changes are made , which bring an end to the economic and social domination of private financial groups .
. The Irish ' No ' was not a ' No ' to enlargement .
Not one political party campaigned against enlargement . Only one non-party organisation did so .
The Irish people have spoken on Nice and their decision will be respected .
The people of the other 14 member states are also entitled to have their say on the treaty in accordance with their constitutions .
For them it will be expressed through their democratically elected parliaments .
They must not be denied that right .
As a democracy where the people are sovereign , the Irish people are also entitled to decide to revisit their decision to confirm it or to reverse it .
It is my view that we now need a sustained debate on Nice and for those parties who supported Nice to seek a mandate at the next general election , which will take place by June 2002 , to present a new proposal on Nice to the people before December 2002 .
Myself and my colleague , John Cushnahan have published a seven-point initiative on measures , which we feel could help to clarify the issues and to assuage fears in Ireland .
I am happy to report that one of those , the establishment of an Irish Forum on the Future of Europe , has now been adopted by the Irish Government .
It should , in my view act in parallel with and interact with the European Convention proposed by the Socialist Group and which Minister Lindh has this morning supported as a proposal for Gothenburg .
It is not easy to discern the myriad of concerns , some domestic , some European , which gave rise to the No result .
There is however one overriding and general concern : The sense that people are losing control of their government and their lives .
People know that the European Project is necessary and important to them . But people are at a loss to know how they fit into the scheme of things .
The bottom line is that if we want people in every European country to initiate a new experiment in sharing their democracy , sharing their sovereignty , sharing the benefits of their freedoms , then we as their elected representatives have to lead courageously by spelling out in great detail how it will all work .
The rights of each and every nation state and each and every single person who lives in Europe must be guaranteed .
I believe that can best be done through a New Federalism , based on a European Constitution .
So far , we only have the vaguest outline of what that might look like .
We have a mountain to climb but I am confident that the people in Ireland and the rest of Europe will rise to the challenge when they are given a chance .
. I voted in favour of the joint resolution because I believe that the issues of sustainable development and climate change are so important in the context of the Göteborg summit that the European Parliament must make a very clear statement .
However , there are elements of the resolution that I did not agree with .
With reference to paragraphs 35 and 36 , I do not believe that a military alliance which is based on the possession and threatened use of nuclear weapons can be a force for " security and stability " .
Secondly , I am totally opposed to the proposals for the US missile defence system - a system which would be banned under the 1972 ABM Treaty and will increase international tension .
I do not agree that it should go ahead , whether or not there has been consultation with the European partners .
Despite this , there is a need for strong political leadership on sustainable development and I hope that the encouragement given to the Council to take on this role will result in progress at an international level .
In addition , the decision to look at Parliament 's own working methods and hold an annual debate on sustainable development are important steps forward .
. ( PT ) At a time when we are discussing the Gothenburg European Council , a few days after the resounding ' No ' in the Irish referendum on the Treaty of Nice , it is crucial that the European Union ' s political leaders , including the governments of the various Member States , draw all the political consequences of this important decision .
In a democracy , the results of a move such as this must be respected .
We must , therefore , review the content of the amendments to the Treaty , which were adopted in Nice and not insist , which is what happened recently with the vote on the report co-signed by the socialist Member , António José Seguro , on speeding up the process of the federalist integration of the European Union . This would endanger various fundamental aspects of national sovereignty and the interests of the smaller countries .
It is regrettable that , in Gothenburg , the opportunity of the Summit has not been taken to reflect on the need to review the current process of integration , which is neo-liberal , federalist and militarist , including the rather undemocratic methods that have been used .
We must insist on a new direction , grounded in respect for cooperation between sovereign and equal States , in promoting peace , and in responding to people ' s real needs .
It is , therefore , essential that in Gothenburg we see progress on support for peace in the Middle East , on respect for the rights of the Palestinian people , on protecting the environment and on sustainable development .
It is equally important that we adopt a clear stance towards George Bush - against his most aggressive positions , specifically with regard to the American anti-missile defence project and the death penalty and to demand that he respect the Kyoto commitments .
. ( EL ) The group of MEPs from the Panhellenic Socialist Party voted against part two of article 23 of the motion on preparation for the European Council in Gothenburg because it feels that abolishing tobacco growing in Europe , which is the aim of this provision , will not have the slightest effect on the overall quantities of tobacco used by the European tobacco industry , given that the European share of the supply ( approximately 30 % of the total ) will immediately be replaced by imports from countries outside the European Union , at the expense of European producers .
The MEPs from the Panhellenic Socialist Party feel that illnesses caused by smoking cannot be combated through ineffectual measures which are merely empty gestures that pander to the hypocrisy of those who have concentrated health care for European citizens on a single point of dubious efficacy .
At the forthcoming European Summit in Gothenburg , the Fifteen will most probably demonstrate once again that they are unable to build a democratic and social Europe .
Entrenched in its inability to sustain a just and lasting peace in the Middle East , Europe will continue to stand by and watch the Israeli aggression against the Palestinian people without being able to enforce UN Resolutions 242 and 338 or insist that the settlements are dismantled .
A few months ahead of the introduction of the euro , Europe will prove equally unable to intervene to prevent the dictatorship of the markets , letting transnational trusts like Marks & Spencer or Danone dismiss thousands of employees while amassing profits of several million euros .
We need European legislation that prohibits market-based dismissals , just as we need to introduce a tax on capital movements and to abolish tax havens .
What is more , however , following the failure of the Treaty of Nice , the Fifteen will continue to promote a Europe that is geared entirely to liberalism by continuing to privatise the public services and calling the systems of social protection into question .
Ireland ' s recent rejection of this treaty shows , once again , that Europe cannot be built without the consent of its people .
We need to hold referendums on the future of Europe and we need to review and amend the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
We urgently need to reduce the democratic deficit between the citizens and their representatives .
In Gothenburg , the future of Europe will be played out not in palaces turned into bunkers but on the streets , with the progressive forces .
. ( NL ) There is a big difference between the Europe the leaders want and the Europe the public wants .
The leaders want centralisation , greater uniformity , liberalisation , cuts in spending and a massive display of power .
The citizens want democracy , a small-scale approach , protection , social welfare and the right to diversity .
Whenever the people of a European Union Member State have the chance to express their views on further European integration , it turns out that about half the voters reject that development .
It has already happened in France and Denmark , and now it has happened again in Ireland .
The same thing will happen in Sweden and the United Kingdom in the next few years .
Last week , 54 % of Irish voters rejected the proposals put forward at the Nice Summit at the end of 2000 .
Not because they have anything against the people of Eastern Europe , but probably because , for example , they understandably do not like the idea of being caught up in NATO ' s military ventures .
Quite rightly , a number of the motions for a resolution tabled regarding the forthcoming Gothenburg Summit press for a stronger environmental policy , a social Europe and respect for the rights of the Albanians in Macedonia .
But basically , they still come from the top down and they represent the wrong Europe
. ( PT ) Sustainable development is at the very top of the international agenda .
This week , the European Union is dedicating a whole Council meeting to it in Gothenburg .
Next year , the international community will gather in Johannesburg , at the ' Rio + 10 ' Summit , specifically in order to update its strategy for sustainable development .
Let us not be under any illusions , however .
The international frenzy about this fundamental idea - sustainability , which is the same as saying solidarity with the generations to come and solidarity between peoples - is more the result of complying with a timetable established several years ago than of having fulfilled a strategy .
Ten years after the Earth Summit , which took place in Rio de Janeiro , and which instituted the worldwide commitment to a form of development that could bring together not only the economic and social dimensions but also the environmental dimension , we can still clearly see the signs of a lack of sustainability .
From the increase in global warming to the reduction of the ozone layer .
From a lack of food safety to the growing resistance to antibiotics .
From the proliferation of chemical products , especially organically persistent ones , to the destruction of biodiversity .
From the accumulation of industrial waste to congestion in the cities .
And we must not , of course , forget that terrible sign of the lack of sustainability of our growth model : poverty and social exclusion .
Given this context , the Gothenburg Council is of very special importance .
It will have to both adopt new policies for sustainable development for the European Union and also launch the bases for the worldwide strategy that is to be adopted in Johannesburg .
Before I state my political wish list for Gothenburg , I should like to briefly broach the institutional issue .
The fact that the Swedish government has decided to end its Presidency of the European Union with a Council dedicated to sustainable development deserves our applause - it could be said , in fact , that in terms of the political agenda , this Presidency has been a genuine breath of fresh air .
Equally worthy of applause is the document drafted by the European Commission as a basis for that Council , ' a Sustainable Europe for a Better World ' .
It is unacceptable , however , that the European Commission ' s extremely late submission of this document should have prevented the European Parliament from being able to contribute properly to this discussion .
Coming back to political issues , I have three wishes for Gothenburg .
1 ) The Gothenburg Council must produce a global strategy for sustainable development .
The European Union has an obligation to lead the worldwide debate on a new growth model , based on new methods of production and consumption .
This must be a model that does not make economic growth and social wellbeing dependent on the intensive use of resources .
Gothenburg is the appropriate setting to open this worldwide debate . It is not only absolutely ridiculous that the 15 Heads of State should dedicate themselves to contemplating the European Union ' s navel a few months away from a World Summit , which is being held with the aim of putting this model of global development into perspective ; it would also be a complete waste of time .
In these times of globalisation , we need European policies and targets for sustainable development that are designed to support and strengthen worldwide policies and targets for sustainable development .
It is to be hoped that in Gothenburg , people will be focussing on Johannesburg ...
2 ) The Gothenburg Council must give a political commitment , with clearly defined targets and actions , to correct the lack of sustainability in the European Union .
Gothenburg must be geared towards action , with clearly defined targets and timetables .
I therefore hope that the Council adopts the following targets :
a 30 % reduction from 1990 levels of European greenhouse gas emissions by 2020 ;
the elimination of subsidies for the production and consumption of fossil fuels by 2010 ;
in 2010 , alternative fuels must represent more than 7 % of all fuels used in road transport and , in 2020 , this proportion must rise to more than 20 % ;
to implement , by 2004 , the new Community policy for chemical products and ensure , by 2020 , that all chemical products that are harmful to the environment and to human health are completely eradicated ;
to adopt , before the end of 2001 , a plan covering agricultural and health policies , to break down human resistance to antibiotics .
to fully stop the depletion of biodiversity by 2010 ;
to adopt legislation on allocating environmental responsibility by 2003 ;
to promote public road transport and rail and maritime transport so that , by 2010 , levels of road transport use are lower than 1998 levels ;
to encourage the use of renewable energy sources , with a view to achieving targets of 12 % of energy coming from renewable sources by 2010 , and 50 % by 2040 .
3 ) The Gothenburg Council must launch the bases for the ' greening ' of the European Union ' s common policies .
There is little point in defining more ecological targets if policies , especially common policies , which are the means of achieving these targets , are inadequate .
It is , therefore , crucial that the Council indicates ' when and how ' the European Union ' s common policies that lack sustainability will be reformed , starting , of course , with the common agricultural policy , and covering the fisheries , transport and energy policies too , as well as the rules for allocating sums from the Structural Funds and the Cohesion Funds .
. ( IT ) After years of exasperating stagnation , the Union has , for some months , been progressing at an increasingly frenetic rate with which the citizens cannot keep up .
Indeed , it is difficult for them to follow all the stages which have characterised the development of the Union recently : the signing of the Treaty of Nice against the backdrop of the general discontent and the urban guerrilla warfare sparked off by the anti-globalisation movements , the ' Convention ' which drew up the Charter of Fundamental Rights , the ' fundamentalists ' who want to incorporate it into a European Constitution , the proposals currently being discussed to use the ' convention ' method again for the institutional reforms and so on and so forth
These are all steps which are difficult for the citizens to follow .
They cannot understand why progress is speeding up in some matters while it is infuriatingly slow in the issues that affect them directly : indeed , the absence of a European economic project , continuing unemployment , the likely weakness of the euro and lack of food safety are only some of the many issues which concern and perplex the citizens .
We would like to see the current elements of the Community acquis implemented first , and then a broader debate held with the citizens of the Union in order to clear up doubts and allay fears before we move on to new institutional phases .
This is why we have abstained in the vote .
. ( FI ) Besides the fact that I voted for the communication on the Gothenburg European Council meeting , I would like to state the following as my explanation of vote :
For the first time , environmental issues are the main issue before the European Council this week in Gothenburg .
The strategy of sustainable development will create a real content for the Union ' s policy , particularly by uniting the economy , employment and the environment .
This is an important step in the development of the EU in becoming a responsible player also in international cooperation , a good example of which is the visible defence of the Kyoto Agreement .
It must be ensured that the strategy for sustainable development will not be overshadowed by other issues at the summit .
In Gothenburg , the leaders of the EU must do their utmost to change the negative decision on Kyoto made by the US .
As the US National Academy of Sciences agrees on the necessity of the agreement , the Bush administration should not have a problem returning to the ranks of responsible states .
Serious consideration must be given to the Irish decision to vote against ratification of the Treaty of Nice .
We must reassess the way the Union works and increase openness .
When , according to researchers in the field , not even the Heads of State who took part in the negotiations are fully aware of the consequences of the Treaty of Nice , we might ask ourselves whether it is possible to reach a sensible decision on this issue at all .
Every support must now be given to an open preparation model as the forthcoming reform of the Union gets underway .
Citizens must be able to follow what is happening in the Union and the institutional reform cannot be made an exception to this principle .
The reactions to the result of the Irish referendum of many leading European figures who were directly involved in drafting the Treaty of Nice or who are now playing up to it sycophantically make it quite clear that the type of Europe depicted in that treaty is based on total lack of respect for the people of Europe .
In a sign of complete disregard for the dignity of the people , even before knowing the final result of the vote in which the Irish people expressed their views , Commissioner Verheugen dared to make the peremptory statement in relation to Ljubljana that an ' Irish veto ' would in no way prevent the enlargement of the European Union as provided for in the Treaty of Nice .
Still on the subject of commissioners , the sight of Mr Barnier shamelessly pretending to speak for the Irish people and learnedly explaining to the readers of Le Figaro on 11 June the three reasons for the Irish ' no ' vote , which , according to him , have nothing to do with the Treaty of Nice , reflects the same total disregard for the sovereignty of nations .
The Irish , who very scrupulously respect their Constitution , are the only Europeans to have had the privilege of being able to express an opinion on Nice in the most democratic way possible , i.e. by referendum .
That meant they had the benefit of a real national debate on the content and implications of that treaty .
Nonetheless , Mr Barnier declared that ' the Treaty of Nice itself was not at issue in the Irish vote ' ...
Mr Védrine , caught up in the system after initially opposing the draft treaty , now rises pathetically to its defence , accusing the Irish of having succumbed to a kind of withdrawal instinct .
Mr Moscovici is broadening the debate by welcoming the absence of a referendum in France : he dismissed this eminently democratic procedure by which the sovereign people are asked to state their views as a ' pretext offering the coalition of ' noes ' an opportunity to speak out against Europe ' .
As for the Foreign Ministers ' Council , since 11 June it has dismissed any possibility of renegotiating the Treaty of Nice to take account of the clearly expressed wishes of the Irish people .
This kind of stance very much gives the image of a Europe that despises its own peoples and is resolutely opposed to democracy ; a Europe that is being built in a deliberately abstruse manner so as to be immune to the wishes or scrutiny of the people .
To pretend now that the Irish ' no ' to Nice prevents enlargement is a nonsense .
It is the Treaty of Nice that creates the problem here .
On the contrary , thanks to the Irish vote , it is now possible , as Philippe de Villiers has proposed , to proceed with enlargement without confiscating national sovereignties .
This can be done on the one hand by abandoning the supranational part of the treaty and including its annexed provisions on enlargement in future accession treaties , and on the other hand by enabling the candidate countries to join the European Union immediately , without the need for a supplementary treaty , by offering them accession to the intergovernmental part of the treaty as it stands .
I have voted against paragraphs 30 and 31 of the resolution ahead of the European Council in Gothenburg .
As I have stated many times before , I am against a common European defence capability and increased military expenditure .
However , I share the view expressed in paragraph 32 .
. Madam President , I very much look forward to the outcome of the Göteborg European Council .
It marks the end of an impressive presidency by the Swedish Government and I congratulate my Swedish colleagues .
The Göteborg meeting of the Heads of State and Government will primarily be about enlargement .
The most important issue for this summit is to achieve a breakthrough in the enlargement negotiations .
The challenge for Europe in the 1980s was to build a single market .
The challenge in the 1990s was to create a single currency .
The challenge at the beginning of this millennium is to enlarge the EU in a way that creates stability , peace and prosperity for all .
Enlargement is crucial for increasing trade , employment and prosperity for all , for helping to improve environmental standards and reducing cross-border pollution , for promoting effective cooperation in the fight against crime and drugs , for improving minority rights , and for enhancing peace , democracy and stability in Europe .
This is an important message to take to our citizens in the European Union , who should be aware of the advantages and consequences of enlargement .
I very much hope that this Summit also makes strong progress on the issue of the environment .
Environmental issues are a top priority for our citizens across the European Union .
We need to prioritise limiting climate changes and take clear leadership in global cooperation .
We also need to agree on working towards concrete goals for the use of clean energy sources , a sustainable transport system , tackling threats to public health and improving our use of natural resources .
To make Europe truly a people 's Europe , we must " green up " our act and look closely at an innovative strategy for sustainable development .
Furthermore , we must tell people about the biggest challenge currently facing the European Union and its citizens , namely enlargement .
For far too long we have not told them this story , and it is high time we let them know .
After all , it is a good story to tell .
Recommendation for second reading by Mr Davies ( A5-0187 / 2001 )
Madam President , I was happy to vote for the directive on ozone .
As we know , ozone , in itself , is activated oxygen : a healthy thing .
What , I regret to say , is not healthy is destroying part of the protective layer of ozone which is in the air , causing an increase in radiation from the sun and the climate change that we all fear .
If this should happen , as we are well aware , that would be harmful - as it already is - to all the citizens but , especially , since it is mainly a question of the air we breathe , to the elderly , many of whom suffer from respiratory problems .
I therefore hope that the European Union will genuinely continue to work to combat air pollution .
Madam President , Mr Fatuzzo rightly referred to the risks of ozone to older people , but I would like to speak of young people .
For it is young people who are the main victims .
In fact , as you are well aware , if we do nothing about the greenhouse effect and the hole in the ozone layer it is the young , the new generations , who will be most at risk .
So I too welcome this directive and I hope that young Europeans will indeed derive real benefit from it .
That , at least , is what we hope and what we wanted to express through our vote .
Recommendation for second reading by Mrs Redondo Jiménez ( A5-0179 / 2001 )
Madam President , Mrs Redondo Jiménez has tabled a document which seeks to protect the European Union 's forests against fire and pollution .
Many pensioners and elderly people who are members of the Pensioners ' Party , of which I have the honour of being the representative to Parliament , tell me that they have free time and would like to be useful , to do something to help society .
Therefore , I propose to Parliament that the next guidelines laid down on this subject should provide for elderly volunteers who are available to be used to go into the forests and woods and to act as watchmen in order to prevent fires , particularly those fires started maliciously which are a scourge on the whole of our verdant Europe .
Madam President , it is our young people who spend most time in our forests , going camping , doing summer courses , taking part in boy scout ventures : out of our entire population they are the ones who have the most contact with the European forests .
What is more , our community service volunteers carry out forestry operations precisely in order to restore an ecosystem which is in danger of being lost or , at any rate , spoilt .
I am speaking on behalf of a great many young people who are members of and vote for the Radical Party , and I say to them that this is an important area of activity for Europe , and I see this directive , Mrs Redondo Jiménez ' report , as supporting young people 's endeavours .
Harbour report ( A5-0202 / 2001 )
Madam President , it would be difficult to deny that the people who spend most time watching television - one of the objectives of the Mr Harbour 's report - are the elderly .
Therefore , I welcome the fact that , with this directive , the European Union is starting to realise that it needs to do something about the programmes broadcast on television as well .
I feel that it would be appropriate if , without introducing unwanted censorship , cultural programmes were also to be made which would be educational for viewers and serve the community as a whole , so that we had something to watch other than violent films and spectacles which do nothing but destroy the values that the elderly still have but which young people , I regret to say , have lost .
Madam President , it may well be that the issue concerns the elderly as well , but it is extremely important in terms of young people and , above all , children .
We know how many children watch television and how often they watch it alone , without parental supervision , without , that is , the filter provided by the family , or maybe not the family , given that the statistics show that many children are born out of wedlock .
From this point of view , therefore , the Harbour report is important , and I am saying this precisely on behalf of the young people of our continent , on behalf of the many young people who approach us and tell us to concern ourselves with broadcasts - not to mention the conflicts of interests and monopolies which have been discussed so often in recent days - and I would add that it is important precisely for young people and children that the European Union legislates on this matter .
Lulling report ( A5-0181 / 2001 )
Madam President , the explanatory statement on page 11 of Mrs Lulling 's report declares that the information required from the companies who draw up these statistics must include information on the pension funds to which the employees of the company subscribe .
However , I regret to say that the attached form , which I have read , does not contain the most important , useful , relevant question that these companies should be asked .
What is the question that must be asked regarding these companies ' pension funds ?
It is this , of course , Madam President : are the pensioners drawing pensions from these funds satisfied with their pensions ?
Because , if not , something needs to change .
Madam President , who is it that deals with statistics in the companies ?
Usually young graduates , young people who have been taken on in these companies and who come from universities that indeed teach statistics .
The part of Mrs Lulling 's report which relates to young people is therefore important .
I cannot stress this enough and I would like to say that we voted for the text .
Torres Marques report ( A5-0149 / 2001 )
Madam President , this report tackles the issue of simplifying invoices .
Here too , at last , is an attempt to improve the regulation of electronic signatures on invoices .
I am for the use of electronic signatures , but I feel that we should work towards introducing them in votes where a signature is required as well .
As you know , there are national referendums , and there are proposals for national legislation which are signed by the citizens .
They have to be signed by a certain number of people , for example 500 thousand citizens .
They could sign these directly democratic requests - these referendums and proposals for national legislation - electronically as well .
This would be a sign of greater democracy in the nations of Europe .
Madam President , I agree fully with what Mr Fatuzzo has said .
We Radicals are also fighting in Italy for the use of electronic signatures to be extended and authorised , in view of the catastrophic performance at the last Italian elections , in which voting continued until 5 o 'clock in the morning in some centres whereas the elections should have closed at 10 o 'clock at night .
I would also stress that it is precisely these young research scientists , who have taken over the world in recent years with new technologies - consider the average age of Java or even Microsoft programmers and of the creators of all these new technologies - who have ensured that the world of young people is the first to be concerned with the development of information technology and applied technologies .
In this respect , I can only congratulate the rapporteur on this report , for the subject is of great interest to many young people who vote for the Radical Party .
Miller report ( A5-0194 / 2001 )
. I wholeheartedly support this report by my Socialist colleague Helena Torres Marques which aims to ease the administrative burden on businesses trading across countries .
It replaces 15 different national rules governing VAT invoices with one simple set of rules .
This demonstrates yet again Europe 's commitment to create an environment for entrepreneurs and businesses to flourish across the EU .
Different rules for VAT invoices in EU Member States often hinder many businesses , particularly small and medium-sized companies .
Not only does this proposal replace national rules for VAT invoices with one set of rules , but it also covers electronic invoicing and there is provision for the use of advanced electronic signatures .
By introducing uniform measures in business transactions across Europe , small companies will gain confidence in trading , not just across Britain , but right across the European Single Market .
The Single Market is essential for jobs in the North West of Britain .
Nearly 40 % of small and medium-sized business enterprises in the region have trading links with other EU Member States .
As a member of the European Single Market , they will have access to over 370 million potential customers - over 6 times more than in Britain alone .
I and my Labour colleagues are determined to make the Single Market work for British business .
By giving businesses from Bury to Blackburn the confidence to reach into these markets , this measure will contribute to this aim and will increase trade , growth and employment across the North West .
Madam President , I abstained in the vote on this document .
It is an abstention which expresses my desire for what is a dream for many European workers to become reality .
This document enables those who so desire - and that is a good thing - to have the right as employees of the European Commission to retire at 50 years old , providing that they have paid 10 years of contributions , and to receive an allowance of 60 % of their last basic salary .
Of course , I am happy for them , but I would prefer it - and this is why I abstained - if we could say the same thing to all the workers of Europe as well , who , in all our States , are told , " You will have to work until you are 65 or 70 years old and for at least 30 , 35 or 40 years , and the most you will be able receive is 40 or 50 % of your retirement pension " .
Madam President , Mr Miller 's report is important primarily as regards the entry of many young people at the bottom grade , who leave the world of studying for the world of work and become part of the European civil service in the Community .
It is therefore on these young officials that I wish to focus , for this progress towards the future pension mentioned by Mr Fatuzzo is , of course , linked to a career which starts at the youngest age at which is possible to join the Union 's staff .
And it is of these young officials that I was thinking when I voted for the Miller report , voting for an improvement , in the context of the Kinnock reform , in the terms and conditions of the officials and other employees of the European Union as well .
Of course we are in favour of allowing officials and temporary servants of the political groups to take early retirement , if they so wish , under the terms set out in the proposal .
But at the same time we cannot endorse the justification for these measures , namely to create an additional 1254 posts without incurring any additional expenditure .
We cannot help feeling suspicious about the way these posts are to be filled , given that it will be mainly by ' redeployment ' and ' rationalisation ' rather than recruitment .
And the fact that the expected 600 departures will be offset by only 258 new recruits certainly implies that the authors of this proposal are looking mainly to increase the workload on the remaining staff .
That is why we abstained on this report .
Brok report ( A5-0207 / 2001 )
Madam President , I am extremely happy that progress is being made in the dialogue and cooperation between the European Union and the ASEM States , that is Brunei , China , Indonesia , Japan , Korea , Malaysia , the Philippines , Singapore , Thailand and Vietnam , which also concern other very important groups of States in the area such as India , Pakistan , Australia and New Zealand .
I voted for this cooperation , but I call - and I am very happy to do so in this explanation of vote - upon the representatives of the European Union and these States to decide together , in these agreements , exchanges and meetings , upon the best way to tackle and resolve the problems of the elderly people of Europe and of the Far East .
Madam President , Mr Dupuis was initially the rapporteur of this report but , unfortunately , he had to give up because his approach - which was , in my opinion , in line with Parliament 's recommendations and rightly focused on the serious violations of human rights in those areas , in certain countries in particular - was not taken up by the committee responsible .
We Radicals therefore abstained in the vote on a text with which we partly disagreed , precisely because it originated from a proposal by Mr Dupuis .
Having said that , Madam President , if there is an area , a context in which the dimension of young people is essential , it is the new recruits of Asia : it is they who may be able to take over from the old generation of Mandarins , those many elderly people who are unfortunately in command of these countries which are often run by dictatorships .
I place my trust in those young people and I hope that the European Union will do the same .
Make way for the young people of those countries !
Fourtou report ( A5-0186 / 2001 )
The resolution tabled on the relations between the states of the European Union and Asia ( the ' ASEM process ' ) has one positive aspect .
It confirms that the importance formally attached to human and democratic rights must not remain a dead letter , that the progress achieved ( or not ) in this field must be assessed at regular intervals and that political consequences must be drawn from these findings .
It also calls for strengthening the inter-parliamentary process , so that the governments and heads of enterprise do not have a monopoly over the Asia-Europe ' dialogue ' , by involving the elected institutions .
All this could help us strengthen the impact of independent and cooperative intervention by the social movements and the citizens of Europe and Asia .
Yet the resolution also has a very negative aspect .
Paragraph 26 , which called for respect for the ILO agreements on trade union rights and workers ' rights , has been deleted .
' Migratory flows ' are once again associated , in the same sentence , with ' transnational crime ' and ' terrorism ' .
The resolution also wants to impose , as a ' priority ' , respect for the ' world trade order ' , in other words , submission to the dictatorship of the WTO and neo-liberal dogmas .
In that spirit , it highlights the ' central role ' that is to be devolved to the ' Asian-Europe Business Forum ' .
I therefore abstain on this resolution .
Madam President , I am , of course , in favour of banning the use of silicone in breast implants .
Last week , Madam President - if you will pardon this aside - I mentioned this document to my daughter , Cristina , who , moreover , was a runner-up in the Miss Italy competition , and I said to her : " I am totally against the use of silicone implants , particularly for women .
You don 't use them , do you ? "
" What are you saying ? " she replied .
" I would never use silicone breast implants because I have absolutely no need of them .
Are you saying I have to come to Strasbourg to inform all the MEPs to whom you will relate this conversation that I am fine just as I am , au naturel , without any operations ? "
And that is why I did not bring her to Strasbourg with my mother , my sister and my wife .
If I may say so , Madam President , it is our loss , for , in addition to being very beautiful , Mr Fatuzzo 's daughter is also very nice and her absence is therefore a great loss to this Chamber or , at any rate , to Parliament .
By way of conclusion , Madam President , I would like to thank you for putting up with this little aside and say that , as far as silicone breast implants are concerned , if there is one category for which it is imperative that we introduce preventive measures to combat the risks engendered by breast implants - the sometimes negative effects of which in the field of health are , in spite of everything , still not well-known - it is precisely the category of young girls who , at 15 or 16 years old maybe , compare themselves with the women they see on various television programmes and attempt to improve their appearance by having , even at that tender age , a breast implant operation .
In this sense , therefore , the category of young people is particularly concerned , and the text we have adopted today must be addressed first and foremost to them .
. The Greens / EFA Group welcomes this report by Mrs Fourtou on Silicone Implants as a step forward in aiming to improve both the availability of information to those considering such implants and in the follow-up of the potential impact on their health .
This report is also valuable in that it stems directly from the action of citizens bringing the issue to Parliament ' s Committee on Petitions - an opportunity available to anyone in the EU where they have concerns about EU legislation and its implementation , or the lack of such legislation .
The petitioners were people concerned , often directly , about the harmful impact of silicone implants for their health .
They spoke movingly to the Committee , research was commissioned via STOA , and this report reflects the outcome .
My Group welcomes the recommendation for further , more specific research .
We also welcome the recommendation for a minimum age for such surgical intervention .
It is of great concern to us that many young women feel the need to resort to cosmetic surgery in the search for a more perfect body in order to feel that they fit in to society , rather than society being willing to readily accept people , whatever their size and shape .
There is a need in a number of member states for cosmetic surgery , particularly that offered privately , to be effectively regulated and for all patients to be given full information .
The patient register is an important proposal as it will help in future research but also to reach women who may be felt to be at risk in the event of any future problem with a particular implant .
I trust that the Commission communication will include the recommendations of this House .
. ( NL ) Manufacturers have found a market amongst women who have had to have a breast removed after contracting breast cancer .
By using silicones it is possible to improve their physical appearance .
The problem is that after five years , half these breast prostheses start to leak and after 20 years , it is over 95 % .
Toxins enter the women ' s bodies and can cause inflammation , attack the auto-immune system and damage the connective tissue .
In the circumstances , it is better to stop using the silicone implants and to focus on developing alternatives .
France has now banned the implants , but other Member States are wavering and indecisive .
I agree with those who submitted the petitions that silicone breast implants should not be used until they have been proved not to be harmful .
The rapporteur ' s solution , which is to improve information and registration , is certainly a step in the right direction in that it might reduce the number of victims , but it is inadequate because it means that there will be more victims even in the future .
It is still vital to give women better protection against the manufacturers and make sure they do not sacrifice their health for the sake of appearance .
I have voted against the proposal .
The European Parliament has once again failed to establish the limits of the EU ' s responsibilities and the Member States ' areas of competence .
The EU must concentrate on its core areas and main tasks .
This focus should be even clearer since the Irish people ' s rejection of the Treaty of Nice in a referendum on 7 June .
The report before us concerns silicon implants , with proposals for rules , regulations , an age limit of 18 for breast implants for cosmetic reasons and the establishment of a European patient register .
It should be clear that this is not an issue to be decided at European level and that it has nothing to do with the main task of the European cooperation project , i.e. to promote peace in our part of the world .
If nobody else wishes to speak , the sitting is suspended .
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

Working time in mobile road-transport activities
The next item is the recommendation by Mr Hughes , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs ( A5-0196 / 2001 ) , for second reading on the Council Common Position for adopting a European Parliament and Council Directive on the organisation of the working time of persons whose occupation is the performance of mobile road-transport activities [ 5919 / 1 / 2001 - C5-0134 / 2001 - 1998 / 0319 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , our ongoing work on working time goes back to the 1993 Directive , which excluded approximately six million workers in total , some 5 million of whom were working in the various transport sectors .
Last year 's overhaul of the directive brought all rail workers , non-mobile workers in the other transport sectors , offshore workers and doctors in training under the directive 's scope .
Furthermore , separate agreements have been reached in the maritime and aviation sectors .
This proposal on road transport thus seeks to close one of the last remaining gaps , but even so it will not cover all drivers .
As it stands , it will only apply to workers covered by Regulation No 3820 / 85 and will therefore leave out a number of categories of workers , including workers driving vehicles of less than 3.5 tonnes , regular urban transport drivers , taxi drivers and drivers of vehicles carrying no more than nine passengers .
Amendment No 5 , from the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , seeks an early revision of the regulation in order to include these workers .
Even more serious , however , is the possibility left open in the common position , namely that the self-employed might be permanently excluded from this directive .
The original 1993 directive applies to employees , but this proposal has two legal bases : Article 137 covers occupational health and safety , while Article 71 covers operational safety .
It therefore applies to the self-employed , and rightly so .
We cannot exclude the self-employed .
If it is dangerous to a driver 's health and safety , and to road safety more generally , for an employed driver to work long hours , is it not just as dangerous for a self-employed worker ?
The answer to that , of course , is that it must be .
When a lorry fills your rear-view mirror , are you going to wonder whether that driver is employed and rested , or self-employed and potentially tired and dangerous ?
So inclusion of all drivers is important , both on occupational health and safety grounds and on operational safety grounds .
But there is also a third important element : that of ensuring fair competition between the various modes of transport .
The rail sector is currently covered by the 1993 directive , but road is not covered by anything approaching a similar regime .
If we are serious about promoting a transfer of freight traffic from road to rail , with all of the environmental benefits that this can bring , then this too is a very important consideration .
My proposed compromise on this point is the same as the Commission 's revised opinion following our first reading .
In Amendment No 4 , I propose an extra three-year transition for the self-employed , and then their automatic inclusion .
However , even this poses difficulties .
Even a temporary exclusion might open up the possibility of imaginative new forms of false self-employment and of collective arrangements being dismantled by unscrupulous employers .
That is why the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs has also proposed a tighter definition of what a self-employed driver actually is in Amendment No 10 .
Those not meeting the criteria listed therein would be subject to the same rights and obligations under the directive as employees .
These are some of the important points in the proposal , but others include the definitions of working time and stand-by duty .
The common position is so vague on these issues that there is little point in trying to limit working time on that basis .
We have , therefore , proposed a return to the definition in the Commission 's revised opinion in Amendment No 6 .
In Amendment No 15 we propose that the reference period for calculating the average 48-hour week be limited to arrangements set in place as a result of collective agreements .
I proposed to the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs that a driver should receive prior notice of commencement of a period of availability 24 hours in advance .
That did not get the support I would have liked in committee , and I would therefore recommend to the House that the compromise proposed by Mrs Lynne in Amendment No 24 of 12 hours ' prior notice should be supported .
In Amendment No 14 I propose that night work be limited to 8 hours with a possible temporary extension to 10 hours , so long as the 8-hour average is achieved over a reference period to be agreed after consultation with the social partners .
The human being is not a nocturnal animal and research demonstrates that the risks of accidents to health and safety are highest as a result of night work .
Therefore , that is also an important point .
In conclusion , the key element is that of the inclusion of the self-employed .
I hope transport ministers will be persuaded to agree to it , otherwise this whole package might be rejected .
They would be to blame if that were to occur , and I hope we can work together to make sure that we put this piece of the jigsaw puzzle in place as soon as possible .
Mr President , we support this directive .
I will not deny that there was a lengthy debate about specific points .
The most important bone of contention in our group was the inclusion of the self-employed .
The majority of the group supported that view , but even so , unlike the discussions at first reading , where the Commission and Parliament agreed that the self-employed should be included , the debate was much more difficult this time .
However , the majority of the group was , as I said , in favour of including the self-employed .
Why ?
Firstly because the self-employed , like any other workers , are obviously entitled to health and safety at work .
Secondly , competition .
It is not right for businesses , whether independent or working with employees , to compete with each other on working hours , as is the case with the Common Position of the Council and the Commission .
A third reason - probably the matter on which the public is rightly most sensitive - is that many regrettable accidents occur , very often due to the fact that people have to work far too many hours and there is too little control . What is more , the control is made even more difficult by tachographs being tampered with .
This has a human cost , whether to tourists travelling south or motorists forced off the road by a lorry driver who has fallen asleep at the wheel .
I believe it is our duty to adopt a regulation on this at European level .
That does not mean it is not still open to discussion .
The PPE-DE Group will not be supporting two of the points .
Firstly , according to the text discussed in the Commission , employees are to be informed twelve hours or a specified number of hours beforehand and before the end of the previous shift of the start and length of their period of availability .
We shall not be supporting that because we believe that the unpredictability of traffic flows makes it really too difficult to organise .
The second point is that according to Amendment No 8 , employers should count the time a non-driving worker spends sitting next to the driver whilst the vehicle is in motion as working hours .
We agree with the Commission that that should continue to be counted as a period of availability and not as working hours .
Mr President , Commissioner , I will start by saying that our Group warmly supports all the arguments and all the amendments which the rapporteur , Mr Hughes , has produced for this second reading .
I am going to take this opportunity to highlight the problem of independent workers , because I believe that the good intentions on the health and safety of mobile workers , which the Commission and the Council are boasting of , may have horrendous effects if obstacles continue to be placed in the way of including independent workers in the Directive .
It is a fact , ladies and gentlemen , and not an opinion , that the three basic principles put forward to justify the need for the Directive - the health and safety of workers , road safety and fair competition - are mere words if we exclude independent workers .
It could even be said that the health and safety of the majority of workers in countries such as mine , who are self-employed , are not of the least concern to us if we exclude them from this Directive .
The Council has the opportunity to avoid responsibility for situations such as those which arise in my country , where more than 400 drivers lose their lives every year , without distinguishing between self-employed and salaried workers .
This figure is increasing by 20 % per year .
Why are we only going to take account of the risk facing a minority of these drivers ?
' Are the self-employed not people ? ' , as Mrs Smet asked .
Of course they are .
Why forget about the majority ?
Do those drivers and citizens who use the roads not face identical risks ?
Let us be serious .
If we really want road safety and the health and safety of workers , it makes little difference whether they are self-employed or salaried .
Independent workers are not another race .
In fact , they have more work to do than the salaried workers .
They have to look after their lorries , their businesses , they have to load and unload , adding these tasks to their maximum hours , while salaried workers deduct all of this from their maximum hours .
As if this argument were not enough , ladies and gentlemen , and if we want to consider the question of free competition , of fair competition , please bear in mind that salaried drivers are going to spend fewer hours driving , the lorries they drive are going to make shorter daily trips and they will arrive later at their destinations .
How competitive are those companies going to be in comparison with those companies whose conditions are much tougher and much less economically burdensome ?
So our conclusion is that excluding self-employed workers is going to have horrendous effects for these workers and also for the sector .
For all of these reasons , we urge the Council to add to the effort that it has already made and include independent workers , if it truly - and this is not pure rhetoric - wishes to protect the health and safety of all drivers , increase road safety , promote fair competition at Community level and not destroy the sector .
It should do so if it wants to protect jobs and companies and , if it wants , in summary , the directive that we deserve in the 21st Century .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the liberal group is not very happy with the rapporteur ' s proposals .
Firstly , because they contain legislation which is not workable in practice and harms the competitiveness of self-employed drivers .
Secondly , because compliance with the rules cannot be monitored or enforced .
They are therefore unnecessary , and the liberal group is always opposed to such legislation .
Thirdly , there is sufficient national legislation . Even the Common Position is giving this due consideration .
And if there is any legislation required at all , then the majority of my group are satisfied with the common position .
The transport sector consists of a few major businesses , and their employees must be given sound working conditions .
It is in the interest of the internal market that a European framework be created for that purpose .
But the transport sector also consists of many small , self-employed drivers .
They are independent businesses with one or two lorries which service a vital segment of the market .
They must be able to do their work , their businesses must be profitable and their services competitive , and they must not be bogged down by unnecessary red-tape and legislation .
One of our major objections is therefore to the proposal that self-employed drivers will need to comply with this legislation in three years ' time .
It would be preferable to see what the proposals bring and only then to consider whether self-employed drivers should adopt this framework or whether separate regulation is required .
As for night work , we agree on the times as described in national legislation , for they offer plenty of flexibility .
However , the period of availability is creating problems for us .
Here too , we would like to take a pragmatic approach .
Drivers often face unforeseen hold-ups , as a result of which they need to have more frequent breaks to eat , for example .
There are other reasons for long delays .
If all that were to be included in working time , the driver would very soon reach the maximum limit , as a result of which productivity would decline unnecessarily . That has little to do with health and safety .
Finally , the definition of working time is far too detailed .
Here too , the liberal group has chosen to subscribe to the common position .
You will gather from my speech that there are a few additional aspects which I have not mentioned .
I cannot explain those rules to the voter .
The liberal group will be voting against the relevant amendments and in favour of the common position .
Mr President , Mr Hughes , Commissioner , in my view , this directive on the organisation of the working time of drivers is of strategic importance .
Many overlook the fact that we are dealing with a road-transport sector which is highly fragmented and under pressure from shippers : there are many small businesses and a few large ones .
Those large ones employ staff and the small ones do not .
Against the background of liberalisation and cabotage , we are dealing with an international issue which requires international solutions .
The price competition is cut-throat , not only in the road-transport sector but also between the different modalities .
That was mentioned a moment ago .
This results in , inter alia , the subcontracting of both wheels ( lorries ) and drivers on a large scale .
This also leads to cowboy pricing , if I can refer to it that way .
One might say - and this is not the first time I am saying this - that the sector is diseased up to a certain point .
This also leads to a social rat race and to the evasion of social duties . It affects working times and working conditions and puts pressure on wages .
The sector is repeatedly up to new tricks .
That would not be the first one .
We have already closed the Willy Betz loophole .
We now have to face the fact that more drivers are becoming self-employed , and the pseudo self-employed in particular have a role to play .
This whole development is detrimental to the sector , the environment ( for cheap transport generates more transport ) , safety and society .
For that reason , we believe that this gap must be closed .
We have already closed the Willy Betz loophole for Eastern European drivers by means of licensing .
In this case , we will close the loopholes not only by involving the pseudo self-employed , but also the self-employed as far as driving times are concerned .
In other words , we very much applaud the fact that everyone , both the employed and self-employed , must remain within those 48 hours .
In addition , I believe the entire definition of pseudo self-employed to be of major strategic importance , and I should like to congratulate the rapporteur on this very sound approach .
The codecision procedure requires our Parliament to form a united front during the negotiations .
Mr President , my group shares the same opinion as most other groups , i.e. that this is a good report and that it is high time we had working time regulations which also apply to road transport .
This has been a relatively long time coming .
Last time we discussed additional groups - at that time it was a question of doctors and a number of other groups - there was a similar discussion , but drivers were not included .
It is very good that this category is now being covered .
Our group also believes that it is obviously necessary to put employees and drivers on an equal footing .
We are fairly sure that if this is not done , less scrupulous haulage companies will organise themselves in such a way as to be able to exploit technically self-employed drivers who are in fact a kind of employee .
We do not want this sort of cheating in the industry .
Our group has tabled two amendments .
We will support all of Mr Hughes ' proposals , but on one point we would like to proceed a little faster .
We believe that the transposition period of three years is unnecessary .
Firstly , the industry has known for a long time that changes would be introduced , so they have had time to adapt .
Secondly , there is a point of view which has been under-emphasised , namely regard for other road-users .
It can be said that the requirement for a transposition period is one way of taking the industry into account , but it certainly gives no regard to other road-users .
Mr Hughes also admitted that the new regulations might lead to considerable problems , even with a transposition period .
We therefore believe that it is as well to bite the bullet and implement the provisions without a transposition period .
This is particularly important with regard to regulations on working time concerning night work and other activities which may represent a danger to road safety .
We support the proposal as it stands , with Amendments 25 and 26 at the end , requiring the transposition period to be removed from the proposal .
Mr President , overall , we feel that the rapporteur 's good work deals exhaustively with the issue .
However , we would like to comment on the proposal regarding the definite inclusion of the self-employed .
We feel that it would be appropriate to include the self-employed in the new directive from the start .
The Council 's caution on the matter is quite understandable , but we nevertheless feel that instructing the Commission to assess , subsequently and with no time restriction , the consequences of excluding the self-employed today , would serve merely to postpone the realisation that it is necessary to include them .
In fact , it is not just the issue of second drivers which needs to be addressed more exhaustively - it is , moreover , dealt with in Member States ' national contract legislation - but above all that of self-employed drivers , including those who have only one vehicle or , in any case , consistently drive one of the vehicles they possess .
There are various different causes which have a bearing on the matter .
Often , when a self-employed driver purchases a vehicle , he is bound to pay for it in somewhat burdensome instalments . In order to meet the payments , he is forced to increase his workload .
Another contributing cause is the just-in-time method which companies , having usually reduced their storage capacities , adopt in order to maintain continuous production , a method , that is , which requires them to produce a continual , regular supply of materials to be worked upon .
Often , the combination of these two causes leads self-employed workers to neglect their health , not to take sufficient rest periods for their safety and , consequently , to create the conditions for potential harm to their or others ' safety .
Apart from anything else , definitively regulating the working hours of self-employed drivers as well is certainly a way of consolidating conditions of fair competition over the entire sector on Community territory and , at the same time , increasing the necessary safety measures .
Mr President , Mrs Smet referred to the fact that a majority in the PPE-DE Group were in favour of including the self-employed .
I am sure that is true .
But I am sure she would also agree that there is a significant minority who take a completely opposite view .
This morning I chaired a press conference here on the subject of burdens on business .
I was joined on the platform by colleagues from Austria , Finland and Sweden - Members from other countries would have come if they could have - who much shared the views which I will now share with the House .
Since the publication of the Hughes report , I have been personally bombarded with complaints from the UK Removers ' Association , the Confederation of Passenger Transport , the Road Haulage Association , the Freight Transport Association and the International Road Transport Union , as well as small local haulage companies and self-employed lorry drivers .
They are united in their horror at amendments that would put UK operators out of business , and in their amazement that these proposals are coming from a UK MEP .
There is no evidence that self-employed lorry drivers , who rely on their own health and , on the safety of their vehicles for their day-to-day business existence , are in need of more EU legislation to make them more safe .
There is no evidence that Member States , when they agreed the common position , were unmindful of their health and safety responsibilities .
There is no requirement on Parliament to tighten up this legislation now .
The rapporteur 's amendments would lead to lower earnings for professional drivers , increase road congestion and pollution and raise transport costs .
Given that UK hauliers are already paying the highest fuel taxes in the world , these proposals would be the last straw for many in the UK road haulage industry .
They also show no understanding of the needs of the industry , or its employees .
These last three sentences are not my words .
They are the words of the UK Road Haulage Association .
UK Conservative MEPs will be rejecting all the Hughes amendments .
We shall not be alone .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , regulated working times mean better protection for workers .
There is hardly a sector in which this is more pertinent than the transport sector .
I should like to reiterate the objective of this directive .
Article 1 states that the purpose of the directive is to provide better protection for the safety and health of drivers , improve road safety and bring about more harmonised conditions of competition .
I think that the common position does not do this justice ; in fact , it even contains a number of inherent contradictions .
Our rapporteur has made proposals which make a sensible contribution to transport policy and environmental policy over and above this .
I should like to raise three points on which we disagree with the Council .
The most important point - as already mentioned - is to include self-employed drivers .
You are wrong , Mr Bushill-Matthews , to say that self-employed drivers and haulage companies are all opposed to Stephen Hughes ' proposal .
A whole series of companies has readily recognised that the competition will be ruinous if self-employed drivers are not included .
Allow me to reiterate the consequences : if the one-third of the 3.5 million truck drivers who are self-employed are excluded , we shall see thousands of drivers turned into unwilling , bogus self-employed drivers overnight .
I cannot believe that they will agree to this .

The second point on which we disagree is night work : we should remember that most serious accidents on European roads are caused not by technical faults but by overtired drivers , which is why we think that eight hours is long enough at the wheel .
My third point concerns standby duty , i.e. the time during which drivers must be ready to take up work .
We think that flexible working times should be in the interest of both sides , i.e. the employer or haulier and the employee , which is why we feel that a day 's notice is a sensible solution .
However , Mrs Smet , this calls for intelligent logistics .
We cannot simply allow the current method , the current practice of shifting stock on to the road at the expense of the truck drivers ' standby duty , to continue .
We need a reasonable , new , practical solution and I think that is precisely what Stephen Hughes gives us in his report .
Mr President , I congratulate Stephen Hughes on his report .
I believe that we have to have a level playing field for hauliers across the EU , because they travel across borders all the time .
We are very concerned that some hauliers will be able to undercut their counterparts from other Member States if we do not pass this directive .
Consequently , it is also important that we include self-employed workers .
I know that my colleague said that the ELDR Group was against including self-employed workers , but in actual fact we were rather split on this and a sizeable minority of us actually believe that self-employed workers should be included .
I believe that they should be included for several reasons , but the main one is again that they can undercut the other hauliers , and this will have tremendous health and safety implications .
I am also afraid that some of the more unscrupulous employers will make those hauliers self-employed just to get round this legislation .
That will lead to not only more deaths on the road , but to health problems for the hauliers themselves .
I would like to also draw attention to the need that Stephen Hughes talked about of giving drivers an appropriate length of time before they take out a load .
I know that Mr Hughes was talking about a 24 hour period .
I put forward the compromise amendment of 12 hours ' notice before the load was taken out and am very pleased that he has agreed to that amendment .
It is only right that hauliers should be allowed some time to sleep , particularly before going on long journeys .
I sincerely hope we are going to vote for this directive and include self-employed workers .
It is a step in the right direction towards providing health and safety not only for the hauliers , but for other road users as well .
Mr President , the aims of this report on improving road safety and guaranteeing minimum standards of health and safety for all road transport drivers are obviously worthwhile , but these goals need to be related to reality , for example their impact in peripheral and remote areas such as the Highlands and Islands of Scotland .
I have received many letters expressing a degree of alarm about the possible consequences of this proposal .
For example , a haulage company in Arran , not the most remote of Scotland 's islands , pointed out that many hours are spent on ferries to and from the mainland .
This is an issue which may adversely affect tourist travel to , as well as from , areas like Scotland .
A coach operator in Glasgow is of the view that if the Hughes proposals are fully implemented , mainland European coach operators may regard Scotland as a destination too far .
In the case of Scotland 's Western and Northern Isles , two or three ferry crossings may be required before reaching Scotland 's mainland , often landing in areas very remote from the ultimate destination .
The report 's conclusion also refers to achieving a level playing field with other transport sectors already covered .
The reality , though , in much of rural and island Scotland is that no alternative to road transport exists .
Indeed , a former Shetland Islands MEP was fond of pointing out that the nearest mainline railway station to Shetland is in fact Bergen .
Scotland 's road transport sector is already being penalised financially by the UK government through punitive taxation on fuel .
Some aspects of this working time proposal potentially threaten the already fragile viability of road transport .
Therefore I cannot fully support the more restrictive proposals in this report .
Mr President , I would like to join with my colleagues in thanking Stephen Hughes for the work he has done on this report .
It has been a very difficult task and , excuse the pun , a difficult road for him to travel down .
The overall aim of the report is to raise awareness with regard to health and safety and to prevent unfair competition .
In his report , Stephen has mentioned his concerns with regard to the common position ; I share some of those concerns .
There are areas that are open to improvement .
However , I also expressed concerns with regard to some of the amendments adopted by the committee and to some of the stances taken within the committee .
As already mentioned by some of my colleagues and , in particular , my Scottish colleague , peripheral areas of Europe would be more adversely affected than others by these restrictions .
For instance , in Ireland 98 % of what is manufactured is transported by road .
We have a fast growing economy . It depends on a flexible and innovative transport industry .
The principle was clearly established in 1993 that directives are to avoid imposing administrative , financial and legal restrictions which would affect these kind of undertakings .
We must try to reduce the number of vehicles on our roads , but there is no guarantee that this directive would do that .
In fact , according to information available from studies carried out by the Irish road hauliers ' association it would increase the number of vehicles on the road and would neither reduce congestion nor lessen environmental damage .
The working time directive as proposed by the Council could result in higher costs for companies .
Some of the amendments put forward by the rapporteur , such as Amendment No 6 , are too prescriptive , while others such as Amendment No 14 , are too restrictive .
Amendment No 17 would impose additional obligations on Member States and would be difficult to implement .
In Amendment No 19 there is a call for harmonisation of penalties .
This is not something we should agree with .
This matter should be left to the Member States because otherwise , as has already been seen , there would be differences in implementation of the penalties .
Finally , under Recital 14 certain conditions with regard to the average working week are not being implemented .
What we are seeking is decreased administrative burdens , a more balanced proposal and fairness for all .
Mr President , Commissioner , I wish to begin by thanking the rapporteur for the work and efforts made in achieving a recommendation for second reading which is balanced and flexible and which may lead to the success of a conciliation which will probably not be easy .
Neither is it easy to achieve the general objective of organising working time for people who carry out professional mobile road transport activities , because it is necessary to take account of the health and safety of drivers , as well as road safety and , therefore , collective safety .
And because another objective must be to prevent unfair competition .
I believe that the Directive must include self-employed workers .
Article 31 of the European Union ' s Charter of Fundamental Rights says , ' Every worker has the right to working conditions which respect his or her health , safety and dignity ' .
And self-employed are workers in every sense of the definition .
And the second paragraph of this Article says , ' Every worker has the right to limitation of maximum working hours , to daily and weekly rest periods and to an annual period of paid leave ' .
I believe that the text , in the terms in which it provides for inclusion , is intended to achieve both the elimination of unfair competition and the granting of a prudent time limit for the self-employed to adapt to the new situation and to ensure their protection .
At the same time , the prudence of the time limit is not going to encourage companies to dismantle themselves and resort to pseudo self-employment .
In summary , I believe that the recommendation must guide us and contribute to creating a more just and transparent society , where it is difficult for unfair competition to take place , and where due attention is paid to the health , safety and dignity of workers whether they be self-employed or salaried .
Mr President , I welcome the Hughes report and the reasonable balance that he has achieved .
It is a tribute to his political skill .
Apart from alcohol , I think fatigue is probably the biggest killer on our roads and it is also true to say that if I were employed as a truck driver , I would not want my job undermined by a self-employed driver who would be willing to work 18 hours a day .
Nor , if I was a self-employed driver and wanted to strike a fair balance between my working life and my family life , would I want someone undermining my position by being able to work 18 hours a day .
It is pointless to argue that a self-employed driver might be less fatigued than an employed driver .
From my own personal experience , the reverse is in fact true .
A self-employed driver has many more tasks to carry out and is more likely to be fatigued when first taking the wheel , never mind having worked 10 or 12 hours in the day , so I would strongly support this report and welcome the compromises that Stephen Hughes has reached .
It is also important to tighten up the definition of " self-employed " .
We have seen too much abuse of this loose definition of " self-employed " in other areas of work .
Our responsibility is to find a balance between the needs of employed and self-employed drivers and the community at large , so as to ensure that the latter can go about its business safely .
They look to us to provide and guarantee safety and to ensure that employed and self-employed drivers are protected by the law from being driven into bad health and , perhaps , an early death from overwork .
Mr President , the organisation of the working hours of road transport workers affects the working conditions of these workers and also the efficiency of logistics .
The area of application of the directive is the most essential question in this whole matter .
The compromise achieved in the Council leaves self-employed hauliers outside the scope of the directive .
In my opinion Parliament should also approve this compromise .
Self-employed hauliers must not be subjected to artificial regulations limiting their total working hours .
This would lead to an increase in bureaucracy and make it more difficult for small businesses to operate .
It would also interfere with self-employed people ' s use of their free time in a way which would be impossible to monitor .
The issue has no bearing on road safety because the driving time of independent self-employed hauliers is already regulated under other rules .
Secondly , I would like to mention the further limitation of working hours in terms of night work .
This would increase traffic jams , weaken road safety and increase costs .
Mr President , the central issue of this legislative proposal is the inclusion of self-employed workers .
The rapporteur proposes a transitional period of three years for the automatic inclusion of self-employed workers in the scope of this directive , which is a sensible and balanced approach and which warrants our support .
The common position adopted by the Council , which excludes self-employed drivers and does not even guarantee that they will be covered by the organisation of working time that it is claiming to be instituting , would have the following consequences : it would put the objectives of the common transport policy at risk , it would not promote road safety and greater equality in conditions of competition and would deny adequate protection for the health and safety of persons whose occupation is the performance of mobile road-transport activities .
This proposal therefore represents an acceptable balance between the economic aspects , road safety and workers ' health .
The truth is that , if adopted , it will contribute not only to reducing the level of road accidents associated with excessive working hours , but also to establishing more healthy competition between self-employed drivers and employed drivers , which will enable us to combat the phenomenon of the pseudo self-employed , which discredits the rules of fair competition in this sector .
With regard to the maximum working time at night , especially bearing in mind the situation of peripheral Member States such as Portugal , the solution adopted by the Council is more appropriate , which stipulates ten hours in every twenty-four hours .
Drivers in these Member States are forced to make longer journeys to reach the major centres of production and consumption .
The only way in which we can reduce driving time is by making use of the night , when the traffic is less intense .
Reducing the driving time to eight hours would , therefore , unjustifiably increase the competitive disadvantage that drivers from these countries face in relation to hauliers from the more centrally located Member States .
Mr President , I should firstly like to thank Mr Hughes for carrying out this difficult task and for the way in which he has done that .
I believe that his amendments are largely based on , and are in line with , the Commission proposals , except for the two which Mrs Smet mentioned a moment ago .
But I should also like to thank the Commissioner in particular for the courage she has shown in bringing this common position about , for that was a very complicated task .
Many governments were opposed to it , and the fact that we are here at all is thanks to her tenacity .
In that respect , she has achieved more than her predecessor .
I hope we will bear this in mind when we deal with other matters too .
I should also like to thank Mrs Sanders-ten Holte .
She has given a truly brilliant , nineteenth-century , liberal account , which would not look out of place as an annexe to Dickens ' Christmas Carol .
I believe that his novel was also about whether one should work on Christmas Day .
This is now given fresh relevance .
I believe it is important that a common position has been reached .
It is also vital for us to negotiate on a few points in the common position which are inadequate , particularly the issue of the self-employed .
In my view , we have not found the ultimate solution , but we are at least opening up the path for negotiations .
Those who claim that we should adopt the common position without question are disempowering this Parliament .
Surely they can understand that .
Those who claim that current legislation is good enough , should read up on the accidents , especially accidents involving buses .
Anyone opposed to those amendments should , next time there is a major accident involving a bus , be very aware of the damage they cause with such opinions to the effect that absolutely nothing should be done on this score .
It is not acceptable that this rather dangerous sector should be the only sector to be excluded from the Working Times Directive .
That is the reason for my group to at least support sound amendments .
Mr President , Commissioner , allow me to start by quoting the early German Romantic Novalis .
As perhaps the first visionary of our present concept of a liberal and peaceful Europe , he coined the following expression about 200 years ago in his widely acclaimed treatise " Christendom or Europe " : " Everything is good , but not necessarily all the time , not necessarily everywhere and not necessarily for all of the people . "
He was quite right .
This insight is something we come up against almost every day in the European decision-making process .
Extended to self-employed drivers , the directive regulating the working time of persons occupied in mobile road-transport activities under discussion today is a perfectly typical example .
From the point of view of small and medium-sized enterprises , and especially self-employed drivers , this directive , with its limit values on average , accurately-defined maximum working times , minimum breaks and rest periods and its provisions on night work , is an example of politics exerting an inadmissible and unnecessary influence on working times for which these drivers alone are responsible .
From their point of view , it is even a compelling , authoritarian obstacle which stands in contradiction to the principles of a market economy and should therefore be rejected .
However , social and competition policy and road safety experts take a different view .
When it comes to more and more frequent shock headlines such as : " Tired truck driver ploughs into carefully parked broken down car " and the need to avoid bogus self-employment and the unfair competition which it engenders , this directive is long overdue .
Improved health protection and safety in the workplace for employees in the road haulage industry also deserves a mention .
For me , as an ardent supporter of a social market economy , my motto is : people first , the economy second .
So I would recommend that we tighten up the common position in the interests of everyone , including those of us who use the roads as pedestrians .
Mr President , today is a great day for road haulage contractors .
As all the speakers have said , this is a step towards making their job less stressful and more humane , and this is thanks to Mr Hughes .
However , why is it that we do not use the Hughes procedure for the Hughes report ?
That said , let us get to the point .
Hudson Bay , 40 years ago , it is cold and foggy .
The Andrea Doria is approaching New York .
Sadly , the helmsman and the officer of the watch , maybe a little sleepy because they have been working too long at a stretch , cause the Andrea Doria to sink , tragically .
It may be that , if they had had shorter working hours , this would not have happened .
We do not want our lorries and motor vehicles to go the same way as the Andrea Doria .
We have remembered a great Italian , Andrea Doria , a Genoan , born in Genoa like me . Let us now remember another great Italian , Galileo Galilei .
Why ?
Because we are going to put the satellite system Galileo into orbit , and it will have to be able to track , monitor and observe the time European road haulage contractors spend on the road .

Thank you very much , Mr Fatuzzo , for sharing this significant observation with us , and if you mention Galileo Galilei and such like , could I make you aware of the transport problems which the Flying Dutchman faced ?
You have no right to reply .
I now give the floor to the Commissioner , Mrs de Palacio .
Mr President , I would first of all like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Hughes , and all the members of Parliament ' s Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , as well as the members of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , for the work they have done .
As you know , this directive has a special significance for me .
In fact , at the end of 1998 the Commission presented its first proposal aimed at introducing common rules applicable to all professional drivers and , since then , this Directive has followed a complicated and tortuous path and has been in deadlock within the Council throughout that time .
In 2000 , a modification of the general directive on the organisation of certain aspects of working time was adopted , Directive 93 / 104 / EC , in order to incorporate mobile and non-mobile workers in the transport sector .
However , it should be pointed out that despite this modification mobile workers are only covered in a series of areas , in particular the average weekly 48 working hours , annual holidays , health controls of nocturnal workers and the guarantee of sufficient rest time .
For this reason , to maintain and defend the proposed directive under discussion still makes total sense .
Having realised how difficult it was for work to progress in the Council and out of concern to take a step forward , although it was not the ideal step , at the end of 2000 I presented an amended proposal for a directive which , as you know , provided for the automatic inclusion in the long term , specifically after 3 years , of self-employed drivers .
I fully agree with what has been said here , since the Directorate-General for Energy and Transport is concerned with regulating the activity time of drivers outside driving time , for safety reasons .
A driver ' s degree of tiredness does not depend on whether he is self-employed or on a salary .
Please have no doubt that that is my position .
Therefore , knowing the difficulties , I proposed a text to the Council and Parliament in which that aspect was modified , with a three-year transition period for the incorporation of self-employed drivers , but with that incorporation taking place automatically .
There is no need to remind you of the long discussions in Council , which ended with a common position on a compromise accepted by all the States , all the delegations present , and which , of course , I myself accept on behalf of the Commission .
In this respect , I would like to say that I believe that , while not perfect , it is a step forward .
It should be pointed out that , in the arguments of the delegation of the different countries of the European Union , of the ministers , there is one factor which is true and that it is the considerable difficulty of genuinely controlling self-employed drivers .
And , although self-employed drivers are excluded , it is a step forward .
It is a compromise which I have accepted , although I do not like it , and I would like to make this very clear .
Ladies and gentlemen , you must understand that I am always faithful to my commitments and I will therefore honour this one . I will not be able to support a series of amendments that you are proposing , although I would like to because I fully agree with them , but I have a commitment to the Council .
This does not mean that , when the conciliation takes place , as I believe it will - because I doubt that the Council will reach a compromise leading to the automatic inclusion of self-employed workers , as I think it should - I will not use all my resources to try to find a solution to unblock the situation which is no doubt going to come about now .
I will refer to a series of amendments , which will be listed specifically tomorrow , which I cannot accept at the moment , although I agree with their content .
I can accept Amendments Nos 7 , 11 , 14 and 16 , which include ideas which appeared in the modified proposed Directive and do not exactly form part of the compromise agreed in the Council and which I believe improve the overall content of the Directive .
Furthermore , we have been able to see that Amendments Nos 9 and 12 provide the texts with greater clarity and that Nos 18 and 22 offer , in principle , better protection , although we will perhaps have to consider modifying the specific wording , but in terms of their content , we will not be able to accept them .
I will say the same for Amendments Nos 3 , 5 , 8 , 12 , 15 , 17 and 19 , which cannot be accepted because they either risk coming into conflict with the existing rules in Regulations No 3820 / 85 or No 3821 / 85 , or Directive 88 / 599 , or there may be a risk of encountering difficulties in their implementation .

I would like to remind you that the concepts of working time and driving time are two different notions , regulated by two different legal instruments .
In this respect , there is one amendment in particular , Amendment No 23 , which involves a disproportionate administrative burden and which I cannot accept .
As Mr Hughes said at the beginning of his speech , as well as various other speakers , the essential thing is the inclusion of self-employed workers , which , according to the proposal I produced at the time , would take place automatically .
I believe that , from the point of view of the internal logic of the Regulation , it is based on the fact that tiredness is a safety risk , and therefore , as the person in charge of the Directorate-General for Energy and Transport I presented a proposal of this nature , because otherwise it would be simply an issue for the Commissioner responsible for Social Affairs and not for me .
I am doing so for safety reasons ; although I fully share this concern , I have a commitment to the Council which I must respect , but you know that you can rely on me to try to seek solutions during the conciliation debates , the final result of which I hope will be as positive as we all wish .
Many thanks , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Maritime traffic
The next item is the joint debate on the following reports :
( A5-0208 / 2001 ) by Mr Sterckx , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive establishing a Community monitoring , control and information system for maritime traffic [ COM ( 2000 ) 802 - C5-0700 / 2000 - 2000 / 0325 ( COD ) ] ;
( A5-0205 / 2001 ) by Mr Mastorakis , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a European Maritime Safety Agency [ COM ( 2000 ) 802 - C5-0702 / 2000 - 2000 / 0327 ( COD ) ] ;
( A5-0201 / 2001 ) by Mr Esclopé , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council regulation on the establishment of a fund for the compensation of oil pollution damage in European waters and related measures [ COM ( 2000 ) 802 - C5-0701 / 2000 - 2000 / 0326 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , Commissioner , this problem is double-edged .
We should certainly not discourage maritime transport : it is en environmentally-friendly form of transport and economically vital .
But we should , at the same time , control the risks involved .
We should regulate traffic better , if I can put it that way , for each accident at sea not only affects those directly involved , namely the people on board the ship , but also anyone living by the sea and making a living from it .
After the accident involving the Erika , we took rapid action .
However , new accidents have kept the pressure on , and we therefore have no choice but to take measures .
I should like to thank the Commission for the excellent cooperation , as well as the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , as a result of which the latter is able to submit to you a unanimous proposal .
First of all , shipping must be monitored more closely . In this connection , we need to extend the powers of the coastal state and the port state , and restrict the right to clear transit - albeit to a minor degree .
We must not forget that the Erika foundered 70 km off the Breton coast , in other words , a long way from the territorial waters .
Secondly , we must introduce automatic report duty via transponders .
On that score , I have developed the Commission proposal in a little more detail .
I believe it is also necessary for the information which then comes in automatically , also to be exchanged between the different Member States automatically .
That happens far too little at the moment .
We must legislate for that .
We should extend the scope of the transponder , which is 30 nautical miles at the moment , as soon as possible , and switch to what is referred to as long-range .
Thirdly , the black box .
That is a difficult point which has been mentioned in the report by Mr Watts , and which has indeed remained more or less unresolved .
In my opinion , we as a Parliament must continue to exercise pressure on the IMO , and we should therefore adhere to our time schedule .
Fourthly , the ban on departure in adverse weather conditions proposed by the Commission .
Admittedly , bad weather was a major factor in past accidents , but we in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism do not support the general measure proposed by the Commission .
Sometimes , in bad weather it is safer for ships to be outside , rather than inside , the port .
Each port or each ship is different .
Neither should we forget that the captain is in charge of his own ship , and we should respect that .
That is why we have made that recommendation for a ban on departure more detailed , or at least slightly changed it into a recommendation which must receive a reasoned reply from the captain .
We request that , in bad weather , station tugs be on stand-by which , in an emergency , could be deployed immediately , so that no time would be lost when something happened .
There are examples of this in France and in the Netherlands .
Environmental risk should not be the only reason for action . As other MEPs have already pointed out , risks involving people , crew and passengers , inter alia , merit action .
I have added a provision concerning fuelling at sea , which is also a difficult operation .
It is dangerous .
In April of this year , for example , there was a collision off the Belgian coast between a bunker ship which was refuelling and another ship that was being refuelled .
A relatively small quantity of oil , namely 10 000 litres , ended up in the sea , as a result of which the coastal area near Middelkerke , Nieuwpoort , etc was polluted , with all the disastrous implications that this entails .
Statistics have shown that the number of accidents involving bunkering operations is rising enormously and rapidly .
We must therefore do something about this .
One of the options is to restrict bunkering , and even ban it in bad weather .
We have added a provision to that effect .
Fifthly , ports of refuge .
That was a problem with regard to the accident involving the Erika .
The Erika searched for a port of refuge and could not find one .
Earlier this year , the damaged fuel tanker , Castor , sailed around the Mediterranean Sea for six weeks because it could not find a port where it could berth .
That is , of course , understandable , for a port could , in a case like that , run the risk of being polluted , and it is not certain that compensation would be provided for that damage .
We must therefore set up a true system of ports of refuge and safe ports of anchorage where damage can be limited . We welcome this proposal , although we have tightened it up slightly .
We must be certain that the ships which call in at our ports and sail along our coasts are insured , and therefore solvent .
In other words , they must be able to pay compensation for the damage they cause . We must also ensure that there are installations there to receive , repair , etc. ships .
All in all , Commissioner , I believe that this is a promising draft for a sound directive , and we must adopt it at the earliest opportunity .
Since there are a number of aspects which can develop very quickly , we have added an evaluation clause .
The proposal will now be presented to the Council .
I hope that the Swedish Presidency will be able to deal with the matter later on this month .
However , I fear that the proposal will end up with the Belgian Presidency .
That being the case , the latter will need to prioritise this issue and ensure that it is completed at least by the end of the year .
Despite this , there are a few matters left to deal with , even though we have approved all the Erika Directives .
For example , we should take additional measures to extend the routing system , in the Baltic Sea in particular .
It is necessary to develop that system and especially to invest in people , people on board ships , people on shore , people who implement the checks and people who make up the ships ' crews .
To underline this aspect , we have included it in the Directive , for a piece of legislation in itself is not sufficient .
The real safety work is done at sea .
, rapporteur . ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I shall be reporting on the proposal for the Erika II package , the purpose of which is to create a European Maritime Safety Agency to provide the Commission with support in applying and monitoring compliance with measures and in assessing their effectiveness .
As the Commission maintains , and we fully support its opinion , it is not possible , at least at this stage , to set up a single operational structure , a type of coastguard or European port authority , to take over the role of the national maritime administrations .
On the contrary , the agency will have to support the actions of the Commission , or rather of both the Commission and the Member States , without the Commission 's mediating , and this is the purpose of some of our amendments .
Of course , the Commission 's proposal initially provoked several questions .
Is it really necessary , in order to " supervise the supervisors " , to create a new Community bureaucracy , or would it be possible to achieve the desired objective by stepping up cooperation between the national competent authorities and between these authorities and the Commission , or by reinforcing the Commission departments responsible ?
The new agency 's dependence on the Commission also caused a problem initially because , despite its being described as independent in the explanatory statement of the report , a look at the proposed articles on the powers of the Administrative Board and the Executive Director and on the proposed composition of the board confirms that this independence is relatively limited .
It is typical that , under the terms of the proposal , the Executive Director is to submit the work programme to the Board after having received the approval of the Commission and the Administrative Board then adopts the programme .
Another typical element of dependence is that the Executive Director is appointed and dismissed by the Board , but only on a proposal from the Commission .
In other words , the European Commission seems to be distrustful of the agency in advance , even though the Commission itself proposes setting it up .
This manifests itself in a tendency to act as a guardian and to restrict the guarantees of its independence , which is not seen in relation to corresponding Community bodies .
A comparison with the status of similar bodies , such as the European Environment Agency or the European Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products leads us to the conclusion that these agencies have wider areas of competence and more scope for initiative .
For example , there is no provision for the Commission to approve the work programme of the Agency for the Evaluation of Medicinal Products , although similar arrangements apply to the Environment Agency .
Nor is there any provision for the Commission to have the right to dismiss the executive directors of these agencies .
The question which emerges from all the above is : does the European Commission really want an independent agency or not ?
It is true that , in our committee , in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , the representative of the European Commission demonstrated a great deal of understanding for these views , which were supported by my colleagues across the board so that the ground has been laid for a compromise and the regulation under discussion can quickly be finalised .
I would also like to express the view that the representatives of related professional sectors who will sit on the Administrative Board of the agency should be elected by their colleagues , not the Commission , that it would he helpful if Parliament were represented on the Administrative Board , but not by MEPs of course , and that the agency 's headquarters should be in a country and town with a shipping tradition and nautical infrastructure , so that it is close to as many maritime-related activities as possible , assuming of course that the town in question is able to provide all the other services needed in order for the agency to function and is well connected to the European centres .
And if my fellow members interpret this as being Piraeus , then I am not to blame ; forgive me , but Piraeus is to blame , with its impressive qualifications for the job .
I should like to close by thanking the Commission for acting so quickly , and to thank all my fellow members whose comments and ideas helped considerably in improving the report and , by extension , the regulation .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Erika I , which is aimed at preventing environmental disasters from oil spills before the event , is now supplemented by Erika II , which is also designed as an instrument for accurately assessing the consequences of such disasters and for improving the system of compensation of the victims , the aspect on which my report concentrates .
We naturally support that objective and believe it crucial to give it priority in the light of the situation we have today as a result , in particular , of the Erika disaster .
At present , an international liability and compensation regime exists covering damage caused by oil pollution from ships , as established by the 1969 CCL Convention and the 1971 IOPC Convention , both of which were amended by the 1992 protocols .
These two conventions have established a two-tier liability system , based on strict though unfortunately very limited liability for ship owners and on a compensation fund to which oil receivers contribute .
Among many other countries in the world , all EU Member States with a coastline are now parties to both protocols , except for Portugal , which has not yet completed the ratification procedures .
The USA , which has its own compensation system , with the 1990 Oil Pollution Act , does not participate in this regime .
The main problem with these two funds is still their ceiling of EUR 200 million .
But apart from the inadequacy of this amount - in fact the Erika spill is going to cost far more , an estimated amount of more than EUR 300 million - the procedure for releasing the money is not speedy enough .
The IOPC Fund can only distribute what money it has and therefore has to await the full list of claims presented before it can determine the maximum rate at which it can compensate the victims .
As an example , the estimates for the Erika suggest that only two thirds of the amounts claimed by the victims can be reimbursed and that this process will take far too long , even if provisional amounts payments are made in the interim .
The first step to remedy this situation is , therefore , to consult the IMO , which is what the Council did , with a view to revising the Civil Liability Convention and the IOPC Convention and tackling a number of structural dysfunctions .
First , the ceiling needs to be raised : a first rise would be scheduled for 2003 , to the level of EUR 300 million .
Next , the scope of liability should be widened to include all those involved in the transport chain . Lastly , the conventions should be extended to include dangerous substances other than oil .
Of course we endorse that approach , but in the absence of reforms , which would be difficult to carry through , Europe had to take action by putting forward an appropriate proposal of its own .
The Commission therefore proposed the creation of a Community fund , called the COPE Fund , which would supplement the IOPC Fund and be modelled on it , but would have a ceiling of EUR 1 billion .
This fund would intervene only in the event of maritime accidents and would be funded by contributions from oil companies established in the Member States and receiving more than 150 000 tonnes of oil a year .
It would be managed by the Commission , assisted by a committee of Member State representatives .
At this point , let me explain the implications of tomorrow ' s vote .
Since the vote we conducted in the Committee on Transport , we in fact believe that extending the scope to all dangerous substances , a proposal supported by the parliamentary right and left , however laudable , would be bound to cause a serious logjam in the system .
Indeed , the conventions on which this extension depends have yet to be ratified .
So , does the European Parliament really want this fund ?
Allow me to point out that we want the victims of these major disasters , hitherto caused solely by oil spills , to be compensated as fully and speedily as possible .
That being so , how can we introduce a third tier of compensation , the COPE Fund , whose operation and procedures are modelled on the existing international IOPC system , by referring to conventions that the IOPC Convention has not yet recognised ?
If the Committee on Transport 's amendments are adopted , I believe there is a great risk , too great a risk , of putting off indefinitely all hope of rapidly creating the COPE Fund .
Aside from our amendments on the representative nature of the chosen local representatives in the decision-making on compensation , our requests for a separate vote are aimed at restoring to some extent the purpose of the initial proposal and thus opening the way to the creation of a supplementary compensation fund at Community level .
This really is urgently necessary .
How could we not be in favour of establishing liability for all forms of pollution ...
( The President asked the speaker to finish ) ... as also of holding all the players involved financially liable ?
We must assume our responsibilities .
Should we engage in drawing-room discussions of environmental theory , or should we establish , without delay ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , I have stood in at the last moment for my colleague Mrs Vachetta , whose take on this is the same as that which I am about to present to you .
The subject of our debate is maritime passenger and freight transport , which are obviously tremendously important , as our rapporteurs have stressed .
However , merely operating the transport sector is fraught with danger .
Danger to the economy and , of course , to human life , dangerous working conditions and , of course , huge environmental dangers .
The carte blanche which prevails in this sector and massive competition naturally make this industry exceptionally dynamic but also mean that it seeks the lowest possible price " at any price " , when it comes to the cost of engines , materials etc. and human resources .
Because this sector is globalised , and has been for a very long time - it always was the most highly globalised sector - shipowners have the right to duck and dive and create conditions of immunity , frequently resulting in the terrible results which we have seen , not just with the tragic incident involving the Erika but on numerous other occasions in the Mediterranean and elsewhere , in both passenger and freight transport .
The second package which is the subject of today 's debate , Mr President , Commissioner , does not answer all the questions or all the problems which , I think , are being exacerbated as globalisation progresses .
Let me give you an example which requires no further comment : the ridiculous example of shipping registers and the way in which they operate and grant or withhold recognition .
We recently experienced tragic complications in Italy , for example , which prohibited private Greek ships which were not flying the Greek flag from entering Italy , while others were allowed to do so .
Absurd incidents based , I believe , on the fact that we do not have clear , proper , efficient , Community legislation on shipping registers .
However , I shall confine myself to the three reports which are the subject of today 's debate .
First , I should like to thank our rapporteurs , who have done an excellent job .
Secondly , we have to admit that the directive and the regulations being examined have a great many positive points , as well as numerous shortcomings .
That is why we shall pass a general vote in favour of them , while supporting certain amendments - important amendments in our opinion - which supplement or improve the texts .
The monitoring system , for example , confirmation and notification of consignments of dangerous substances , black boxes at long last , monitoring of ships , the facility for Member States to intervene and prevent ships from departing when the conditions are too dangerous - these are all are important matters and we support them .
However , we also have some absurd opposition , Commissioner ; we accept that we have to supervise and monitor engines , materials and equipment , but we do not agree to supervise the working of the most important factor in shipping , i.e. the people who work in the industry .
Not just their health , but their rest times and suitable working conditions .
Most accidents that have occurred so far are caused by tired and disheartened people , who were basically not to blame .
So we have tabled the relevant proposed amendments .
Secondly , as regards the maritime safety agency , everyone involved in shipping is calling for such an agency and we agree .
I personally wish we had a European ports authority with more than a merely coordinating function and I think we can help this agency to progress along these lines .
However , we disagree with the composition of its Administrative Board .
We want people at national and local level to sit on the board .
Why not non-governmental organisations with some form of proof of the usefulness and efficiency of their work ?
And we also want this agency to be accountable and to publish regular information on what it does .
We consider this to be absolutely self-evident .
Finally , a word on the compensation fund for oil pollution . It is a good idea .
As I think our rapporteur quite rightly illustrated , the IOPC Fund has shown its limitations .
But why should this agency only be funded by persons who buy a certain quantity , 150,000 tonnes of oil or more ?
Why should it not be funded by everyone involved in the fuel transport sector ?
We think this is the right way forward .
We also think that the one billion limit is too low and bears no relation to the actual size of the sector or its turnover .
That is why we propose that it be raised to two billion .
And , of course , we think that its activities are restricted - very restricted even - and that it should be set on a broader base .
We shall vote on this basis and we hope that we shall soon have a third package , an Erika III , which incorporates these factors and this criticism and which will be most useful in completing the policy set before us which , we must admit , is generally a good guideline .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , these three reports will indeed reinforce the measures our Parliament adopted with the Erika I package last May .
Turning to the first report , by Mr Sterckx , there are two dimensions to the proposal from the European Commission .
First of all , we are taking steps to improve the safety of ships , which is the foundation of maritime safety .
I am glad that the responsible committee endorsed my proposal for a tighter timetable for installing black boxes and transponders on board the ships .
Thanks to that provision , all European ships will have to be equipped with these devices no later than 2006 .
Secondly , we are proposing to Member States a Community monitoring , control and information system for maritime traffic , about which I in fact have some reservations , for there is nothing very Community-based about these measures .
Although Parliament has endeavoured to consolidate its proposals , they remain dependent mainly on Member State action .
Regarding ports of refuge , for example , the Member States must draw up plans for accommodating ships in distress .
Parliament , in its wisdom , has called for the measures taken to be evaluated after a period of one year to ensure that the proposal really is implemented rapidly .
We must indeed ensure that ships in distress can be accommodated urgently in these ports , which will have to be suitably equipped to carry out the necessary repairs .
That is also why I am against the idea of zones of refuge , which do not offer the same guarantees as ports in terms of naval equipment .
Another positive and important point is the improvement of communication between ports on the movement of ships carrying dangerous goods .
With this report , the European Union has given itself the necessary instruments to ensure close cooperation between the Member States and offers them more means of controlling maritime traffic and making it safer .
This helps protect Europe 's marine and coastal environment , while also giving more rights to the captains and crews of the ships , including the primordial right to avoid accidents at sea and thus protect themselves .
Moving on to Mr Esclopé ' s report , it will enable us to add a new dimension to the proposed COPE Fund .
I believe it is essential to extend this fund 's scope for intervention to pollution caused by noxious and hazardous substances .
We must ensure that this does not delay the first process .
We must not confine ourselves to a compensation fund for damage caused by oil pollution , as we were tragically reminded by the shipwreck of the Ievoli Sun off the coasts of Brittany .
The proposal to make ship owners who are responsible for maritime pollution contribute to the compensation of victims seems a good idea , since it is a step in the direction of establishing the liability of all the players involved in sea transport .
This concept of liability was not defined clearly enough in our legislation .
What is being applied here , and applied fairly , is the polluter-pays principle .
That is a major and positive change , which may make it possible to put an end to practices that are dangerous and harmful to our environment .
Thirdly , we will be voting on the report by Mr Mastorakis , on the establishment of a European Maritime Safety Agency .
The Commission seems suspicious of its own proposal .
So it has introduced several paragraphs intended to ensure it has a right of veto over the operation and activities of the future agency .
Clearly , that would deprive the agency of the independence it would need in order to be effective and credible .
I do not understand for what reasons the Commission wanted to place the future agency under its tutelage .
Parliament has therefore endeavoured to reduce the agency 's dependence on the Commission and give it enough power to justify its existence .
Indeed , this agency must be created only if it is independent and entrusted with genuine tasks .
I believe that the work we have done will allow the agency to be given greater responsibilities and to assume them with more independence .
There remain , however , two points in this proposal with which I am not satisfied .
Firstly , we cannot in a same report call for unannounced checks in the Member States , while also stipulating that these visits take place after reaching an understanding with the Member State concerned .
To us this looks like two different types of visits , but that is not clear from the text and it would be advisable to clarify the matter .
Next , I do not understand why our Parliament is not to have any representatives on the agency 's administrative board when the Commission is to nominate four representatives from its ranks and four representatives of the professional sectors most concerned and the Council is to appoint four others .
If we want to deprive Parliament of representatives on this management board in the name of the separation of powers , then we must also exclude the representatives of the Council from it .
The Council is the Community co-legislator and the other arm of the budgetary authority alongside Parliament .
If the Council is represented on the administrative board , there is no real separation of powers , so the absence of representatives of Parliament makes no sense under these circumstances .
These reservations aside , I am satisfied with the basic proposal to establish this agency , as amended , I hope , by our Parliament .
We have worked hard to give the European Union a single air space .
Today , we have taken a significant step towards creating a single maritime space in Europe and I can only hope that we will take further steps in that direction , especially at international level , and that we will soon be able to learn the first lessons from the measures we have adopted .
Mr President , may I say , as permanent rapporteur of the Committee on Budgets for the agencies , that the Committee on Budgets is satisfied with the document presented .
The Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism has accepted the amendments proposed by the Committee on Budgets on the creation of a European Maritime Safety Agency .
I should like to start by outlining the context within which the following proposed amendments are set .
The structure of the agencies is such that finding a uniform line is no easy task when it comes to funding .
Nonetheless , the principles of the European Parliament require us to ensure that the authorities are efficient and transparent and control their costs .
With new agencies , we must ensure that their budget is managed along clear lines from the outset .
Now to the proposed amendments .
The first proposed amendment introduces a new recital on the subject of transparency and control .
Fundamental budgetary principles should apply to agencies because they implement EU policies , employ staff and are fully or partially dependent on Community subsidies .
Amendment No 2 clarifies that we expect the Member State to contribute towards the premises of local offices .
The third proposed amendment contains provisions governing the adoption of the agency 's budget .
Control is exercised on the part of the European Parliament through the Committee on Budgets and how funding is provided .
We must ensure that the Agency is not given too much independence .
As permanent rapporteur for the agencies , I know that , if agencies are too independent , they take too much on themselves and overshoot their objective and their actual remit .
Mr President , first of all I must apologise for my absence from the committee when my amendments to the Esclopé report were discussed .
I was involved in the British general election and also in the mayor-making of my wife , which is why I was unable to be here .
I will confine my remarks to the Esclopé report .
This is an issue of great concern , provoked by the Erika and aggravated by the Ivoli Sun disaster off the Channel Islands .
As one personally associated in 1969 with the effects of the Torrey Canyon disaster on the beaches and livelihoods of south-west England , I have understood and shared that concern for many years .
The proposals from the Commission were all right as far as they went , but there are a number of deficiencies .
The first is the potentially detrimental effects on existing international funds , the CLC , i.e. the Convention on Civil Liability , and the IOPC , the International Oil-Pollution Compensation Fund .
Secondly , no attention was given to the bunker-fuel oil spills or the pollution caused by hazardous and noxious substances .
There are two conventions on these subjects : the Bunker Oil Convention 2001 , and the Hazardous and Noxious Substances Convention of 1996 .
Both of these are unlikely to be ratified in the foreseeable future .
That is why they need to be addressed in this report .
Thirdly , there is in equity in terms of the responsibility for meeting the costs .
I have some reservations about Amendment No 22 and the implications for oil companies of pollution caused by chemicals or noxious substances .
That is something that we can address at second reading .
But in essence what we have tried to do is to rectify that inequity .
Mr Esclopé sought to amend the report to take account of local public concerns and also to limit what is , I believe , the Commission 's unnecessary involvement in the day-to-day running of the COPE Fund .
His suggestion of a tri-partite committee is well-meaning , but inadequate .
We need to address the too heavy and bureaucratic involvement of the Commission and we should accept the tried and trusted international arrangements used by the CLC and IOPC funds .
Finally , there is local consultation , which is needed , but should not be mandatory and it should not be a vehicle for delay .
This has the potential to be a far-reaching and radical piece of European legislation and in consultation with other non-EU states it can go a long way towards resolving the problems of maritime pollution caused by oil and hazardous or noxious substances .
We should be proud of this achievement and support it .
Mr President , as I said last time : before the courts and on the high seas , we are in God 's hands , but at least the Erika I and Erika II packages will help to make the high seas a little safer .
I should like to offer the rapporteurs my warmest thanks .
I think it makes sense and that , with a monitoring and control system , with an independent agency and with a compensation fund in the event of accidents , we have taken a step in the right direction .
As part of this - and this also applies to the Esclopé report - the Commission has proposed setting up a fund for oil pollution , or rather for oil pollution from tankers .
But it has been our experience over recent years that it is not just tanker accidents which cause pollution ; other ships also pollute the environment with dangerous substances , often harmful substances such as so-called bunker oil .
That is why it makes sense to opt for a more comprehensive approach here .
For once , I would gladly have heard the Commission comment along the lines of a huge car advertising campaign running in Germany : ' Can 't be done , doesn 't exist ' .
So , Commissioner , when you take a stand here , please do not start by saying it ' can 't be done ' . Start by saying , ' how can I accommodate Parliament ? ' and then make it legally and technically possible .
I think the committee is right to spread the risk by making shipowners and charterers , as well as oil companies , bear their share of the risk , by apportioning responsibility on an equitable basis and by including local representatives of the regions affected in a fund committee , so that their interests can be represented .
And representing interests does not mean taking their own decisions ; it means being included and being heard on a case by case basis .
That is why , as I said last time , we should up the ante now because people , because the Erika - damn it all , this accident occurred over two years ago and we have still not passed any legislation and everything still hangs in the balance .
That is why I call on my fellow Members and the Commission to up the ante now .
I think it makes sense to make a start on maritime safety by setting up an agency .
I understand why Emmanouil Mastorakis thinks that Piraeus would be a good place for the agency but may I say that I think that Lübeck , where I come from , would also make an excellent base for such an agency .
( heckling : or Greifswald , Rostock )
Mr President , I too would first like to thank the rapporteurs for producing successful reports .
These reports focus on essential factors to improve maritime safety and there is still much to do in this sector .
To minimise accidents the identification of vessels must be improved , the obligation to notify must be extended and procedures for transferring and using information must be simplified and attention must also be paid to differing circumstances .
The grounds for compensation for damage must observe the principles of the international system on which the Commission ' s proposal is also based .
The circle of people entitled to compensation and the accidents for which compensation is payable must not be extended .
However , those suffering from oil damage must receive full compensation for the loss caused by the damage .
The European oil pollution compensation fund is not the only way of solving problems .
Solutions should initially be sought at international level and the oil industry must also take part in financing the fund .
The maritime safety agency to be set up must support Member States and the Commission in applying Community legislation .
The field of operations drawn up for the agency is quite broad so good cooperation with Member States is important .
The representation of various bodies on the board is not , however , essential as their points of view will be taken into account by other means .
Besides tightening up the regulations , care must be taken that the decisions made are realistic and capable of being carried out .
My group sees it as important that the proposals are approved quickly and we make progress on safety issues .
I would finally like to draw attention to the fact that solutions to improve maritime safety carried out only within the Union are insufficient .
For example , issues of responsibility must be addressed at global level .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteurs , a moment ago , we listened to our eccentric visionary , Mr Fatuzzo , who talked about the loss of the Andrea Doria and who referred in that connection to the captain ' s fatigue .
We are now turning our attention to the Erika and to what preceded and followed that disaster .
I think it is wise once again to add a number of important elements to the Erika II package .
As Mr Piecyk has already indicated , we will need to make more headway , for things are developing far too slowly at the moment .
That does not mean that we are not actually sometimes the cause of those delays ourselves .
I am therefore rather critical of the proposal , for example , to extend the compensation fund for oil pollution to include other substances .
We would like to see this happen , and with that in mind , I think that Mr Atkins ' contribution might also lead to delay .
I would , in fact , like to take the opportunity of congratulating Mr Atkins on his wife ' s appointment and of offering my sympathy for the defeat of the Conservatives .
I think I share rapporteur Esclopé ' s view that we should not decide on any separation of either activity until this appears to be appropriate and until we are in follow-up negotiations .
However , in this case , as in other cases , we very much welcome an extension of the funds as soon as possible .
We would wish to see a number of amendments re-tabled because some issues got lost at sea in our committee , either because we lacked one vote or there was a tie .
That is partly caused by the fact that so many parties are involved in setting up the funds .
In our opinion , if the ' polluter pays ' principle applies , all relevant shipowners , shippers , etc. should be involved in the setting up of those funds .
Regarding the fund management , we do feel that the Commission , backed by all environmental organisations and local authorities , has a considerable role to play .
Mr President , Commissioner , as Mr Sterckx stresses in his excellent report , the maritime accidents involving the Erika , the Ievoli Sun and the Baltic Carrier highlight the shortcomings of and the omissions in current Community legislation .
It is high time we had strict controls and supervised ships entering EU ports or using the busy shipping lanes off Community coasts .
I need only point out , in order to illustrate just how serious maritime safety is , that 90 % of trade between the EU and third countries uses maritime transport .
Contrary to the honourable rapporteur and his Amendment No 11 to Article 8 , I take the view that the EU has sufficient weight and international clout to adopt its own regulations and standards where the IMO is unable to do so in the short term .
I therefore subscribe to the Commission 's proposal to install black boxes on older ships and not to allow any technical derogations for older ships .
Surely it is older ships which represent a danger to maritime transport and the maritime and coastal environment ?
A second point I should like to raise concerns how compliance with the measures adopted can be guaranteed at national and European level .
The Commission proposes setting up a new European Maritime Safety Agency , on which Mr Mastorakis has reported .
Despite the general consensus on the remit and responsibilities of this new European agency , I wonder if it will resolve the fundamental problems involved in improving maritime safety in the Member States .
Would it not be better to start by stipulating what the Member States themselves should do in order to anchor a uniform European approach in their national legislation and put it into practice ?
By that I mean , for example , specific proposals for new national databases , powers for the national authorities to conduct stricter inspections of ships which represent a risk , specific powers for coastal authorities over ships using ports of refuge or criteria for specifying the number of ports of refuge to be notified and the special safety precautions required in ports .
But , first and foremost , we need to train and deploy the human resources needed .
So far there has been no mention of this or uniform European approach here .
This , too , is something the Commission should take into account and include in subsequent action .
Mr President , I am very pleased to have the opportunity to speak on this very important topic , which is most pertinent to my constituency of Connaught Ulster , covering virtually the entire northern and western coasts of Ireland .
The livelihoods of many of my constituents are dependent on the marine sector and a coherent safety policy for all facets of maritime transport is an urgent necessity .
I commend all three rapporteurs for their work on this important subject .
I would also like to express my appreciation for the work carried out by the Commission in responding so rapidly to Parliament 's resolution , which called for a general tightening up of maritime safety .
It has brought forward two comprehensive packages of measures in a relatively short period of time and has clearly demonstrated a proper appreciation of the urgency of the matter .
The measures we are dealing with today aim at the effective protection of European waters against the risk of accidents at sea and marine pollution .
I would like to address myself in particular to the setting up of a European maritime safety agency .
This agency would play an important role in providing the Commission and Member States with support in applying , and monitoring compliance with , maritime safety measures , and in assessing their effectiveness .
It is not enough to agree on a set of rules .
We must also ensure that there is full and proper application of all aspects of maritime safety regulations in order to afford maximum protection for all those working in the sector , as well as to protect properly inhabitants of coastal areas and the coastal environment .
I welcome the proposal for four representatives on the board to be appointed by Parliament .
With regard to a proposal for four industry representatives on the board , it would be helpful for the Commission to clarify that the various sectors of the maritime industry would be represented .
It is absolutely essential that there be representatives from the fishing industry on this board .
In conclusion , it is essential that whatever regulation we adopt aims at an exemplary level of safety in sea transport and the prevention of pollution in our seas .
Coming from a maritime region of the Union , I am acutely aware of the preciousness of our marine resources and the need for sustainable activities , which assure these resources for future generations .
Mr President , Commissioner , while we are discussing the second package of proposals following the disaster involving the Maltese tanker , the Erika , the Council and the European Parliament have still not reached agreement on the first package .
Surely it is a disgrace that , eighteen months after the event , we still cannot manage to resolve our differences .
I would call on the Council once again to study Parliament ' s constructive contribution .
Back to today .
The proposals which the Commission has prepared in this second package are also valuable .
They help establish an adequate framework for safety at sea and environmental protection .
I can therefore support most elements in this package .
The navigation system is an important element .
In particular , the dynamic between the powers of the captain and the port authorities and between the exchange and processing of the collected information is a key point in this proposal .
The rapporteur has found a prudent solution for the first point .
The provisions concerning the exchange of information will need to prove their worth in practice which might be more difficult to achieve than expected .
The third major component of this proposal concerns the point where things went wrong with the Erika : the opportunity to find a safe haven in the event of potential damage to the ship and the environment .
In my opinion , the provisions included - provided they are fully implemented by the Member States - appear to guarantee responsible reception of ships in difficulty .
If , despite the precautions taken , an accident should nevertheless occur , it is important to provide swift and adequate compensation for the damage .
The existing international compensation system leaves a lot to be desired in terms of speed of action .
The introduction of a European layer on top of the existing Fund is only to be welcomed if the desired provisions cannot be introduced in the international system .
It is as yet unclear whether that will happen , but a complete adaptation to the proposed EU standards seems unlikely .
In order to prevent European shippers and receivers from being placed in too unfavourable a position , the extra layer will need to be as limited as possible .
An extension to include substances other than oil seems an unnecessarily complicating factor on which to reach international agreement . Therefore , this extension does not receive my backing .
Finally , Mr President , an Agency , yet to be set up , that supports the Commission forms a constructive contribution towards the EU ' s tasks of ensuring safety at sea .
Both international and European legislation on shipping traffic are starting to take on such dimensions that high-quality , specialist expertise to support the Commission is vital .
It is therefore important for the Agency to be staffed with highly qualified personnel from the Member States .
And as long as that requirement is met , I am not concerned where the offices of this Agency are based .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , a year and a half ago , the oil tanker Erika broke up off the coast of Brittany , causing one of the largest oil slicks ever .
Sadly , that was not the first , and will probably not be the last time we see this kind of pollution of the coast of one of our Member States .
The French Minister for the Environment , for his part , saw no need to curtail his holiday in La Réunion . Did he underestimate the scale of the disaster ?
Or did he think it would be pointless to return ?
It is true that Mrs Voynet and her Green comrades are concerned with issues other than the environment .
The number of seats the Socialists will hand to them at the next legislative elections , the legalisation of drugs , homosexual marriages , abortion , regularising the status of immigrants who have illegally entered France , protecting the life of murderers in the United States : with all these concerns , there is not much room left for the environment .
By contrast , our other leaders were very active .
Mr Jospin went so far as to visit one of the beaches , carried by one of his friends so as not to dirty his shoes .
They all vowed , rather belatedly , that this would never happen again .
All the necessary measures would be taken , double hulls , breaking up pieces of floating wreckage , etc .
Some even suggested launching a campaign to boycott Total , the only remaining French oil company .
Naturally , the large American oil groups welcomed this happy initiative .
A year and a half later , all this activity has brought no real improvement .
Compensation of victims is almost non-existent .
Only 6 % of the available money has been paid out .
The main purpose of the IOPC Fund , the compensation fund set up by the oil companies , seems to be to pay the victims as little money as possible .
These procedures , these counter-inquiries , these experts ' reports seem to be designed to discourage the most persevering of claimants , who retreat before the avalanche of procedures they are required to follow .
As for our coasts , they continue to be polluted by thousands of ships carrying dangerous waste .
The 1996 conventions on compensation of damage caused by the transport by sea of noxious and hazardous substances and the 2001 convention , known as the Bunker Convention , on civil liability for pollution damage caused by bunker oil , have not been implemented , or indeed ratified .
What solution do the three reports before us today propose ?
Compensating the victims ?
Mr Esclopé , in his report , rightly notes that the IOPC Fund is not very effective .
But it is questionable whether the solution lies in the creation of a new compensation body .
The maritime safety of our countries ?
The proposals in Mr Sterckx ' s report on the identification of ships , on their cargo and their access to ports , are entirely justified , but they only cover one aspect of the problem .
As for the establishment of a European Maritime Safety Agency , called for in the third report , Mr Mastorakis is right to question the usefulness of creating , and I quote from the report , ' a new Community bureaucracy ' .
Once again , the Europe of Brussels appears to be restricting the freedoms of the Member States by setting up another administration .
But freedom is not licence , and we should be quite clear about that .
It is the natural prerogative of a state to fly its flag on a ship , as recognised by the international court at The Hague since the famous cases known as the Muscat Dhows Case and the Lotus Case .
So we cannot protest if Liberia or Panama , for instance , make use of this attribute of their sovereignty .
But the end result cannot be that our states are obliged to allow ramshackle ships operated by incompetent crews and posing serious risks to the environment to approach their coasts .
They must have the right to visit and , if need be , to refuse access to or turn away any ship that penetrates the zone defined by the Montego Bay convention as an exclusive economic zone , i.e. the 200 sea-mile zone .
All these measures , however wise , are not sufficient to tackle the threats - meaning , of course , environmental threats - facing the coastlines of our countries . If we are to tackle them , perhaps we first need to ask a few embarrassing questions .
Why , for example , is a French company forced to go to a foreign ship owner , flying a dubious flag , with a crew that can only be described as a floating ' Babel ' ?
The Communist trade union , the CGT , which has ruined the French shipyards , the governments that have increased the rate of compulsory levies by 15 points in 25 years , probably have the answer .
Why is the oil we import not carried mostly via the oil pipelines , which would be much safer than any tanker ?
Yet , the threats are not only environmental .
The arrival on the French Côte d 'Azur last February of a Turkish vessel filled with a thousand or so Kurds from Syria , misrepresented as Iraqi refugees , showed the French that in the Europe of Schengen and of Amsterdam there is hardly any more control of their maritime borders than of their terrestrial borders , even near a large military port .
Any ship can , therefore , enter our territorial waters .
Today , some of these ships are carrying oil , others hazardous substances , others illegal immigrants .
Tomorrow they could just as easily be carrying weapons or terrorist groups .
These dangers are the result of abolishing the borders and of the decline of our national navies , which , today , no longer have the resources to accomplish their tasks , one of the most important of which is protection of the coasts .
If we are to restore maritime safety to our countries , then as in many other areas it is not so much new European regulations that we need as governments that pursue a policy founded on simple principles : independence in relation to energy , maintenance of a genuine national navy , lower levies and protection of borders , including maritime borders .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we all recognise the importance of the Erika II package , which seeks to improve safety and avoid the repetition of environmental disasters at sea and along the coasts of the European Community .
It took the disaster of the Erika in December 1999 for us to launch a series of measures on the safety of sea traffic .
However , it gives me great pleasure to be able to say that the debate on the measures making up the package is progressing fast in a coordinated manner , demonstrating a clear convergence of objectives within the European institutions .
I congratulate the European Parliament on its work , for it conducted the analysis of the proposals rapidly and resolutely .
With regard to the safety of the transportation of hazardous , pollutant goods by sea , it is now clear that the current legislation is totally inadequate .
In fact , Directive 93 / 75 / EEC lays down a notification system for the goods but does not establish rules for collecting information .
In this regard , Mr Sterckx 's report draws our attention to the need to increase the safety of maritime transport by using new technologies and the instruments made available to us by international provisions establishing a Community monitoring , control and information system .
We must guarantee more stringent monitoring of ships which represent particularly high risks to safety at sea or the environment .
I agree with the rapporteur when he calls for an increase in the powers of Member States to act in their capacity as coastal States when faced with accident hazards or the threat of pollution .
In addition , we are all convinced of the utility of installing a black box on board vessels , and we hope that it will be possible to bring older ships into line with the new standards within the transition period , even if this means installing a simplified version of the black box or VDR .
I would like to end by drawing your attention to the fact that VDRs and transponders are not in themselves sufficient to avoid accidents . Other factors such as the level of training and the competence of the crew are equally as important .
Mr President , as a British MEP I would like to say that on this occasion it is unfair to blame the French for the delay in implementing the Erika I package .
The Council as a whole must share responsibility for the lack of progress .
Sadly it is not just the Erika , but the 1 000 ships that have sunk over the past ten years that really highlight the desperate need to make progress in the areas we are discussing this afternoon .
Many lives have been lost , thousands of kilometres of our coastline have been damaged , perhaps for ever .
That is why I , as PSE spokesperson this afternoon , speak in support of the Commission 's proposal and the Sterckx report on the need to establish a monitoring system for maritime traffic .
I thank the rapporteur for all the work he has done , but I should like to focus on one item on which I cannot fully share his views , namely Amendment No 11 to Article 8 .
Maybe the rapporteur could explain the amendment later on , but I fear that it seeks to water down the commitment contained in the Commission 's proposal to ensure that high-quality voyage data recorders - black boxes - are fitted in all ships , old and new , by 2007 .
In my view , and in that of many in the maritime sector , the reluctance to accept the value of voyage data recorders and take positive measures to fit them in merchant vessels is a factor which makes safety in the maritime sector less satisfactory .
According to marine accident investigators , a voyage data recorder not only records what happens , but also removes arguments and ensures that appropriate corrective measures can be taken .
It is , in their view , one of the most valuable tools available today in preventing accidents from happening , not just in learning from mistakes .
Electronic systems have highlighted the limitations of human ability to recall events accurately .
They have on occasion shown eye-witness accounts to be totally unreliable .
We desperately need these particular black boxes to be fitted sooner rather than later .
To put it simply , a ship fitted with a black box is a safer ship .
First , lessons can be learnt and they can be learnt accurately .
But secondly , there will be a significant change in the safety culture of a ship as a whole .
Therefore the VDR is , if anything , a preventive tool .
We would therefore support the Commission 's proposal .
The IMO route is perhaps a better one , but we are not prepared for a study that may be published in 2004 - who knows ?
We want action and we want it now .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , you may rest assured that , unlike Mr Gollnisch , I will not call for every last detail of maritime safety to be resolved .
Although we welcome the speedy attempts to ensure the safety of transport by sea , we also remember that the ' Erika I ' package has still not been adopted in full .
Once the initial excitement is over , the institutions , including Parliament , relapse into their slow procedures , which is a pity .
We must keep up the pace for the ' Erika II ' package , and I hope it will not be plagued by subtle attempts to slip in amendments that may be relevant but have no chance at all of being adopted by the Council , with a view to slowing down the procedures .
For the object of this package is to establish an effective arsenal of legal provisions to ensure maritime safety , after all the disasters that have occurred , and to prevent pollution .
On the report on the monitoring system , we totally support the rapporteur ' s proposals , especially those seeking to make it compulsory as from 2007 to install a black box in all ships entering EU ports and on a system of automatic identification of ships , so that they can be monitored by the coastal authorities .
The directive will also require Member States to determine ports of refuge for ships in distress .
This provision will , no doubt , pose some problems and we will have to be very careful how we implement it .
Turning to the European Maritime Safety Agency , we welcome its establishment but we would have preferred it to serve as the point of departure for a future European coastal agency .
That is not the case , but with time and experience , that is what it could turn into .
We would like it to be independent , whereas the Commission proposals in fact leave it little margin for manoeuvre .
We are sorry that our proposal to include representatives of the NGOs and trade unions on the administrative board were rejected .
These voluntary players often make pertinent proposals and could be objective and constructive allies for the agency .
With regard to where the agency will be based , before the final choice is made , we would like to see a number of criteria introduced , such as the frequency of accidents at sea , the intensity of maritime traffic and the maritime infrastructure of the candidate countries concerned .
Finally , the third report concerns the European Fund , modelled more or less on the IOPC Fund , which was unable , a year and a half after the Erika disaster , to compensate the victims , although the appropriate authorities had made the necessary financial promises and set early deadlines .
We fully endorse the main objectives , such as the aim of raising the compensation ceiling , given that damages for the Erika disaster came to EUR 300 million , whereas the IOPC Fund has a ceiling of no more than EUR 200 million .
We think it is crucial to extend the compensation to include environmental damage .
In fact , this would be the first time that the financial evaluation of environmental costs was given in figures and that compensation was paid for repairing damage to the environment .
The Committee on Transport 's attitude in this regard is difficult to understand and tends in the opposite direction .
We regret that .
Lastly , on contributions to the fund , we believe that those who own and charter the ships should also have to contribute to this fund .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although a number of questions remain open , let me say from the outset that I endorse the three reports before us on the ' Erika II ' package , while at the same time emphasising that we urgently need to adopt them and , even more , to implement them .
Improvements are still needed and , I hope , are still possible ; that is the purpose of the amendments my group has tabled .
I will confine my comments to two points I regard as crucial .
The first is the need for greater democracy , to enable the various players involved in this sector to have a say in the decision-making process .
Secondly , we must go further on the question of compensation .
Coming back to the first point , priority must be attached to giving the men and women involved a say .
That is a democratic requirement to which the European Union constantly refers as one of its values ; but it is also a question of effectiveness .
If we want to improve safety at sea we must also mobilise all the citizens concerned , in particular nature conservation associations , trade union organisations and , more generally , the personnel involved in maritime traffic .
With regard to compensation , we very much need this initiative .
We have to listen to the victims , the elected representatives , the local associations involved .
We must give them a say in the actual evaluation of the consequences of the damage as also in the decisions on compensation .
They have a role to play in the management of the COPE Fund .
The same requirement should apply to the Safety Agency , which should be open to representatives of the employees of this industry , to representatives of the associations , who have the kind of know-how that is crucial to any proper evaluation .
In even broader terms , I believe that the agency should ensure that they are involved in its initiatives on a regular basis .
On the second point , it is unacceptable that in the final analysis much of the damage caused by maritime disasters is borne by the people who are the victims .
That is the reason for establishing the COPE Fund and that is why we are supporting this initiative .
Let me say once again that I think it would be very judicious to hold the ship owners and charterers liable both financially and under criminal law .
We must also establish the link between the nationality of the ship owner and the flag flown by the ship .
Lastly , according to some estimates , the COPE compensation ceiling of EUR 1 billion will suffice for the Erika disaster .
I believe that to accept that ceiling would mean accepting that we do not pay full compensation for other disasters , which , alas , we cannot exclude at this point , and therefore that the countries concerned have to bear much of the costs .
We would have preferred no ceiling to be set , so that the compensation corresponded as closely as possible to the real need ; in the meantime , I believe we should consider raising that ceiling .
Mr President , let us make the most of a good thing .
For once , the Commission is showing appreciation of the daily lives of European citizens .
Even so , twenty-one years after the sinking of the Amoco Cadiz , the Commission is finally taking action and proposes to improve and speed up the payment of compensation to victims .
This is the objective behind setting up the COPE Fund , an objective which has my unbridled approval , all the more so because I am an MEP for the Loire Atlantique region , the département in France which has been affected the most by the Erika disaster and where tourism plays an important part .
This economic and ecological disaster has placed many businesses in difficulties , caused unemployment and has polluted our environment .
The irony is that it is the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism that is dragging its feet .
Committee members from both the right and the left voted in favour of amendments on increasing the COPE Fund for substances other than oil , and even though these amendments are praiseworthy , they will cause an unavoidable delay - I am sorry but this is what will happen - in setting up the Fund and therefore in compensating the victims properly .
This strategy is more than debatable , since it is based on conventions that are not yet ratified and it might even scupper this eagerly awaited measure .
These amendments therefore seem tainted and absurd .
This is a choice that we will eventually have to explain to those affected by the disaster who are on the verge of bankruptcy and to the municipalities that have put an enormous effort into cleaning up the coastline and which are awaiting appropriate compensation .
I believe it is irresponsible to give a demagogical speech , ruling out any extra compensation .
I think it would be much more sensible to push this through quickly and to achieve practical results .
That is the reason why we will be voting against these amendments , so that the original proposal - the most suitable one for properly compensating those affected by this disaster - is restored .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , the Erika disaster led to a wave of indignation amongst the European public at the deficient measures in force and our incapacity to prevent such a huge catastrophe .
This accident demonstrated the limitations of a political approach which tried to deal with maritime safety exclusively within the framework of international organisations such as the IMO .
The very extensive international safety legislation which now regulates maritime transport has made it possible to drastically reduce accidents and pollution .
The measures we are discussing today and those which we discussed just a month ago , Erika I , demonstrate the commitment of our institutions to strengthening the safety of ships and the protection of the marine environment .
However , as in all human activities , it is practically impossible to guarantee complete safety .
It is therefore inevitable that there should be sporadic maritime accidents or pollution incidents and that , being spectacular , they should receive wide media coverage .
This does not alter the fact that the immense majority of journeys take place safely , effectively and in a way which respects the environment .


I congratulate the rapporteurs , Mr Sterckx , Mr Esclopé and Mr Mastorakis , on their excellent work on the safety of maritime traffic , the compensation of oil pollution and the creation of a European Maritime Safety Agency .
I would also like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Commission and , in particular , the Vice-President , Mrs de Palacio , on her magnificent work , since in one year she has presented six proposals aimed at improving maritime safety .
As alternative rapporteur , I will focus on the third proposal , by the rapporteur Mr Mastorakis , on the creation of the European Maritime Safety Agency .
I personally believe that the creation of this Agency will demonstrate to the public our institutions ' great interest in preventing future accidents and pollution , as well the need to raise levels of safety on our seas .
Both the rapporteur , Mr Mastorakis , and others of us have presented a series of amendments aimed at improving the organisation of the Agency .
I would like to mention one , which relates to the composition of the Agency ' s board , in which we propose that Parliament be removed from that composition .
The reason is clear : we believe that Parliament is an organ for controlling management , never for participating in management .
For that we have the Commission , the Council and a whole range of organisations .
I therefore simply wish to thank the Commissioner for her work and ask her to present the Erika III package shortly , so that we can continue working on maritime safety .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by welcoming the launch of this second round of measures , diligently drawn up by the Commission and subjected to in-depth debate in the Parliamentary Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
As has already been said , the basic aim is to avoid the far too many , genuine tragedies which have occurred when unforeseen natural causes are combined with human error .
I would like to focus on the measure analysed in Mr Mastorakis ' report , a measure establishing a European Maritime Safety Agency .
This is a structure which , to discharge its functions fully , must imperatively be autonomous , independent and highly focused .
These are the requirements which the Group of the Party of European Socialists has repeatedly stressed and reiterated with the amendments tabled in plenary and unexpectedly rejected in committee : autonomy and independence , as I said ; the membership of the Administrative Board , which would exclude without any reasonable grounds both direct and indirect representation of Parliament ; the decision-making powers of the Agency ; in short , its role and usefulness for achieving the goal which all undoubtedly endorse .
Ladies and gentlemen , we would like to stress these points and we hope that our recommendation , contained in another amendment which refers to the criteria to be fulfilled for eligibility for accommodating the Agency , will be endorsed .
This is not so much a question of engaging in another tedious , nationalistic competition as of laying down and outlining the criteria and parameters which a town or State must fulfil in order to be eligible .
Indeed , there is no doubt that it is in the interests of all to establish not formal , needlessly ornamented structures which duplicate functions but suitable bodies , so that we do not end up lamenting over tragedies which could have been avoided by courageous , far-sighted decisions .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , today I defended my position and that of my group , as did my fellow Members in the debates in committee , expressing a completely favourable opinion of the establishment of the European Maritime Safety Agency .
We are all thinking of the Erika disaster and other serious accidents involving oil tankers and the ship that spilled chemical products off the coast of Galicia , which have caused huge and irreparable damage and also deaths .
It is these tragedies that underlie this decision . Now , in the little time that I have , I wish to remind you that in the next six months , perhaps as early as in Gothenburg , the Council must decide on the location of the agency .
I hope that it chooses a country with maritime traditions and history , and that amongst the countries that fulfil these conditions , the choice goes to the Galician coast , which sees the majority of the maritime traffic that unites Europe with the other continents and where the greatest number of accidents occurs , including the extremely serious ones that I have just mentioned .
If my proposal were acted on , I can assure you that the decision would receive the support and the warmth of Galician society .
Mr President , with regard to Mr Esclopé ' s report , we are not opposed to a European compensation fund , particularly , and I quote , in order ' to ensure adequate compensation of pollution damage in EU waters resulting from the transport of oil [ ... ] by sea ' .
We are , however , opposed to the fact that this fund is , ultimately , paid for by taxpayers .
It is up to polluters to pay for all the damages that they have caused , either directly or indirectly , not to mention the financial penalties that apply for having failed to avoid causing pollution .
That was not the case in the sinking of the Erika , where , moreover , the charterer was Elf ; in other words , one of the richest oil companies in the European Union .
Furthermore , even with the help of various compensation funds , the victims of the oil slick have still not received adequate compensation and some have not even received any .
The individuals responsible for damages are themselves threatened with court action , or even prison in order to force them to face up to their responsibilities .
In order to force the guilty oil companies to do this , we must confiscate all their assets within the European Union , to make them pay immediately .
Of course , nothing of the kind has been proposed .
It is for this reason that , whilst we approve some of the amendments , we shall abstain from voting on this report .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , may I again thank the three rapporteurs on behalf of my group .
Even if the debate has shown that one group is perhaps not completely satisfied on one or two points , we must admit that all three reports were adopted either unanimously or by a large majority in committee and we should maintain this majority in tomorrow 's vote .
I think Parliament has put a very good package together in its position on Erika II and we should stick to it .
I also think , to pick up on some of the comments made , starting with the comments made by the previous speaker and my colleague 's comments on the compensation fund , that we are not prevaricating .
All we are saying is that it is just not on for Member States to maintain to the outside world that they support compensation regulations and then only ratify quite basic compensation regulations .
With the Esclopé report , we have included the fact that we want regulations for both oil pollution and for pollution from dangerous or harmful substances .
The Council is perfectly at liberty to prove to us at second reading that it is prepared to push ahead with ratification or find an alternative .
But it is just not on to say : you are blocking our compensation regulation , when they have no intention of doing anything about pollution from dangerous or harmful substances .
In this respect , we must put on the pressure and say that we want a general regulation because there is a great deal of maritime pollution , not just from oil , but also from chemicals and other substances .
If the Council knows of a better way , then we are quite prepared to take it .
And you too , Madam Vice-President , if you know of a better way , then we are quite prepared to go to a second reading .
We also have an open mind about international regulations .
If the IMO wants to find a global solution to the problem within the next six months and actually does so , then we will gladly withdraw this Commission proposal .
But all I can say is that , the same thing always happens ; we always have to put on the pressure first and adopt our own legislation before any global regulations are passed , which is why we must push ahead here .
One last comment on the Mastorakis report . We cannot say on the one hand that the agency should be independent , and then say that Parliament should have a say on the Administrative Board .
That is a contradiction in terms .
We want an independent authority but , in a democracy , any executive , even a subordinate authority , must be answerable to parliament .
This will only happen if the agency is not completely independent of the Commission .
We here in Parliament shall come down on the Commissioner if the agency makes mistakes .
And we shall not be satisfied with the agency director 's head .
If something goes wrong in the agency , it will be your charming head that we are after , Madam Vice-President .
That is parliamentarianism , which is why the agency must be independent , but under the responsibility of the Commission , and why we and not some experts appointed to the Administrative Board must exercise the right of control .
We are your partners , Commissioner , and we shall get along just fine .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to make three comments on the occasion of this extremely important debate .
My first comment is to say that , first of all , we should see to it that the European legislator stops berating itself on this matter .
It has been 18 months since the Erika sank , an event marked by commotion , emotion and by ensuing controversy .
It is easier to hurl abuse and to argue than to legislate , and I believe that the length of time waited , at the end of which six texts have been proposed , and these are six extremely important contributions to implement a legal basis for maritime safety in Europe , which did not previously exist , is normal .
I also believe that Parliament and the Commission must be congratulated for the work that they have done - the Commission for having proposed six texts and Parliament for having examined them , thanks to the rapporteurs , in record time .
To do otherwise , in my view , would have been to deceive the public , in other words , to lead the public to believe that it was possible to work much more quickly .
My second comment relates to the content . I believe that , with both the Erika I and Erika II packages , today we have , or very nearly have , a fairly solid legal basis , and we have created a European maritime area , or the beginnings of a European maritime area from scratch and within , essentially , 18 months , with the constraints that are all too familiar to you , which are , in particular , the constraints of our agreements at the IMO .
We have made much progress , particularly with regard to risk prevention , or safety , in other words , as regards the effectiveness of monitoring and as regards legal and financial liability . I , like many , believe that the European Union must legislate in order to be more powerful within the International Maritime Organisation .
As for the future , and I would like to mention two cases here , I believe that there are two important aspects of safety which have not been dealt with .
The first aspect is the emptying of tanks .
I think that it is absolutely essential that the EU legislate and pass tough legislation on the practice of emptying tanks , which is collectively more damaging as far as the environment is concerned , as you know , than the accidents that we have witnessed .
In this respect , there is a gap in the legislation , which must be filled .
The second aspect is that , like many , I am astonished that rivers are not covered by any safety regulations .
A large proportion of today ' s traffic , particularly in northern Europe , uses the rivers .
This puts people living in the vicinity at risk , and we should not wait for a disaster to happen to take legislative measures on traffic using inland ports .
Mr President , we have heard some interesting speeches , especially from my fellow countrymen , Mr Mastorakis and Mr Papayannakis .

The European Union has made a move , legislation is progressing , but there are still serious concerns and questions , such as , to be brief , first : the question of the first Erika package - not just the fact that it has taken so long but the question of how it has been hammered out , amidst fierce bargaining , with safety issues coming behind questions of competition and other interests , giving rise to a lot of speculation , especially as regards single-hull tankers .
The second cause for concern is that , despite the fact that the Commission supposedly wants uniform safety standards at sea throughout the European Union , this is not the case .
Different conditions apply to a whole series of ships , such as ferries in northern seas or ships in the Mediterranean .
What is going to be done about this ?
The third point concerns controls .
We have the agency , or rather the proposal to set up an agency , but at present there are no controls .
A few months ago , the Samina sank in the Aegean .
Neither the Greek government nor the Commission was able to say which legislation , which directives Greece is applying and if these directives are being applied for the sake of appearances - such as the directive on training - or if they are being applied in practice .
No one could say !
Both the Greek government and the Commission owe us an answer .
Finally , there are two points on which I have reservations .
I have some doubts as to the amendments by the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism on the question of the weather , which I think detract from the Commission proposal .
And secondly , the cost of the compensation fund should not be borne by the citizens , especially as oil is one of the factors which exacerbates inflation , the cost of living and so forth
Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , I think that the three directives under discussion today are a step forward as far as maritime safety is concerned , although I think that things would be even better if the Council took less time and was more efficient in taking decisions and we did not end up debating the Erika II package before we have even completed the Erika I package .
In all events , I think that two points need to be highlighted in Mr Sterckx 's report .
The first is that his proposals give us a more substantial and more positive measure as regards ports of refuge , places where ships can shelter in the event of danger , and I think that , thanks to Mr Sterckx 's proposals , we now have more specific and more substantial measures .
The second point is that , when a ship departs under normal circumstances , we have stipulated that the principal responsibility lies with the master and that it only lies with the port authorities in exceptional circumstances , because the master in fact knows better than the port authorities in such cases .
As far as Mr Esclopé 's report is concerned , I should like to say that he has done a good job in introducing international arrangements here , as it is an international problem which requires an international solution . Of course , the proposal before us can - and should - act as a catalyst and encourage the relevant international agencies to take swift action on the problem in question .
Now , as regards the report by my fellow countryman , Mr Mastorakis , whom I should like to congratulate on his report , obviously we need a flexible and efficient agency and I think that , as they stand , Parliament 's proposals on this Maritime Safety Agency reinforce the efforts being made and I think - and Mr Mastorakis himself believes - that , if it were to be based in Piraeus , this would reinforce these efforts still further .
Now we obviously need to take further action , especially as regards the application of Community legislation , and we need to highlight the human factor , the number of inspectors and surveyors needed to apply the legislation , inspector training , staff and crew training etc .
But I assume that the Commission will consider this at a later date and notify us accordingly .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate the Commission on this second package of legislation , which is not starting from scratch , since the Member States already have technical skills , in their dockyards and shipowners , their scientific community , their operators . The package , therefore , today gives European citizens the beginnings of a legislative guarantee and the beginnings of the secure management of its exclusive economic zone .
We think that it is worth pointing out the effort and the persistence that the Commissioner has demonstrated on this dossier . I would also emphasise the contributions of the three rapporteurs .
With regard to the COPE Fund , it is , as has already been said here , a supplement .
It is intended to meet the needs and the cover the risks of the most serious situations , such as those that have been mentioned here at some length .
Beyond this , many other risks remain .
Of course , maritime transport , which is subject to the rules of competition , must also have its rules strengthened under the IMO in order to enable its economic activities to continue to be profitable without sacrificing safety , not only in Europe and the United States but in all seas and oceans .
The timeliness and the objectives of the agency have also already been discussed here at some length .
I think that the rapporteur reasonably points out some loopholes , but I also feel that it is not Parliament ' s place to manage the agency , but instead to supervise the administrative rules and good practices , of this and other , similar agencies .
What the agency must guarantee is absolute fairness and equal cooperation between the Member States and must also ensure the participation of the public , of those in the profession and of the other economic and social interests concerned .
The agency ' s independence must , therefore , be a paradigm , an essential factor for it to be respected , for it to allay the concerns of the public and to develop and encourage plans for action and cooperation at European level .
This is certainly what is needed and , as many speakers have stated here , there are many potential locations for the agency , since there are several candidates which are all equally competent and well prepared .
I think that Lisbon is probably the most appropriate .
Mr President , if Cyprus and Malta accede to the Union - or rather when , not if - the Union will have the largest merchant fleet in the world .
Not so much because these two countries are huge maritime powers , but because many shipowners find them ' convenient ' , and I use the English term advisedly .
A large fleet is an advantage , of that there can be no doubt .
But it entails a great deal of responsibility .
We must therefore ensure that our fleet is safe ; safety on our own doorstep is paramount , but elsewhere too the European flag must stand for quality .
When I reported to Parliament on enlargement and transport , I held a great many talks with people in positions of responsibility in the candidate countries .
They were all very quick to promise that they would transpose the relevant acquis into their national law .
However , as I pointed out even then , things were still in the pipeline , especially the Erika II package under discussion today .
That alone was cause for concern .
Talks on transposing European law or , to use the Community jargon , ' implementing the acquis ' , soon got bogged down .
In one case , I was even told that the inspector responsible was on holiday .
We shall need much more than one inspector if we want to use serious , prompt , all-encompassing controls in order to prevent further disasters on our or anyone else 's doorstep .
We shall need sufficient numbers of trained inspectors and we shall need them quickly .
The present Member States can do a great deal to help here .
Twinning and the temporary secondment of well-trained specialists working in existing management and control structures recently proved to be a very effective instrument in reintegrating former East Germany .
We could apply this model here too .
With measures to guarantee that foreseeable problems will be dealt with promptly by well-organised accession mechanisms , we could contribute to the success of the enlargement process and , more importantly , win our citizens over .
There are already more than enough concerns and fears on the question of enlargement .
We must address these concerns and fears , be they major concerns or concerns about individual specialist aspects such as those under discussion today .
I almost said there are a lot of Irish among us .
Parliamentarians on the Administrative Board - not the best way of involving Parliament , I think .
The Commission should monitor the agency and we should monitor the Commission .
As an Austrian , I unfortunately have no high-sea ports to offer .
We lost our last sea battle a hundred years ago .
But I should like to think that we too could offer a pleasing location , should one be wanted .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is high time we woke up and noticed the kind of environmental and safety risks associated with maritime transport and particularly with tankers .
Oil catastrophes have concretely shown that relying on good luck costs society dear .
Unfortunately difficult decisions often make progress only when a catastrophe and the reactions of voters force politicians to act .
The Erika II package under discussion therefore deserves all possible support .
I would like to congratulate all three rapporteurs for drawing up thorough reports .
The Erika II package certains very many positive proposals among which I would particularly like to mention the setting up of emergency ports and the automatic monitoring of vessels .
The setting up of a maritime safety agency will also improve coordination on safety issues .
Although we Europeans can affect the condition of our maritime environment very significantly , we must always remember that we are not alone in the world , even after enlargement .
A large number of vessels originating from other than EU Member States travel near the shores of Europe .
Therefore , we must take care that the well-intentioned measures of Europe do not impede the creation of international agreements .
One example is the European oil pollution compensation fund ( COPE ) .
Setting up the fund must not mean reducing willingness to achieve a wider solution under the auspices of the IMO .
Oil pollutes just as much and clean-up costs are identical whether the vessel is registered in the EU or , for example , under the Liberian flag .
Ladies and gentlemen , safeguarding the cleanliness of our seas and especially our coastline means we must not hesitate a minute longer .
It is time to act decisively so that the worst problems can be removed once and for all .
In this way , we will ensure that no Jessica , Angelica or even Marika Package is required in the future .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would , first of all , like to thank and congratulate the three rapporteurs , Mr Sterckx , Mr Mastorakis and Mr Esclopé , on their magnificent reports on the safety of maritime traffic , the creation of a European Maritime Safety Agency and compensation for oil pollution .

Furthermore , I would like to thank them for having presented and prepared these reports within such a short timescale and for the attention they have paid to the problem of maritime safety .
However , like many of today ' s speakers , I regret the fact that we are discussing the Erika II package without having yet adopted Erika I , although I hope that within the conciliation procedure we will achieve a positive result as soon as possible .
Nevertheless , I would also like to say that the Erika I and Erika II packages are already having practical effects within the International Maritime Organisation , where we have managed to make progress on making double-hulled or similar ships compulsory for the transportation of oil , and also with regard to the current discussion on increasing the figures in order to cover liabilities , which will very possibly exceed USD 300 million - they are currently 180 million - and also in relation to countries such as Cyprus and Malta which - and I address this to Mr Rack - are making an enormous effort to improve the characteristics of their fleets within the framework of their incorporation into the European Union , accepting the requirements of the Erika I and Erika II packages before they enter into force .
Before the end of the year , I will present a proposal on safety on ferries , although we know what happened in the case of the Samina Express : they were watching football .
Greek justice is taking action .
I believe we must mark out territories .
It is the Member States who have all the responsibilities in the criminal field .
I will refer to the proposed directive on maritime traffic , which is the most advanced one in terms of its preparation and I believe this is indicated by the consensus in relation to it .
We broadly support all the amendments , with slight modifications of the wording of those which are aimed at improving or specifying the scope of the text .
Also , in part , with some modifications , Amendments Nos 6 and 18 , which are extremely important , on the refuge area . With some modifications , the amendments which are aimed at improving the assessment of the implementation of the Directive on the ground , specifically Amendments Nos 7 , 20 and 21 .
We cannot accept the current wording of Amendment No 11 on black boxes - although I understand the rapporteur ' s objectives , the formulation used makes this requirement dependent on a prior decision by the IMO .
We are not prepared to accept this .
If the IMO is able to make progress , we will have to move ahead ; but we know that good work is being done within the International Maritime Organisation and what we want is to put more pressure on , as we have done in the case of double hulls .
With regard to the proposal for the European Maritime Safety Agency , I would thank you for Parliament ' s positive approach to our proposal and the support it is giving us .
This is not a purely administrative measure , but rather the Agency will increase the public visibility of the European Union ' s commitment to increasing maritime safety to the highest possible level and preventing pollution from ships .
I would like to say to those people who are concerned that the Agency may become another Community bureaucratic body , that the Agency will enable the Member States to be part of and participate in an area which , as we all know , involves national and Community responsibilities and competences and through which we have to seek integration in order to better coordinate these actions .
The Agency will enable the Commission and the Member States to work together in an independent body and that is one of its advantages .
Parliament ' s amendments do not alter the spirit of the Commission ' s proposal and focus principally on the administrative structure .
The Commission supports Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 7 , 15 , 16 , 21 and 22 and we can also accept Amendment No 4 , which makes it possible for the Agency to offer technical assistance to the candidate countries without a specific request from the Commission . We can also accept Amendments Nos 14 and 10 , which clarify the mandate of the principal directors of this body .
In relation to Amendments Nos 9 , 20 , 27 and 28 , on the Administrative Board , I must say that we accept Amendments Nos 9 and 27 , insofar as they eliminate the presence of Parliament and , if these amendments are incorporated , we will have to make the necessary adjustments .
In relation to the location of the Agency , Amendment No 19 seems more logical than No 29 .
Objective criteria are specified for the selection and I fully agree with this and believe that it can be incorporated .
We accept that the external evaluation of the Agency be subject to the conditions set by the Administrative Board , as Amendment No 17 requests in part , although we do not think it is necessary to repeat the evaluation every 5 years as it suggests .
With regard to the visits which the officials of the agencies must make to the Member States , the Commission wishes the national administrations to actively participate in them and to assist them .
We cannot therefore accept either Amendment No 6 or No 5 , which contravene this objective .
I understand the justification for Amendment No 18 , but for reasons of legal certainty I cannot accept it , since the term ' independent ' adds nothing to a body with its own legal personality .
Nor can I accept Amendments Nos 8 and 12 , which imply that it is not necessary for the Commission to approve the Agency ' s programme , nor Amendments Nos 13 and 25 , according to which the decision to make visits to the Member States should depend on a Commission opinion , rather than on its agreement .
Supervising the implementation of the Community acquis will remain the responsibility of the Commission and the Agency cannot replace us in this task .
Lastly , the Commission cannot agree with Amendments Nos 11 and 24 , which affect the impartiality of the executive director .
With regard to the third proposal on responsibility and compensation for the dumping of oil , I would like to congratulate Mr Esclopé and Parliament on your work on such a complex issue .
I would like to make it clear that the problems do not relate to the underlying objectives , but only to the means of achieving these objectives and we should try to solve all the problems by means of a proposal designed to deal with one specific issue : the lack of adequate compensation in the case of serious oil pollution .
Furthermore , I agree with what Mr Esclopé has said .
If we now add to this proposal the problems relating to other types of dumping , to pollution from chemical dumping or from the cleaning out of bilge , we will eventually paralyse the initiative .
These types of proposals are specifically related to Conventions which are awaiting ratification and which must be ratified over the next few years .
I am also prepared for us to also make some regional proposals in the event that existing Conventions are not ratified by a sufficient number of States that are members of the IMO .
But since there is already an international proposal , I believe that we should not be too hasty .
The perfect is the enemy of the good .
Let us concentrate on the dumping of oil , on which we have data and certain factors which will allow us to move forward quickly .
We can accept three groups of amendments which , altogether , make up more or less half of them .
The first , the nineteen amendments which seek to extend the scope of the Regulation to cover substances other than oil , such as chemical and combustible substances , are not acceptable , as I have pointed out .
The second group of amendments , which refer to the role of shipowners in the COPE Fund , Amendments Nos 22 to 25 and 50 , which seek to introduce compulsory contributions for shipowners , are not compatible with international law , since the international rules in force do not allow demands for additional compensation from shipowners , unless the accident has been caused by fraudulent behaviour .
This is one of the problems detected by the Commission in the international system in force , which must be rectified on an international level and we are committed to working on this .
Nevertheless , given the current situation , requiring shipowners to participate in compensation for damages would contravene the current international rules and we are therefore unable to accept such a proposal .
But I must say that Amendments Nos 29 , 31 , 34 to 42 , 52 and 57 also cause problems for the Commission because their aim is to strengthen the participation of the local representatives of the polluted region in the COPE Fund committee procedures .
I would remind you that this committee is covered by the Decision on commitology and Community law does not allow its composition to be changed .
Nor can we accept Amendment No 19 , which proposes removing the paragraph establishing the possibility of rejecting compensation to claimants involved in the accident , that is to say shipowners , charterers and company directors .
It would not make sense to compensate those responsible for the pollution .
I therefore prefer to keep this paragraph , which allows the rejection of payments to the parties most involved in the pollution .
We have problems with Amendment No 28 , which proposes reducing the period for collecting contributions , and lastly , with Amendments Nos 51 , 52 , 54 and 55 , which create difficulties in practice because they fall outside the scope of the proposal .
All the others , either in their entirety or in part , can be accepted .
They are Nos 2 , 4 , 5 , 6 , 8 , 9 10 , 11 , 20 , 30 , 32 , 33 , and from 43 to 49 .
I will end by once again thanking the rapporteurs for the speed and quality of their work , as well as the whole of the committee and Parliament as a whole for their support for the Erika I and Erika II packages in their entirety .
I hope that all the remaining stages of negotiations in both forums will maintain the highest quality in terms of the texts and the proposals , and will be completed as quickly as possible .
I would also like to say that before the end of the year we shall be submitting proposals on safety in the transportation of persons , of passengers .
We would have liked to achieve everything by now , but we must understand that sometimes we cannot achieve what everybody wants .
We have , however , taken very significant steps forward which , I insist , have already had real consequences by improving safety on our seas .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be held tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Occurrence reporting in civil aviation
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0203 / 2001 ) by Mr Collins , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on occurrence reporting in civil aviation .
Mr President , the continued increase in air traffic , which is expected to double over the next decade , is placing unprecedented pressure on air travel safety .
It has been well documented that air transport is a very safe mode of transport and this should , and must , remain the case .
However , we must all work to ensure that air accidents are reduced to a bare minimum .
The continent of Europe accounts for about 10 % of all accidents worldwide , while one third of air traffic takes place in European skies .
It is clear that a large proportion of the measures needed to improve air safety should be geared towards preventing accidents , rather than providing a response when accidents have happened .
Incidents occurring in one Member State are not necessarily known in another Member State and similar circumstances can lead to fatal accidents .
That is why I welcome this European Commission proposal .
As a result of this new initiative , all European Union Member States will establish formal incident-reporting systems to facilitate the collection of information on actual or potential safety deficiencies involving aeroplanes in Europe .
Setting up a system that allows for safety and civil aviation authorities to share information available from the different reporting schemes will enable all parties involved learn from their mistakes thereby producing a safer system for all air users in future .
Article 75 of the Treaty of Maastricht introduced the legal basis for the introduction of Community measures to improve the level of transport safety in Europe , thereby creating a Community competence in this field .
The adoption of a directive on accident and investigation in November 1994 was the first EU response to the use of these new powers .
However , the limitation of the 1994 directive was that as the number of accidents is fortunately very low , the opportunities to learn from them are very limited and lessons can , therefore , be drawn only after an accident has already happened .
It is now proposed to complement this first initiative with a new directive that would address both mandatory and confidential reporting of incidents , defects or malfunctions which may constitute a hazard for civil aviation operations , called " occurrences " .
The objective of this new directive is to contribute to the improvement of air safety by ensuring that essential safety information is reported and collected , stored , protected and disseminated in order to facilitate its effective analysis and monitoring .
A network of national mandatory occurrence reporting systems will be based on a system developed by the Joint Research Centre in Ispra in Italy .
These reporting systems would also be complemented by the creation of confidential reporting mechanisms which will be put in place across the territories of the European Union .
The proposed European Aviation Safety Agency will need this kind of data if it is to carry out its work effectively .
In conclusion , it is incumbent on all legislators within the European Union to ensure that the utmost is being done to ensure that air travellers are entirely safe in the journeys they take .
The specific proposal is part of a number of measures presently being proposed by the Committee on Transport of this Parliament to improve the quality and safety standards of air travel for all users .
Mr President , the establishment of formal reporting systems is clearly a requirement of Annex VI to the Chicago Convention on International Civil Aviation .
The United Kingdom has a long-standing mandatory reporting scheme , MORS , currently established under Article 117 of the Air Navigation Order and administered by the CAA .
There are several established systems for the interchange of safety data for analysis , such as JAA , EUROCONTROL , etc . , as well as legal ICAO requirements .
I would suggest that any EU initiative be compatible with the proven effective systems in place .
My initial concerns were as follows : first , although the proposal insists on confidentiality and disidentification of reported information , which is a purely legal issue , it does not satisfactorily tackle the issue of information abuse , especially since data could be made available to third parties through many different channels , including the so-called and loosely-defined " research institutions " , etc .
Aviation is always under close scrutiny by the media and such additional opportunities for reporting would inevitably be misused .
It is therefore necessary that all parties using and providing data can genuinely trust the system .
My second concern referred to Article 2 and Annexes I and II .
It is generally thought amongst safety experts that it is not the quantity of data that is important , but the quality of the reporting and analysis .
The lists of examples of reportable occurrences may need to be addressed .
As it stands , the proposal could become over-regulated , difficult to manage and have no added safety benefit .
My third point referred to Article 4 .
I believe it is essential that reports from pilots and other staff members be made to their own company .
Bypassing their own company structures would weaken the internal reporting processes that have been built up over the years .
My final point refers to Article 8 , which appears to go too far by establishing a totally blame-free reporting system .
This would need to be amended as there could be circumstances in which gross negligence is involved .
My own experience over a number of years has shown that confidential reporting works extremely well .
However , in such a safety-sensitive industry , it is important that all employees follow the strict rules , regulations and practices that are laid down .
I would like to thank Mr Collins for producing a comprehensive report .
It was a great pleasure to work with him .
I believe that we have now reached a sensible conclusion and would hope that the amendments adopted in committee , which address those concerns , can be supported in the plenary vote .
Honourable Members , I am in no doubt that all of us here welcome initiatives to enhance safety , but they must be well thought through and beneficial to the entire aviation industry and the public at large .
I should like to suspend the debate at this point .
We shall resume the debate on this item at 9 p.m.
Question Time ( Commission )
The next item is Question Time ( B5-0171 / 2001 ) . We shall now take questions to the Commission .
Part one
Question No 32 by ( H-0455 / 01 ) :
Subject : Cooperation with Afghanistan In its joint position on Afghanistan adopted on 24 January 2000 , the European Union condemns human rights violations in that country and in particular discrimination against women .
What information and guarantees can the Commission give concerning access for Afghan women to European aid and cooperation programmes launched under the aegis of ECHO ?
The Commission wishes to underline its concern for the suffering of the entire civilian population of Afghanistan , as a direct consequence of the ongoing conflict and the current drought .
In this respect , ECHO has this year already allocated EUR 15.5 million for humanitarian aid to Afghanistan .
ECHO is focusing particularly attention to vulnerable groups : internally displaced people ( of which there are more than half a million ) , the disabled , women - particularly widows - and children .
The needs of women and children are specifically addressed in mother-and-child health programmes .
Projects are being implemented by Médecins Sans Frontires of Belgium ; Médecins Sans Frontires of the Netherlands ; and from France , Action contre la Faim , Aid Médicale Internationale and Médecins du Monde .
All aim to treat malnutrition among children under five years of age , as well as monitoring the health status of women , in particular nursing mothers and pregnant women .
Usually , NGOs also provide their female patients with elementary hygiene education .
These projects are implemented in areas where internally displaced people have settled .
Currently , there are medical projects in the Panjsher Valley , Herat , Kandahar , Kabul , Mazar-e-Sharif and Hazarajad .
NGOs have access to all beneficiaries , women included , and can employ women as local NGO personnel in medical programmes , in spite of the fact that separation between the sexes has to be strictly observed .
For instance , ACF employs between 55 and 65 per cent of women in its medical programmes .
Medical NGOs play an important role in the professional training of women .
They organise medical training sessions for small groups of women in cooperation with the Taleban Ministry of Health .
We also carry out Food-for-Work projects .
Income-generating activities for women , which encourage self-sufficiency , are increasingly supported by ECHO .
Since 1999 , ECHO has financed Food-for-Work projects in Kabul for men and women through German Agro Action and Medair from Switzerland .
While men are occupied in land recovery works and city drain cleaning , women are given raw materials and knitted quilts and sweaters , to be distributed to other beneficiaries .
This kind of programme entails the participation of women from a variety of socio-economic classes , from educated to illiterate women , each using their knowledge and / or all manual abilities .
They are paid a fixed rate in wheat seed every two weeks .
This pilot project in Kabul was subject to an independent evaluation , which proved to be very positive .
MEDAIR is in the process of implementing a second phase .
Similar operations are now funded by ECHO in Mazar , Kandahar , Herat , Kabul and Faizabad , through UN Habitat and various NGOs .
On other types of project , I can inform you that NGOs , with the support of ECHO , try whenever possible to have women involved in each project .
Even in shelter programmes women are involved .
Female health monitors go from house to house visiting women in order to provide them with basic information on hygiene , primary health care and conservation of water and food .
Operational partners such as NGOs , international organisations and Red Cross , family and UN agencies closely monitor all operations through expatriates and local staff present in the field .
All ECHO partners are bound by a framework partnership agreement , which obliges them to be present and , in relation to us , to present financial and operational reports of their activities on a regular basis .
Furthermore , ECHO has field experts , who also follow the ongoing projects very closely to ensure correct delivery of aid .
Recently , following UN sanctions and meetings in Europe with General Massud , the Northern Alliance commander , meetings in Europe , the hardliners within the Taleban movement seem to be gaining the upper hand , as reflected in the hardening of their position against work by women .
Unfortunately , this general state of affairs is escalating , as we can read in press reports now .
However , in conclusion we can say that , despite the difficulties , NGOs in Afghanistan are doing their best as our partners to alleviate the suffering of women in the country .
ECHO is not carrying out development cooperation as such , but is delivering humanitarian aid .
Clearly , for many Afghans - women and men , educated and uneducated - the activities we support are a valuable , and by and large the only , form of assistance .
Maintaining access for this humanitarian aid is crucial , and we will continue our work , even if the circumstances are difficult and appear to be worsening at present .
I am planning to visit Afghanistan in September with a view to stepping up this effort .
Commissioner , thank you for your very detailed answer , particularly with regard to Afghan women .
You know that the President of the European Parliament , and some other MEPs too , received a delegation from Afghanistan .
We very much want to support them and be by their side .
Despite your detailed answer , I do have to ask you for further information .
In France , Médecins du Monde has been rallying its efforts over the last few days to alert people about the famine and drought in Afghanistan .
Yesterday , they came here to Parliament once again .
As we know , drought is a terrible thing and this drought appears to be the worst in 30 years .
We also know that there is no water irrigation system to combat it .
Nothing has been done for 20 years - there are no dams , for example .
The situation is terrible and it would now appear that the harvests are down by 65 % , a quarter of the population is directly affected by drought and hunger and one million people are heading for the borders .
Apparently , life in the camps is increasingly dangerous and , according to Médecins du Monde , food distribution in Afghanistan is extremely erratic .
Given this situation , I need to be able to respond , Commissioner , as , in the dossier being circulated by its members , Médecins du Monde has condemned the fact that the European Union ' s contribution has fallen from 50 million in 1991 to 36 million in 2000 .
We are , therefore , moving towards a decrease in aid and assistance to Afghanistan .
I would like you to give me an answer on this issue and also to tell me whether - given this situation , the politics , the drought and all the problems that you have mentioned - it would not be more crucial to increase our food aid and to put in place a genuine comprehensive policy on humanitarian aid .
Even if this exists - you did mention this - should it not be better coordinated ?
The problem is that the answer to the drought disaster in Afghanistan would be systematic , normal , broader-based development cooperation .
But the situation in that country does not make it possible to organise and implement normal development cooperation .
What we are doing is making a relatively large-scale effort in terms of humanitarian aid .
This year ECHO has identified Afghanistan as one of the " forgotten conflicts " , in order to focus on and raise awareness of the need to mobilise international society .
It is also clear that the access problem is a real one , partly because of politics in Afghanistan .
The major challenge we face is to restate and explain the need for everyone involved on both sides of the conflict to accept unhindered access to the country by humanitarian organisations .
This will be the focus of my efforts when I go there in September .
Question No 33 by ( H-0473 / 01 ) :
Subject : Commission intentions and actions with regard to the global fund to combat HIV / AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis While welcoming the increased international attention paid to the tragic and immense consequences of the HIV / AIDS epidemic , malaria and tuberculosis , including the Commission ' s programme for accelerated action in this field , COM ( 2001 ) 0096 , it is obvious that there is an urgent need for efforts far beyond this initiative - and indeed beyond the pharmaceutical industry ' s lowering of prices - in order to address the pressing needs in terms of prevention as well as treatment .
The UN Secretary-General recently proposed the establishment of a global fund to combat HIV / AIDS , malaria and tuberculosis and urged donors to make firm commitments before the UN General Assembly special session on HIV / AIDS in June .
The amount needed has been estimated at $ 7-10 billion per year .
President Bush recently announced an initial US pledge of $ 200 million .
In the light of the Commission ' s programme for action , what are its intentions as regards the global fund ?
Is the Commission prepared to take the lead in this issue and contribute significantly to the fund ?
. The direct answer to the question of whether the Commission will actually contribute money to this fund is that at this stage we do not have an answer .
I will try to explain .
We made a joint Council and Commission declaration on the proposal for a global health fund at the Development Council meeting on 31 May .
I will quote from the first part of this : " The Council and the Commission note with concern the devastating impact of HIV / AIDS and other communicable diseases on human suffering and on economic and social development and hence also on poverty reduction efforts .
The proposal by the UN Secretary-General to establish a global HIV / AIDS and health fund is therefore fully welcomed .
The Commission and Member States will explore how best to develop this initiative . "
The Commission is taking an active part in the negotiations concerning the modalities and all the issues relating to this fund .
There are a number of points we consider important .
I will go through them , quoting from a speech I made on this issue during the LDC Conference on 16 May .
First , we would wish to see a number of principles or conditions fulfilled .
I will name just a few .
One , donors should make available additional and new resources over an extended period of time .
The Commission does not have access to additional resources .
We have a specific budget .
The Commission is not in a position to tax directly , as you all know .
So it is , in fact , the political decision-makers who decide on taxation who can provide additional resources .
We cannot .
Two , the OECD countries need to take measures to assume a fair share of the global financial burden of reducing poverty and disease .
Three , we do not support single-issue funds and plead for a broad approach targeting the three major communicable diseases - malaria , tuberculosis and HIV / AIDS .
Four , we will continue to raise the need for country ownership , integration with national development strategies and health systems development , effective coordination on the ground and keeping prevention efforts to the fore .
This is crucial .
If all this is not helped by a fund , the fund is no help at all .
So , does it improve delivery ?
We have had enough empty donor-driven manifestations .
If the answer to the question about delivery is not a clear " yes " , the establishment of the fund will only be like crossing the creek to get wet feet .
Five , a fund should be open to contributions from all interested parties , both public and private , and should support action beyond the public sector .
Six , the governing structure of the funds should be light and transparent .
The basic and multilaterally agreed health policy principles of WHO should be secured on how it is managed .
Seven , the fund should be outcome-driven as opposed to input-focused .
Eight , decreased transaction costs for countries should be a priority .
Finally , I wish to say that a global fund cannot succeed and will not get our support without a commitment from industry to a global , tiered pricing system .
These conditions may look very demanding but they , represent in fact , the mainstream of shared international policy in this area .
It would be a tragic mistake to organise a fund , which is supposed to be a procurement fund , for special , expensive types of medicine .
Today this is something which we more or less agree upon .
But that is not how discussion about the fund started out .
Much of the discussion so far has been meaningful , but please note that as far as mobilising money is concerned , today we are not even allowed to provide core funding for UN organisations .
Even under the new financial regulation , which we hope to get but do not yet have , we will not be allowed to carry out normal core funding , although we hope to be allowed to provide programme-based funding for UN organisations .
This fund , however , will not be a UN organisation .
What is on the cards here is to ensure core funding for this fund .
None of this is as easy as it may be portrayed in the press , but we are , in substance , a very active player in contributing to making the fund a meaningful and well-organised entity .
Thank you , Commissioner Nielson , for a very full and in many parts interesting reply .
I believe we agree that this is one of the most serious epidemics and not only one of the most serious humanitarian catastrophes but one of the most serious economic catastrophes the world has even seen .
As much as ten years ago , based on the ways the disease was spread , sexual practices of the time and the widespread poverty in many African countries , experts were able to make forecasts showing that there would be a spread similar to that which we have today and which has had such incredibly tragic consequences .
Unfortunately we are now able to make the same forecasts for other parts of the world which were infected later , and the outlook is similar .
The only way to proceed is , naturally , prevention with a mixture of support initiatives for those already affected and preventive initiatives , partly in the form of information and education and partly in the form of efforts to find a vaccine .
I naturally agree with the Commissioner that no problems will be solved simply by setting up a fund .
I also agree with many of the requirements for such a mechanism which Mr Nielson sets out .
At the same time , it was my experience in setting up UNAIDS , of whose board I was a member , that we constantly had too little money and were able to implement far too few ambitious initiatives .
During the years of setting up the project we actually had no money whatsoever to support the national initiatives in the countries most affected .
At the same time , as Mr Nielson has stated , the UN bodies ' normal budgets have fallen , which means that we are suffering from a major lack of money .
I am sure that money is needed to achieve success in terms of research and active initiatives at national level .
I therefore believe that Kofi Annan ' s initiative is good , as long as this mechanism can be set up in a good and non-bureaucratic way .
I appreciate that the Commission cannot conjure up money from nowhere .
However , there was a major surplus in the EU budget for last year which has recently been returned to the Member States .
It must surely have been possible in such an extraordinary situation to gain support from the Council for a substantial aid package .
It would otherwise look very strange , bearing in mind the Commission ' s very great commitment in the course of last year and the initiative in which Mr Nielson and others were involved in September - October 2000 .
I would also like to test Mr Nielson a little further .
Given that the soundings ahead of the New York Summit in a little under a month ' s time are positive and that this mechanism can be set up properly , what plans are there for us in the EU , Member States and the EU itself , to be able to put forward a decent sum to bolster the preventive work ?
It is very true that not only is this a human tragedy , it is also an economic disaster , the mathematics of which are simply paralysing .
This is also true in cases where countries choose to opt for treatment .
Treating HIV-positive persons may mean that many of them can continue functioning , as schoolteachers or whatever .
But the treatment is ongoing year after year , and the impact on national health budgets , even if they are given these anti-retroviral drugs for free , is incredible .
The real bottleneck in the use of advanced complex medical treatments is not necessarily access to the drugs but the organisation of their delivery .
Few people realise that we are talking about 18 to 20 different pills or medications that have to be taken at intervals of a couple of hours , around the clock ; that their composition has to be changed every few weeks and that all of this has to be very strictly and precisely organised .
On top of this , all these persons need safe drinking water and at least two good , varied meals per day .
In a developing country , that is asking quite a lot .
The reality is not so easy .
We have been informed that Merck and the Gates Foundation have jointly set up a USD 100 million fund for Lesotho .
On top of that , Merck has provided free medicine in order to solve the problems of delivery on the ground .
They have been working on this for a year without much progress .
This is why it is not just an evasive response to lay stress on prevention .
We have seen that it can work in the case of Uganda and in other places too we are beginning to see the AIDS curve go down .
I appreciate the response from Mr Wijkman .
It is true that these organisations need money .
We will come to this in the next question .
But it will never be the role of the Commission to be a major supplier of general funding as such for the UN organisations .
Freeing up additional money for these purposes is the role of the primary donors , that is the governments , who have the right to tax their citizens .
That is how we mobilise additional money .
It may also be possible to mobilise new private money .
I hope this fund will be a breakthrough by doing so on a systematic basis .
As to our own unspent money , the fact is not that we have money floating around , which we then send back to Member States .
The way the system is administratively organised in the case of the European Development Fund is that we call in money on a quarterly basis from the treasuries of the Member States on an ongoing basis .
We have real commitments that have not been translated into actions in terms of spending the money .
But as I have told Parliament on many occasions , we are going through the whole portfolio , reducing and scrapping those commitments that are not implementable and accelerating the flow in the pipeline .
Most of the money is in principle committed - implementation is the real challenge .
As you were informed earlier , the rate of commitment from now on for AIDS activities will be at the level of about EUR 800 million a year .
This shows that in terms of contribution , we are a major player and are making a big effort in these countries .
The question remains to be answered : will we be allowed to do it legally and will this fund actually mean improved ability to deliver on the ground ?
These are the questions that we need to come back to .
The Commissioner will be aware that this Parliament supported the change to the financial regulation which should at least partly ease his path .
I should like to ask him two supplementary questions .
First , as he said in his answer , there are many ongoing discussions .
We very much welcome the summit that was called by Kofi Annan .
We very much welcome his own round table which was organised last year and which made substantial progress at European level .
I am aware that there is a proposal for a further such round table jointly between the European Union and US interests .
Would the Commissioner comment on whether he feels such a proposal is timely and whether he would be interested in participating in such a meeting ?

Secondly , after the South African case , Mr Nielson 's colleague , Mr Lamy , did commit European Union technical assistance to developing countries afflicted by the HIV / AIDS pandemic , to utilise the national emergencies clause in the WTO to examine the use of generic drugs and of parallel importing to secure affordable medicines .
Would the Commissioner comment on whether the European Commission has been successful in identifying developing countries to utilise these monies in this way and what further steps he plans to take in order to achieve this ?
Mr President , during the LDC Conference I met with the new administrator of US Aid , and I can tell Mr Howitt that the issues he was looking at largely mirrored those I have mentioned today namely prevention of HIV / AIDS - the real problem being delivery - and so on .
That was more promising than many other things we hear from his government .
It remains to be seen whether the announced contribution of USD 200 million from the US Government to this fund is approved by Congress , and whether it will in fact be additional money , but that does not form part of our more restricted deliberations here .
It is useful to pursue the dialogue with the United States on these issues , especially where we could feasibly agree on a practical approach , so I will continue working in this vein .
As to the second question on using the national emergencies clause as a basis for opening up for some of the elements in the TRIPS Agreement , have been sending a clear signal to our partners in the developing world that the Commission is interested in supporting their efforts to find and use the most flexible interpretation of the Agreement and we have also stated - as we did at a joint meeting with the CEOs of the major pharmaceutical companies that Pascal Lamy and myself attended - that we see a need to check the existing agreement , so as to ensure that the interpretation is good enough to facilitate better use of these possibilities in developing countries .
However , we have not pinpointed any specific cases on which we can focus and act in a concrete manner .
That said , we have expressed a strong desire to do so .
What we have done is to apply pressure by announcing a total untying with regard to all essential drugs used to treat these transmittable diseases .
Opening up not only regionally , but also globally , should make price differentiation more difficult .
It should also make for a change in stance from bidders from around the world and from the generic drug producers .
Mr President , first I would like to thank the Commissioner for his answers today .
No one who has listened to the Commissioner over the last few years in this House could doubt his commitment to removing poverty and disease from the world as efficiently and effectively as possible using EU-resources .
I wanted to ask him a question about the third disease mentioned in this report , and suggest to him that perhaps we should concentrate on this least glamorous of the three , because tuberculosis could be eradicated .
Unfortunately HIV , as you say , is likely to be with us for a long time and at the moment we are largely into palliative care as regards HIV / AIDS .
A concerted world programme over a relatively short period of time could eliminate tuberculosis from the world .
I have a particular interest in this , because the cure was actually pioneered in my home city of Edinburgh 70 years ago .
We thought we had eradicated it in western Europe , but it is re-emerging now .
If we can remove it from the developing nations , we can also remove it from the world permanently .
That is the prize - the permanent removal , which is unfortunately not yet available to us as regards the two other diseases .
Even if there is a delay in getting the World Fund going on the other diseases , perhaps we could suggest to Kofi Annan and the UN that we have a pilot project concentrating specifically on tuberculosis , which might inspire nations to contribute to the other areas once we see success in this area .
This is a highly significant point .
This is one of the reasons why we have insisted all along - it has not always been easy because public attention has been almost exclusively focused on HIV / AIDS - that malaria , TB and HIV / AIDS have to be looked at in the same manner .
The best economic data we have to illustrate the benefits of doing these things efficiently relate to polio eradication .
It has been documented that the world can save USD 1.5 billion per year in ongoing costs if we can mobilise the USD 400-450 million it takes for a 2-3 year final offensive to wipe out the remaining centres of active polio around Nigeria and northern India .
It is absolutely feasible and it is an incredible pay-back .
As regards TB , the mathematics are similar but it is more difficult to eradicate .
For TB and malaria , the economics of the cure are very different .
They cannot in fact be compared to HIV / AIDS , for which there is no cure , only treatment in the mortality rate of HIV-positive persons in the world .
If we did what we ought to do for malaria and TB , that would bring about as much improvement as we could ever achieve with anti-retrovirals .
This is the real issue .
There is good reason to give more attention to TB and malaria .
This was the main contribution of our action programme .
It was also supported by the round table last September .
It is exactly for that reason that I am somewhat stubborn about creating such a fund when we are not sure about the modalities and the policy of that fund .
I therefore welcome the contribution concerning TB .
As the author is not present , Question No 34 by Niall Andrews ( H-0492 / 01 ) lapses .
Question No 35 by ( H-0461 / 01 ) :
Subject : Vegetable protein crops in the Union The ban on animal meal could have provided an opportunity for expanding vegetable protein production in the Union , but the Commission , without any consultation , decided to rule out any such plan , claiming the cost would be too high .
However , encouraging farmers to grow protein crops would have allowed us to restore balance to European farming by escaping from cereal monoculture which requires the increased use of fungicides .
This decision will also inevitably entail huge and ever-increasing GM soya imports from the US .
On what data did the Commission base its conclusion that the financial cost involved in a protein crop programme would outweigh the need to combat soil impoverishment , a serious degree of food dependence and increased use of GMOs in Europe ?
Mr President , honourable members , ladies and gentlemen , following the new restrictions on the use of meat and bonemeal in feedingstuffs in the wake of the BSE crisis and at the request of the Nice European Council and the Agriculture Council , the Commission has thoroughly investigated the supply of and demand for oil and protein crops .
The European Council expressly stated in its conclusions that any proposals for measures need to respect the financial perspectives .
Our findings are contained in the Commission communication to the Council of 16 March on options for promoting the cultivation of protein crops in the European Union .
According to simulations carried out by the Commission services , a significant increase in aid per hectare for protein crops would only have a very limited effect on the areas cultivated in the Community .
The main reason for this very slight increase is that cereals are much more attractive crops and greater increases in world market prices are forecast for cereals than for protein crops .
In order to promote organic farming , the Community has allowed fodder pulses to be used on holdings which comply strictly with organic farming standards .
Whether or not more products containing GMOs will be farmed in future depends on licensing arrangements and consumer acceptance in the Community .
In the final analysis , market trends will obviously be the deciding factor .
The decision to favour growing organic fodder legumes alone has not reassured the operators in this sector .
Imports of soya have increased , as have the prices .
Can you give us any assurance that there will not be any genuine speculation ?
How will the farmers be able to resist this ?
The food scares have plunged them into an economic crisis .
The only alternative that they have been given today is based on soya imports , whereas we cannot even guarantee them that this soya has not been genetically modified .
I can gladly give the honourable Member this assurance because you must bear the following in mind : not all the meat and bonemeal produced in the past was used in feedingstuffs .
Half a million tonnes of meat and bonemeal were exported every year and another half a million tonnes of meat and bonemeal were used to make dog and cat food every year . Only the remainder was used in feedingstuffs .
If you then also bear in mind that , recently , more soya was used than was needed for nutritional purposes , because the feedingstuff manufacturers calculated that it was in their interest to do so , then the protein balance in feedingstuffs barely changes .
The amendment to the ban on feeding fishmeal and meat and bonemeal to pigs and poultry accounts for less than 3 % in the import system in terms of volume .
Less than 3 % is simply not enough to trigger huge speculation or somehow put the Community under pressure .
Question No 36 by ( H-0470 / 01 ) :
Subject : Impact of the fisheries non-agreement with Morocco Of the funding earmarked for renewing the fisheries agreement with Morocco , how much is the Commission proposing to allocate to the restructuring of the sector ?
Under which Community funds will the new Restructuring Plan be financed ?
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , may I start by reminding the House that the principle of subsidiarity has to be respected in structural policy .
But this also means that , when restructuring plans are being programmed , it is the individual Member State which is initially responsible for drafting the plans and submitting them to the Commission .
Obviously , the Commission works in close liaison with individual national authorities in such cases .
In principle , more funds could be used to resolve the problems caused by the fact that the fisheries agreement with Morocco failed to materialise .
First and foremost , of course , the Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance , which can be used to apply for Community grants for the fleets and the fishermen and shipowners affected .
In addition , aid can also be granted within the framework of the European Regional Fund , the European Social Fund and the European Agricultural Guidance Fund in order to diversify into other activities in the coastal regions affected .
In all events , we need to start by deciding on the measures and then calculate how much money is needed .
And , in view of the conclusions of the European Council in Nice , the Commission is currently checking if additional funds are available for restructuring the fleets affected within the framework of the current financial perspectives .
Commissioner , you have not answered my question .
The doubts over funding must be cleared up and you must tell us , please , whether all the funding intended for the fisheries agreement with Morocco , EUR 125 million per year , will now be invested in the people affected or whether , on the contrary , quantities will be diverted outside the scope of the fisheries agreement with Morocco .
It has been a disaster , but that must not mean either a saving or a diversion of the funds which had been already approved .
You reply in a theoretical and impersonal way .
Please reply specifically to the question you are being asked .
I asked you : what amount are you going to provide ?
In Andalusia , there is enormous concern about this issue .
You are an expert in giving no answer , but the Commissioner in charge must reply honestly to our questions .
It is very easy to avoid the question , but you are responsible and you must reply to what you are asked and not in a theoretical and impersonal way .
Mr President , I think that , all in all , I have given the honourable Member a very accurate answer , although it may not be the answer she wants to hear .
However , may I clarify exactly what we have to do here .
We cannot set a figure and then allow the Spanish to review how the money received is to be disbursed .
The legal bases stipulate that we are obliged to do exactly the opposite .
First , the measures needed because the Morocco agreement failed to materialise must be defined .
Then we must stipulate what proportion is to be funded from the existing Regional Fund , from the existing Social Fund and from the existing Guidance Fund .
If these funds do not suffice , then we must consider where we can find the additional funds needed and the Commission is prepared to discuss this .
However , until we have decided exactly what measures are to be implemented , the Commission cannot name an amount .
That is a fact .
I must also remind you that even the last Morocco agreement contained a reduction in the size of the fleet and that , logically , not only would we have had to maintain this reduction in any new agreement , we would have had to do so with the money currently provided for in the funds .
You are wrong to maintain that Spain now has a claim to EUR 250 million per annum because this sum was provided for in the previous agreement ; on the contrary , Spain has a claim to a solution to the problem which has now arisen .
What we now have to consider is how much money and what sort of money is needed in order to provide such a solution .
That is the correct procedure and there is no alternative to it .
Commissioner , it is certain that the 125 million euros that there were for chapter IV , obviously aimed at Morocco , are not going to be used as planned .
But if this agreement were going to be for three years , those concerned would be expecting 375 million euros from the solidarity of the European Union .
We are all aware of this and we hope that the Commission will be generous in paying attention to the petitions from the Governments of Spain and Portugal .
We will continue to work towards this in Parliament .
But my question has a different aim .
I wanted to ask the Commissioner if he is aware of the information that is being published in the Moroccan press at the moment , specifically in the weekly Demain and the magazine Economy and Enterprise , where top military , political and diplomatic figures in Morocco are being accused of having blocked this agreement to protect their own personal interests .
It is currently being said in the Moroccan press that they only declare 60 % of their catches and that they are lining their own pockets .
This , according to what is being said in Morocco at the moment , seems to be the real reason .
They were not concerned about fishing resources , as they told us , or the Moroccan fisheries sector , or even the Moroccan people , but something else .
Is the Commission aware of these reports that are being published ?
They give names .
If so , is it aware of what is going on and are political , economic , financial and trade relations with Morocco going to be re-established in the light of what is happening , which is just what we suspected , and which was the real cause of the failure to cooperate with the European Union ?
Mr President , I did not quite understand from the translation who exactly has been lining their pockets .
But I assume that you meant certain Moroccan forces were lining their pockets .
Is that correct , Mr Varela ?
I see .
I have to say that I am not familiar with the details of the accusations which have been or are being made .
But I can assure you that one of the main reasons we said a new agreement had to be set on a new financing basis and a new funding method had to be found was in order to preclude any such suspicions from the outset .
That is why we were keen not to do the same in this new agreement as we had in earlier agreements , i.e. to pay out the money without earmarking it for a specific purpose .
Part of the negotiations involved earmarking these funds .
Then , of course , the Moroccan side would have had to maintain records of how it had deployed the funds .
I think this needs to be the general model for the future .
We really cannot agree to provide funds when some or practically all the money paid is clearly being used to develop their own sector without any accounts being rendered as to how these funds have been used .
Question No 37 by ( H-0445 / 01 ) :
Subject : Bilingualism in Istria On 9 April 2001 the Regional Council of Istria ( Croatia ) adopted a regional statute which provides for parity between Italian and Croatian in all regional institutions and all procedures of administrative bodies .
Unfortunately , on 23 April 2001 these rules were suspended by the Croatian Ministry of Justice , which argued that their constitutionality had to be confirmed . This is despite the universal view that they are consistent with the spirit and letter of the Croatian constitution ( or Fundamental Charter ) .
There is great consternation and concern at the serious problems which would be created for the Italian-speaking population , given that Italy 's status as a friendly nation and founder member of the EU should ensure the existence of full Italian / Croatian bilingualism in the border areas .
Can the Commission state its views on the compatibility of the negotiations on the association and stability partnership offered by the EU to Croatia with a view to closer relations with this decision by the Croatian government , which is visibly contrary to the basic principles of the EU and its ' acquis ' and is a clear case of violation of the rights of cultural minorities ?
As the honourable Member would expect , the Commission has been following the recent developments on the bilingual regime in Istria with close interest , although the issue has rightly been treated as a bilateral matter by the Italian Government .
Protection of minorities through safeguards against discrimination , access to education in minority languages and preservation of minority cultures have always been an important element of EU conditionality in our relations with Croatia .
Our commitment to such safeguards was reiterated and formalised in the stability and association agreement with Croatia , initialled by the Commission on 14 May .
Croatia has renewed its commitment to respect its minority population and cultures and the adoption of national legislation supporting the use of minority languages was one of the first achievements of the new Croatian Government last year .
Since then the draft of a new comprehensive constitutional law on the protection of minorities has received a favourable opinion from the Council of Europe 's Venice Commission and work on the issue is continuing .
The Commission has every reason to believe that Croatia will apply this legislation seriously .
Meanwhile we are looking forward to the opinion of the Croatian Constitutional Court on the Istrian statute .
We are confident that Croatia and Italy will find a successful solution to the specific problems referred to in the honourable Member 's question .
Thank you for your response , Commissioner .
I realise that this is primarily a bilateral issue , but we would be grateful if the Council could endeavour to make representations in the appropriate fora to the effect that , once the Croatian Constitutional Court has delivered its opinion on the constitutionality of the articles under consideration , the Istrian regional statute can , at last , be reinstated and enter into force in its original form .
Mr President , Commissioner , bilingualism and multilingualism do not just represent a problem in countries wishing to accede to the European Union ; they also represent an opportunity within the existing 15 Member States .
Is there in fact a best practice or a comparison , a sort of benchmark between the countries which we can apply in order to identify where the best solutions are being found to the problem and which model has proven to be the best so far ?
Mr Rübig is right to draw attention to the happy coincidence of languages within communities and countries in the existing 15 Member States .
My own nation of Wales is a case in point .
I am glad to say that the Welsh language is now increasingly flourishing alongside the dominant English language , with advantage for people whose first language is either English or Welsh .
That is certainly the case elsewhere in the current Union .
I simply hope that those in the Union who would seek to generate divisions on the basis of different cultural and linguistic origins will be overwhelmed by the majority who enjoy the diversity and treasure the co-existence of cultures within the same community .
We all appreciate , Mr President , how difficult it is to exercise your discretion on these occasions .
But I have to say , on a day when we have had only one hour for questions , it was a bit hard that you allowed all the supplementaries to over-run .
It becomes a farce if our efforts to hold the Commission to account result in a shortened Question Time and only five questions being asked and answered .
Mr MacCormick , my understanding of Question Time is that Members must be allowed to ask supplementary questions first .
I am amazed at just how detailed the Commission 's replies have been .
It is something which I have never experienced in my 22 years as a Member of this House .
I am sure there is a reason for it , which I shall ponder on overnight .
I am sorry that we have run out of time , but these things happen and there is nothing I can do about it .
I hope , understanding as I do your answer , Mr President , that I have the good fortune to appear higher on the list the next time you are in the Chair for Question Time .
I hope so too .
I shall heed your advice , Sir , and next time I shall be my usual strict self .
As we have run out of time for questions to the Commission , questions 38 to 77 will be answered in writing .
Question time is closed .
( The sitting was suspended at 7.05 p.m. and resumed at 9.00 p.m. )

Occurrence reporting in civil aviation ( continuation )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on report ( A5 ­ 0203 / 2001 ) by Mr Collins , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council directive on occurrence reporting in civil aviation [ COM ( 2000 ) 847 - C5 ­ 0764 / 2000 - 2000 / 0343 ( COD ) ] .
Mr President , this is the continuation of the debate on Mr Collins ' report on occurrences in aviation and the reporting thereof .
Occurrences can prevent accidents , and the duty to report therefore helps increase safety in aviation .
By gathering statistical data on the nature and number of certain occurrences , existing safety regulations can be improved or new ones introduced .
The more information gathered in a broadly-based database , the better the analyses .
The proposed measure has a strongly preventive character .
It is therefore only logical that a legal framework be created at European level .
The future European Safety Agency could also stand to benefit from this .
The success of the proposed system will depend on the degree of its confidentiality .
Detailed information should only end up in the hands of relevant users .
Those reporting occurrences must be certain that the information provided will only be used for statistical purposes .
After all , this is not about apportioning blame or liability .
Technical defects tend to be reported more readily than human errors , whilst the second category is of major importance where occurrences , and hence safety , are involved .
Pilots , for example , will only volunteer this information if confidentiality and anonymity are guaranteed .
The European Parliament ' s amendments are specifically intended to strengthen this element .
The success of the new Regulation will depend on the cooperation of those directly involved . That is also evident from the discussions we have held on this platform and in the committee .
There is a need for regular evaluation and reporting on the implementation , to assess whether the reporting systems work .
People in the field need to be involved , and that is also the purport of Amendment No 12 which we re-tabled .
On the basis of evaluation , the lists of occurrences to be reported must be also be updated .
However , not only do we want to know to what extent occurrences are reported , we also want to know the type of occurrences that recur time and again and the safety conclusions that are drawn from these .
That is the purport of Amendment No 11 .
In my opinion , the public is entitled also to obtain that type of information .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the liberal group supports the tenor of the rapporteur ' s proposals .
How often do I read in the paper that one or other incident has occurred .
It is by no means always serious , but still .
It is therefore in the interest of safety that an effective , transparent system be put in place for reporting these incidents at international level , so that we can gain an overview and draw lessons from the data gathered .
However , our group attaches great importance to the extent to which the information received from those who report who actually require the information will be given it .
Secondly , it is , in our opinion , important for the anonymity of those who report incidents to be protected .
That is , of course , to be welcomed , but if individuals who report incidents are guilty of gross negligence , it must be possible to prosecute them .
It is not acceptable for people to be cleared of their negligence by reporting the incident involved .
We are therefore pleased with the support which our amendments received in the committee .
However , we do struggle with a few other amendments , and I would mention Amendments Nos 5 , 6 and 7 for the same reasons , in fact , that we tabled our amendments and that we received that support .
Amendment No 5 , in particular , does not promote clarity , but as I said before : I should like to thank the rapporteur , and the liberal group supports the proposals on the whole .
Mr President , we will be abstaining on this report .
We have nothing against the fact that Member States inform one another about air traffic incidents that have occurred in their respective air space - nothing could be further from the truth .
However , the explanatory statement , whilst confirming that most air accidents are due to human factors , casts light on the problem from just one perspective .
It does not mention the fact that two of the main causes of incidents and accidents in airports and airlines are the widespread job insecurity and the number of staff being cut back . Yet , the number of passengers and flights is constantly rising and they are rising increasingly quickly .
Staff cut backs are all the more shocking because the large airlines are making huge profits .
The Air France group has , for example , just announced a gross operating surplus of FRF 10 billion , or approximately FRF 200 000 per company employee , and , in spite of the substantial increase in the price of kerosene , the company has just increased its shareholder dividends by 57 % this year .
In order to reduce the number of incidents or accidents in the air , we should begin with a huge recruitment drive for airports and airlines , and make jobs more secure .
After all , the priority should be the safety of passengers and staff , and not shareholder profit .
Mr President , I welcome with satisfaction the proposals before us because I believe that not only will aviation safety in general be improved , but this will also strengthen cooperation procedures , as well as reinforcing preventive strategies .
Importantly , this report will also offer an adequate degree of confidentiality for the people closely involved , who have the most intimate knowledge of how to run a safe aviation industry : I refer to aircraft crew , air traffic controllers and maintenance personnel .
It is also important for us to stress best practice , particularly in the area of research and development .
Here we welcome the setting up of the European Coordination Centre for Aviation Incident Reporting .
That is why we support the rapporteur , who has been as careful as ever to ensure consistency between EU legislation and the international framework provided by the ICAO .
This is also the reason why we cannot accept the excessive restrictions implied by some amendments adopted in committee , especially those that seek to hide the responsibilities of the operators .
Companies will not become safer and more competitive if we hide these responsibilities .
We believe that customers have the right to be fully informed .
Similarly we cannot accept those amendments that deliberately try to weaken the position of people in the industry , whose duty it is to accurately point out incidents .
To have a reliable system of occurrences reporting in civil aviation , we have to ensure confidentiality for the people who report them .
The Commission 's proposals are right , even if there may be a risk of legal implications .
The only risk to safety we can see comes from an attempt to dilute the proposals in favour of the airline companies .
I thank Mr Collins for his excellent report and hope that his common sense approach will be adopted by Parliament .
Mr President , Commissioner De Palacio , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to thank Mr Collins for his successful report .
The continuing growth of air travel is causing pressure on air travel safety .
Safety precautions are essential .
Although air travel has been a relatively safe form of transport , the congestion of airports and airspace has increased the risk of accidents .
The majority of accidents are due to human factors .
Aviation is becoming more technical and is increasingly relying on the ability of staff on the ground to produce safe air navigation services .
For this reason it is important to obtain information on the functioning of these services .
Gathering and storing information about exceptional occurrences and exchanging information are vital to increasing the safety levels of civil aviation .
It is important that exchanging information regarding risk situations and accidents functions both within and between Member States .
Member States must exchange experiences and information so that more risk situations can be avoided .
If the transfer of information on security deficiencies is to be improved , however , we have to guarantee the data protection of individuals and companies , as Mr Collins proposes in his report .
Each year , Member States must submit a report on the level of safety of civil aviation .
If a risk situation or accident is due to serious negligence , the Member State must have the right to initiate legal proceedings .
In my opinion , cooperation between Member States to increase safety in civil aviation is an important precaution due to the growth of air travel .
The safety of Europe ' s airspace is to everyone ' s benefit .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I have the utmost respect for this House , and of course for what is set out in the agreement on relations between the European Parliament and the Commission , and I must therefore express my surprise at the fact that the author of this report is not present to hear the debate on it .
To be honest , I cannot understand it .
Having said this , I would like to thank you for being here and for what you have said , and say that I hope that this Directive will be quickly approved , and that we will accept all the amendments tabled by your Committee , except for one , Amendment No 11 , as the Member States themselves will have to publish their own annual report on an incident reporting system .
With regard to Amendment No 2 , although we accept it , it should be formulated differently to prevent the system from recording several reports on the same incident , which could distort the corresponding analysis .
Out of the new amendments , Amendments Nos 12 and 13 , Amendment No 12 is not acceptable , while we accept Amendment No 13 , as we think that it approves the Commission ' s own text .
I assure you that the Commission , like you , will continue to work to improve and increase the quality of air safety in Europe , which is something that concerns us all .
Thank you very much , Commissioner de Palácio .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Work equipment
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5 ­ 0156 / 2001 ) by Mr Skinner , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Council Common Position for adopting a European Parliament and Council directive amending Council Directive 89 / 655 / EEC concerning the minimum safety and health requirements for the use of work equipment by workers at work ( 2nd individual Directive within the meaning of Article 16 ( 1 ) of Directive 89 / 391 / EEC ) [ 5766 / 2 / 2001 - C5 ­ 0135 / 2001 - 1998 / 0327 ( COD ]
Mr President , Commissioner , I think we can say that none of us would like to continue to hear that every year in the European Union 500 000 falls from height are recorded , out of which 300 000 result in sick leave of more than 3 days , 4 000 involve serious injuries and 1 000 are fatal .
Nor would we like to have to repeat that these accidents take place mainly in work carried out on scaffolding , platforms and high places .
I do not wish to refer to issues that should be dealt with by the rapporteur , whom I must congratulate , even though he is not here , not only on his work , but also on the sensitivity that he has shown on these issues affecting workers , who often lack training and preparation .
We should not forget that construction is a bridging sector , which enables workers to move from the agricultural sector into the service or industrial sectors .
I think that the rapporteur ' s sensitivity has enriched the debate as many of the amendments tabled were accepted , all of which aimed to enrich the debate and contribute to the adoption of measures to make employment safer .
We know that zero risk does not exist , life is risky and work , which is the ultimate in active life , involves risks .
We have a generic text , in our Charter of Fundamental Rights , which has been published but not incorporated into the treaties , which in Chapter IV , under the heading Solidarity , states that " Every worker has the right to working conditions which respect his or her health , safety and dignity " .
I would also like to say that respect for health , safety and dignity means a commitment from everyone , first of all from the workers themselves , and also from employers .
Perhaps we should not establish a hierarchy , as we would obviously put the employers first , but the workers themselves must always have the necessary awareness and training to take on the risk , accept the risk and know how to respect it .
No type of administration should be outside this commitment .
Finally , I would like to discuss this commitment from all in the sense that , as Bertrand Russell said , in order to be happy we need three things : the courage to accept the things that we cannot change , enough determination to change the things that we can change and the wisdom to know the difference between the two .
I think that , in this sense , the fight against accidents at work should be one involving constant determination and constant courage from everyone .
Mr President , I should like first of all , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , to apologise for the fact that Mr Skinner is not present in the Chamber .
He must be detained by something very important , for we are all aware of Mr Skinner ' s great commitment to getting this matter finalised .
EU rules are , of course , often criticised for being much too detailed .
Rules concerning employees ' health and safety are no exception .
However , the directive which we are to be involved in approving today shows why that degree of detail really is necessary .
We already have general rules to protect employees , including against falls from height , but the fact remains that falls from height account for 10 % of all industrial accidents in the EU .
That is partly due to the fact that the rules are not kept on work sites , but it is perhaps also due to the fact that there is a lack of more precise instructions as to how such accidents are to be prevented .
Anyone who has tried to climb up scaffolding knows how , in that situation , one wonders whether the construction , which looks so flimsy , has been put together properly .
It requires a certain knowledge to erect scaffolding properly , and I believe that the required training in the erection , modification and dismantling of scaffolding can help improve safety .
I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , not only on behalf of Parliament but also on behalf of all those people who work on scaffolding , for a good result has in actual fact been achieved .
Clearly , we have not , however , solved all the problems with this directive , and I can see four points in particular that we shall have to do further work on .
First of all , I very much support what the common position states about the need to find a solution concerning employers and the self-employed .
I should like to see these people in general covered by the rules concerning the working environment , both because of competitive considerations and because their actions can help improve safety on the work site .
Secondly , we must look at the requirements made of those products designed to improve scaffolding .
It is a major problem for those who erect scaffolds that the components are often very heavy .
They are thus not only very difficult to handle , with the risk too of dropping them , but they are also a contributory factor in causing those who work with these materials to become worn out .
A third point is training .
We have found a satisfactory solution in this directive , but I believe that training is one of the points we must be very careful about in the future .
Moreover , I believe that , as time goes on , it will be quite natural to make much more stringent demands upon the content of training .
Let us now see , however , how the Member States set about the task .
Fourthly and finally , there is the attitude to health and safety .
Legislation alone cannot prevent accidents of this kind .
Prevention has a lot to do with the authorities ' having the proper opportunities to monitor whether the legislation is being complied with , but also with individuals ' taking the new safety rules seriously .
We cannot have those who work on scaffolding playing Tarzan out on the work sites .
This directive now provides a series of clear instructions and , if they are used correctly , then I believe we can get something done about the unduly high number of accidents there are involving falls from height .
Thank you very much , Mrs Thorning ­ Schmidt .
With regard to your initial information , I would say that the rapporteurs are clearly those with the greatest interest in being present at these debates , as one would , of course , expect .
The absence of rapporteurs from debates is something that must be pointed out . It must at least be communicated to the Bureau sufficiently in advance , both out of common sense and for the smooth running of this House .
I must say , ladies and gentlemen , that Mr Collins informed the Bureau that , since this debate would continue after 9 p.m. , he would not be able to be here at this time .
The Bureau was , therefore , aware of this fact .
With regard to Mr Skinner , the Bureau was unfortunately not given any information or explanation .
I think that , in future , the Bureau will have to inform rapporteurs that if they are for any reason unable to attend , they must proceed in accordance with the basic rules of courtesy and of respect for the Chamber .
Mr President , first of all , I want to say that I think Mr Skinner has carried out a very incisive piece of work , something which I think must also be said this evening .
As chairman of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , I have supported the conciliation that has been achieved concerning a change to the scaffolding Directive .
It provides more precise rules for health and safety in connection with the use of ladders and other work equipment on scaffolding , and I want to congratulate Mr Skinner on his work .
It is therefore a question of revising existing rules , and it is clearly of practical significance in terms , for example , of its demands for training and the issue of including self-employed persons under the rules .
Unlike a number of other Members here in the Chamber , I have not , during the discussion of the proposal , felt any need to raise the issue of whether we should have this kind of directive at all .
I do not think that that was on the agenda this time , but I should like , at the last moment , to say a little about the matter , for there is a lot of talk nowadays about lists of competencies and new forms of governance .
What should the EU deal with ? Which tasks must the national states carry out and in what ways are they to be carried out ?
I am absolutely in favour of common EU rules ensuring that free competition in the internal market does not become competition in a poor working environment .
Is safety in relation to scaffolding really a matter for the EU , however ?
Would it not perhaps be better to take the decisions concerning safety on scaffolding closer to the building sites concerned ?
This might be at a national or local level .
I started giving some thought to this in the middle of the very exciting and detailed discussions we had on , for example , the use of ladders on scaffolding around the old houses in Amsterdam .
Another issue is that of how it is to be ensured that the rules are in actual fact implemented and that we do in actual fact see fewer accidents involving falls from height .
While we have been discussing this Directive , I have in fact been paying more attention to the scaffolding in Brussels , and I believe , to be honest , that we shall have a serious problem implementing this directive .
The discussion we are also having in other contexts about new forms of governance must also deal with the way in which we are to regulate the working environment most effectively .
Are we to continue issuing detailed laws and regulations , or should we focus more upon how these work in practice ?
Is there some other way in which we can oblige the two sides of industry and the national governments to ensure a good working environment ?
I think we need some new thinking .
Mr President , Mr Skinner , Commissioner , it gives me great pleasure to be able to discuss this topic .
One of the Dutch newspapers this morning carried the headline , ' Europe safeguards the window cleaner ' s bread and butter ' .
That was a reference to the concern that it would no longer be possible to use a ladder for work .
This directive has finally provided a solution .
It means that a ladder can be used for work , provided the work is short-term and it poses a limited risk .
That is precisely where the whole problem lies .
This news is music to the ears of people in the Netherlands , at least the window cleaners , along with an entire professional sector of self-employed who carry ladders around in the Netherlands and the rest of Europe , such as maintenance people , painters and decorators , and so forth .
But they are all getting excited about nothing .
For the time being , anyway .
For it may well be that , at national level , the measure will at some point be interpreted to mean that ' short-term ' is not a full working day , in which case the work can , strictly speaking , not be carried out .
I am only highlighting this issue .
We have not solved the problem .
The directive causes problems of enforceability .
If we concern ourselves with working conditions in this House , we should do this effectively , and our efforts must be geared towards the relevant categories of people : employees , self-employed with no staff , self-employed with staff , etc .
There is room for more clarity in this respect .
Mr President , in the previous debate in September last year I confirmed that health and safety was an important issue , and I commended the rapporteur on the thought that he had put into his work .
I am delighted to see that he has finally arrived here so that he can hear me say that yet again .
My complaint was then , and still is now , that this was a matter best left to Member States or indeed to local authorities - a point already made most eloquently by my colleague , Mr Jensen , a few moments ago .
When the original Commission proposal on this subject was published , it said : " The difficulties of implementing the provisions on the ground should not be underestimated in the case of SMEs " .
Despite this comment the rapporteur put forward even more detailed amendments and then blithely stated in the September debate : " This is a small- to medium-sized business-friendly piece of legislation " .

Coming straight after the report of Mr Hughes , earlier today , suggesting a number of amendments to the proposed extension of the working time directive to mobile workers , one thing is very clear . The people who believe that the EU should legislate in the finest detail , the people who are piling on more burdens on business without even understanding that is what they are doing , are not some unelected Brussels bureaucrats , they are Britain 's very own Labour MEPs .
I now understand what Tony Blair means by Labour leading in Europe .
When it comes to extra red tape British Labour MEPs are way out in front .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the legislative proposal we are now discussing , whose content is to be welcomed , goes some way towards meeting the need to combat the phenomenon of accidents at work caused by high falls from ladders and scaffolding .
This phenomenon is , unfortunately , all too common throughout the European Union .
We cannot repeat often enough the huge number of accidents that occur : according to information supplied by the Commission , around 500 000 falls from a height occur every year , 300 000 of which cause more than three days ' absence from work .
Furthermore , of this total number , around 40 000 serious accidents are recorded and around 1 000 deaths .
In most cases , these accidents are caused by the improper use of scaffolding and ladders .
In this area , as in other areas in the social sphere , we need to encourage the adoption of measures and common legislation to encourage the setting of standards and a levelling upwards , which would represent added-value for all of the Member States .
I am sure that , in my country , where this type of accident has reached frightening proportions , this directive will make a valuable contribution to preventing them . It will also provide an incentive to the competent national authorities to define stricter and more rigorous rules on the use of such work equipment .
Lastly , I wish to emphasise the positive manner in which the Council has worked in close cooperation with Parliament on this matter .
Although we sometimes tend to criticise the positions adopted by the Council , we should give praise where praise is due .
. Mr President , I am very pleased with the generous remarks that have been made and apologise for not being here on time .
We can thank the chauffeurs ' service of Parliament .
As wonderful as it is at ferrying us in every day , they seem to have left me behind some half-an-hour after I asked for them to be there .
Apart from this complaint , I should like to thank all the services that have been a part of this very successful report .
I see Simon Duffin , for example , from our secretariat in Parliament , who was instrumental in bringing about many of the compromises , agreements and consensus in our committee .
We should be generous in our praise for people like Simon and others in the Commission who worked tirelessly in bringing about this particular report .
It is a first .
Through an informal process , it may beggar belief to Mr Bushill-Matthews- although I thank him for his original praise to begin with - that it is an employer-friendly report .
There is nothing like this that has come through the processes of health and safety .
That may stagger you , but it is true .
It is true for various reasons .
Perhaps we ought to start off by reminding ourselves of the very reason why this report came about in the first place .
The report was lost as a scaffolding or works-at-height directive , as an annex to an original report .
The reason why it was lost was because originally it was blocked for reasons I will not bother to go into now .
But sense prevailed and now we have it back .
Five hundred thousand people each year fall from heights .
That is quite a staggering amount across the European Union every year .
Forty thousand - as you have probably already heard - are seriously injured ; seriously enough for them to have three or more days off from work .
A thousand , very sadly , die each year , with the consequent effects on administration , the burden to businesses of finding replacements , of training , finding the costs for compensating the relatives .
That is quite a burden for business .
Across the European Union the costs are estimated as being in the region of EUR 28 billion every year .
That is enough for a whole host of hospitals , schools , roads , or whatever you want , across the European Union .
Yet we still persist in allowing accidents to happen in the workplace .
Forgive me for being passionate about this , but if you can stop accidents in the workplace , I say you are doing a favour for the workers in the enterprise and for the businesses themselves .
We should strive to do that in the most reasonable and practicable way .
Those people who know me , know me for being a practical person , not somebody up there in the clouds wishing further ideology to descend on businesses , but somebody who sees the real advantages for the person in the workplace .
I worked at heights .
I worked on scaffolding .
I worked on ladders .
I tried to carry things too large for people to be able to carry .
I have seen it .
Let me tell you these are not fly-by-night dreams of someone in Parliament .
If I am a Labour MEP who has brought legislation in , I am very proud to do that because we may see a reduction of accidents in the workplace as a result of such legislation .
Not only that , it is employer-friendly because it brings about a level playing-field .
No longer will we have the competitive basis , on which some companies wish to compete , of people who prefer to miss out all these rules and regulations in favour of seeking the lowest cost , the lowest denominator in the workplace .
That puts at risk the lives and livelihoods of those people who are the most vulnerable - the people who are working there .
Parliament has been incredibly successful in this process .
It has been successful for many reasons .
It has partly been successful because it has been able to include things which the Commission and the Council were not originally willing to consider .
These are not burdens .
I do not think that including self-employed people in this particular legislation is burdensome .
When you look at the contracting industry - take electricians , for example - the vast majority are self-employed .
The report has not only looked at contracting industries in the building sector but looked across a wide spectrum of people working at heights .
It is not just people working on building sites that fall from buildings or scaffolding , it is across a range of different industries .
It seems remarkable that this could be so misrepresented .
Parliament also stood out in favour of maintaining a sensible balance between too much detail and that which needs to be regulated .
We need regulation if we are to have the kind of standards which a civilised European Union wants to see .
This move was underlined by the fact that Parliament took a very mature interest in some of that detail and effectively helped people , for example , who have to carry huge weights on ladders , to consider the very serious problems that could happen to themselves and the very serious injuries .
Not all the amendments came from the Socialists .
It is not as if we were some devious clique involved in destroying businesses .
Amendments came from the other side of the House as well .
Let us not forget that .
You are criticising your own colleagues as well .
This is a very successfully arranged piece of legislation .
It has been achieved through consensus and goodwill in our committee .
I thank all the people who have been a part of that .
I hope we will be able to enjoy the success for many years to come .
Thank you very much , Commissioner de Palácio .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
European Union 's oil supply
The next item is the report ( A5 ­ 0163 / 2001 ) by Mr Linkohr , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Communication from the Commission on the European Union 's oil supply [ COM ( 2000 ) 631 - C5 ­ 0739 / 2000 - 2000 / 2335 ( COS ) ] .
Mr President , perhaps I could waste a little time because earlier on we were informed that the Linkohr report would be taken at 10 p.m.
Obviously you have been speeding through things at an extraordinary rate and Mr Linkohr must have been under the misapprehension that he was not required until 10 p.m.
I have only just got here myself as a shadow rapporteur .
Could we perhaps waste a little time ?

Mr Purvis , clearly a multitude of reasons can be given , but Mr Linkohr is very well known in this House and is extremely responsible .
I am referring more to coincidence than to his personal responsibility .
I am sure that he has a legitimate reason for not being here now , but I must also say that in terms of programming speeches , the Bureau makes quite accurate estimates for speaking time .
Members must therefore keep an eye on the display board and have an idea of when their time is approaching .
Parliament must have this balance - and I am by no means criticising the three rapporteurs who , for a host of reasons are not here today - if it is to function and work properly I am sure , however , that Mr Linkohr is on his way .

-DE ) , draftsman of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs . ( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are so dependent nowadays on oil as a source of energy that , if it were to stop suddenly , almost everything would grind to a halt .
For example , can you imagine life with no aeroplanes and no cars ?
The Commission communication on Europe 's oil supply , which is exceptionally important in content and most daring in form , Mr Linkohr 's report on it , the opinions of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , the Committee on the Environment , Public Heath and Consumer Policy and the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which has done me the honour of appointing me as draftsman , are clear and , to a greater or lesser extent , all come to a number of revealing conclusions .
First , at current rates , the worldwide consumption of oil will rise from 77 million barrels a day in 2000 to 115 million barrels in 20 years , i.e. it will almost double .
Secondly , specialists forecast that the maximum [ output ] will not exceed 90 million barrels a day and that the number of new fields discovered will continue to dwindle .
Thirdly , Europe is totally dependent on oil imports .
The present figure is 75 % and it is expected to top 85 % in 2020 .
Fourthly , the price of crude oil is expected to remain high , at least 22 to 28 dollars a barrel , and will most probably continue to rise .
I this is combined with the high value of the dollar , the cost will inevitably rise , making European products less competitive , due to the high rate of tax on petroleum products in the European Union .
This , of course , will exacerbate inflationary pressures .
Fifthly , huge numbers of people die in road traffic accidents , almost as many as the number of people who die in major wars .
Sixthly , 70 % - I repeat 70 % - of the atmospheric pollution of our planet is due to transport and only 7 % is due to industry and we should refrain from misleading criticism which only targets industrial pollution , given that cars and aeroplanes cause most of the pollution on our planet .
As I have checked and there is still time , I should like to finish my point because I think that this is an important issue .
Oil is , however , a valuable commodity in other important sectors , such as the pharmaceutical industry .
Consequently , as it is a non-renewable source of energy , we should not waste it .
If all this is true , and this is what the Commission report tells us , then what we need to do is obvious , but it is also extremely difficult .
In the long term , we - and the European Union in particular - must look for alternative sources of energy , such as natural gas , hydrocarbons , of which there is an abundance on our planet , nuclear energy - concentrating on nuclear fusion - and of course , sustainable sources , of which solar energy is the most important .
In the short term , and I am almost finished , the European Union must look for oil and natural gas from several geographical sources , especially in the Caucasus .
We also need to try and reach an agreement with OPEC on more stable prices and payment in euros rather than dollars and , at the same time , to increase our safety stocks .
( The President cut the speaker off )
, rapporteur . ( DE ) Mr President , if we had held this debate on the oil supply of the European Union six months ago , far more attention would probably have been paid to it and a host of journalists would have been here so that they could report on it the following day .
I doubt if this will be the case today because things have calmed down somewhat since .
Surprisingly , back then , when oil prices were indeed rising , albeit not so dramatically , the streets were full of protesters and if a country had held elections , the government would probably have had terrible trouble getting re-elected ; even though there is nothing they can do about it , psychologically it makes a huge difference .
People were confused and many took to the streets in anger .
What exactly is my point here ?
My point is that oil policy can have an extraordinary effect on public opinion in our countries and we must be take care when talking about oil .
Obviously , people are getting used to higher prices .
The price of oil has since risen to 30 dollars a barrel , yet there is no revolt - at one time , even that rise would have constituted a danger .
What I am trying to say here is that this is not an insignificant issue and we should make an effort to help stabilise prices - knowing full well that prices will , of course , tend to go up before they go down over the next few years , due to the shortage of oil and for ecological reasons , and that abrupt changes are dangerous .
The Commission published a communication back then , on which I should now like to congratulate it .
I think it is an exceptionally helpful and intelligent communication and I think the most important message - and it is this message which I also want to get across in my report - is that we need proper relations with OPEC .
We need dialogue with OPEC and , more importantly , we need the European Union to speak with one voice in this dialogue .
Not with fifteen , with one .
I am pleased to pay you the compliment , Commissioner , but I would have said it anyway : it must be the Commissioner who speaks for the European Union .
I can imagine that the band which OPEC is aiming for will be pegged at between about 22 and 28 dollars a barrel .
Even 30 dollars would not be a catastrophe , even if , because of inflation , we would , of course , be more comfortable with 25 rather than 30 dollars .
So where are the bones of contention , including here in Parliament ?
First , there is the question of tax harmonisation , of the harmonisation of duty on mineral oils .
I am an ardent advocate of this sort of harmonisation , although I know that many of my fellow members take a different tack , believing that tax policy should be subject to competition .
However , I think it is absolutely essential and fair , in the interests of truck drivers and haulage companies in competition with each other , that we harmonise competitive conditions .
The second divisive issue that is causing problems is the use of stocks .
Now I too know that these stocks , which we have estimated at 90 days , are , of course , minute compared with the size of the oil fields underground and that releasing these stocks will have little impact on the cost of energy .
I am not so naive as to have overlooked this .
However , I believe that it makes sense , psychologically , to release them in a crisis , but I admit that we could argue the point .
The third point we need to discuss - and I am being very cautious here - is the use of fiscal instruments in the event of a crisis .
If you object that this is highly adventurous , then I would remind you that the French government granted tax relief back then , contrary to European directives , and has kept it in place to this day .
In other words , we have to deal with a real situation here , which we cannot allow to put us under pressure .
What gives me food for thought is that OPEC stands together with the USA on climate policy .
In other words , they are a partner in the US alliance , which could be dangerous when it comes to climate policy .
I really would like to be able to discuss climate policy with OPEC .
I think that we could well broker a compromise here .
, draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
( DE ) Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Linkohr on his report , even if , as rapporteur for the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , I am not totally happy about the fact - although this will depend on the outcome of the vote - that scant attention has been paid to one fundamental factor , namely the utilisation of oil in the transport sector .
Mr Linkohr has described the circumstances in which oil prices fluctuated abruptly and erratically and has pointed out that a whole series of countries took measures which were out of kilter both with the rules and principles of the European Union and with what we are debating today from the point of view of sustainable development , because we must not forget that the debate is not just about this report , it is about the huge task of the Swedish presidency and the Gothenburg summit as regards sustainable development .
Even if the topical subject of Ireland is taking centre stage , we should not forget this fundamental approach .
I particularly welcome the fact that the President of the Commission said quite clearly today that sustainable development is one of the cornerstones of development in the European Union , including a transport policy geared towards sustainable development .
This also includes , as Mr Linkohr said , a price policy which prevents erratic fluctuations but which does not follow the populist line of : the lower the price of transport , the better .
No , what we need is a pricing system and structure in the transport sector which is keeping with transport policy objectives , especially where oil is used .
And the transport policy objectives , as the Commissioner also sees them , consist of shifting more traffic from the roads to the railways wherever it is possible and makes sense to do so .
When we have adopted a railways package , when the Commissioner has proposed the additional measures which we are waiting for , then it will make sense overall to boost sustainable development by shifting traffic , especially freight traffic and passenger and local traffic , on to the railways .
The last point I want to mention here is planning policy .
We know it cannot happen overnight but I think - and this too is contained in the Linkohr report - that we must urge individual Member States to think in their future planning policy about providing public transport which is as efficient and environmentally-friendly as possible wherever land is developed and houses , factories etc. are built .
This too is important if we want to ensure that sustainability is not just dead letter .
Mr President , Mr Linkohr 's report is much to be welcomed .
It is a balanced report with workable suggestions on how to improve the intermittently precarious oil supply situation .
That it is precarious can be seen from the spike in prices which occurred last autumn , or as is occurring now with Iraq 's decision to stop oil exports .
It is precarious because we depend on supplies of oil from unstable parts of the world .
It is intermittent because these crises endure for relatively short periods as market forces come to bear and rectify the situation .
Indeed the volatility of oil prices , ranging in the last 18 months from USD 10 to 34 per barrel , is as much a problem for the suppliers as it is for the consumers .
This gives us an opportunity , because stable prices are of interest both to us in Europe and to the oil supplier countries .
We should make a much more consistent effort to develop a dialogue with the oil supplier countries , with the Middle East , with Russia , with the Caspian and Caucasus countries and with West Africa .
This dialogue must not just be pursued when there is a shortage , or when there is a seller 's market , or when it is in our interest .
It must be pursued also when the boot is on our foot , when there is a glut and a buyer 's market .
As a practical example , Europe should encourage and facilitate the construction of oil and gas pipelines from these places to the heartland of Europe .
Nor should we overlook the potential of our indigenous oilfields , notably those in my Scottish constituency .
Research and investment and improved recovery techniques have already extended the life and productivity of the North Sea and continental shelf oilfields .
But more can still be done .
We must also pursue opportunities for saving energy , above all in the transport sector .
Yes , we must do what we can to promote renewable and alternative energies .
But we cannot share Mr Linkohr 's enthusiasm for harmonising tax rates and using harmonised tax , applied at European level , and the manipulation of strategic oil reserves to regulate oil prices .
Tax rates are for the Member States to set and clearly they are quite unwilling to sign up to the long-delayed directive on taxation of energy products .
Taxes on energy should be set in the context of an open competitive European market which , in itself , will ensure that fuel costs are not too far out of line from one country to the next .
We cannot afford to hobble our economies , our industries and those who live and work in our rural and remoter regions .
Yes , oil supply is a matter which has to concern us .
The Commission 's communication and Mr Linkohr 's report are valuable contributions to understanding the problem and defining possible solutions .
If we can succeed in amending the few unacceptable aspects that I have detailed , this group will be pleased to support Mr Linkohr 's report .
Mr President , Mr Linkohr , ladies and gentlemen , the problem of the security of energy supplies is not new to the European Union .
As the rapporteur mentioned , the hike in oil prices just over a year ago gave us an indication of how easily Europe could be destabilised by the speculative manoeuvres of the major oil exporters .
Once again , Europe has been unable to take coordinated action because of its great dependence .
Today , therefore , it is particularly crucial that we adopt a coherent strategy to allow the European Union to provide this security .
In 2000 , Europe imported 75 % of its total oil requirements and by 2020 , this figure will reach 85 % .
We must , therefore , take steps to reduce our dependence .
These measures include , first of all , diversifying our supply sources and we must develop long-term strategies for the Persian Gulf , Caspian Sea and Caucasus regions , if only to limit the influence of OPEC .
In this connection , we have just cause to welcome the European Commission ' s energy initiatives in the context of Euro-Mediterranean cooperation .
The European Union has everything to gain from stepping up the dialogue , by means of the Euro-Mediterranean Energy Forum .
Reducing our dependence on oil exporting countries can also be achieved by diversifying the energy sources .
I am thinking , of course , of sources of renewable energy and biofuels .
I am also thinking , however , of nuclear energy , even though I know that many people here are opposed to this .
Of course , we must obviously stress the need for research in order to minimise the production of waste and risks to safety .
Gas may also represent an alternative energy source and I support the proposal seeking to carry out a feasibility study on the construction of new oil and gas pipelines between the Middle East , West Africa and Europe .
Another aspect of our strategy must focus on the rational use of energy and I welcome the Commission ' s proposal to submit to the Gothenburg Council a plan for energy savings and diversification of energy sources , which will aim at more efficient use of energy .
Lastly , transport is a sector that deserves all our attention .
According to current forecasts , the transport sector will account for 71 % of demand for oil by 2020 and , as rapporteur , I note with interest the request from Mr Linkohr to carry out research under the Sixth Programme for Research and Development .
To sum up , I also believe that tax harmonisation has an important role to play in the strategy that I have just mentioned and I support the proposals that have been made on this by my fellow Member , Mr Linkohr .
I would , moreover , like to end my speech by offering him my warm congratulations for his work and for his skilful approach .
Mr President , Commissioner De Palacio , I would also like to thank the rapporteur Mr Linkohr for an excellent report .
Our group supports the main points of the report .
The Union ' s dependence on oil imports is increasing worryingly while , at the same time , the availability of oil is decreasing and its price rising .
The goal of the Union ' s overall strategy must be to seek to reduce Europe ' s dependence on importing energy .
At the same time effective dialogue is required with groupings of oil producing countries , exactly as stated in the report .
In this context I would like to mention cooperation with Russia .
Among other things the gas and oil resources of the Barents Sea area are an important reserve also in terms of European energy provision .
The Union should also seek more decisively than previously to replace oil with other sources of energy .
Renewable energy sources and biofuels in particular can replace part of oil consumption and at the same time promote the Kyoto objectives .
This requires that the Union direct more of its resources than previously towards researching renewable energy and promoting its use .
Nor should we overlook local renewable fuels whose renewability can be successfully proven , such as peat , cork waste and olive stones , for example , depending on the geographical area .
An important means of reducing dependence on oil is also saving energy .
One example is taking into account energy aspects to a greater extent in construction and transport .
The simplest way of saving energy is to improve the energy efficiency of buildings by harmonising building regulations towards energy efficiency .
At the same time , oil-based raw materials can be replaced by renewable materials such as wood , for example .
In the transport sector , oil consumption can be reduced by better planning , new technology , environmentally-friendly means of transport and by investing in research into fuels to replace petrol .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Linkohr for a very fair report .
I agree on the importance of far-sighted policies .
When oil prices rise we conserve energy , when they fall we do not .
This has been very short-sighted , as I am sure the Commissioner will agree .
Energy saving and the rational use of energy must be part of our strategy for security of supply .
The rapporteur has rightly pointed out that it is possible to save large quantities of oil using existing technology .
Around 20 % of production could be saved simply by using energy-saving windows .
Oil is a costly , non-renewable energy source , which should not be used wastefully .
I therefore support the Commission 's proposal to submit to the Göteborg Council a plan for energy saving and diversification of energy sources aimed at more efficient energy use .
What is even more important is the transport sector .
Here the emphasis on biofuels and renewable energies is most welcome .
We need to develop a new generation of vehicles .
Energy consumption in the transport sector is our greatest problem .
The report makes very welcome proposals here .
The Green Group cannot , however , agree that nuclear energy is safe or an acceptable replacement for oil .
Instead , let us have the same kind of investment in renewable energy that we have seen in nuclear energy over the past 40 years .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , our oil supply problem is a very real problem . However , the report under discussion makes no attempt , in my opinion , to address it from the point of view of the interests of the people of Europe .
The objective of its basic approach is to enhance Community imperialism within the framework of competition with the United States of America .
Certain objectives , such as restricting the power of OPEC and drawing up a long-term strategy for the Persian Gulf , Caspian Sea and Caucasus regions , are evidence of a multi-faceted policy of imperialistic intervention .
At the same time , the rapporteur acknowledges that the crisis in 2000 was not a real supply crisis .
In fact , subsequent developments proved that speculation by monopoly groups and heavy taxes in the European Union were to blame for high prices .
Nonetheless , the report attacks tax cuts and proposes that taxes be harmonised upwards , concealing this anti-grass roots measure beneath a mantle of environmental sensitivity .
Of course , everyone agrees that we need to develop energy-saving technologies and promote renewable energy sources .
However , the oil supply problem cannot be resolved within a neoliberal economy in which the more we consume , the greater the profit .
I think that only a fully nationalised energy agency can take charge and make proper use of existing energy sources in each country , taking account of both the economic cost and environmental protection , while safeguarding the interests of the people .
This is a highly political issue and has to do with the facility for centralised planning within an economy in which the people own the means of production in sectors of strategic importance .
Mr President , diversification is the key word for the Commission and the rapporteur with regard to the European Union ' s energy supply .
That is one of the ways of preventing greater dependence on imported oil .
First of all , the dialogue with oil-producing countries could lead to a greater diversity of suppliers .
This welcome spreading of risk prevents individual countries from assuming too much power in the European oil supply .
In addition , the Commission and rapporteur are using the dialogue as an instrument for more stable price development .
However , this is easier said than done .
Moreover , both the use of strategic supplies and excise measures are not sufficiently convincing as price instruments .
The risk is that these price instruments might only delay the synchronisation of supply and demand because the market does not highlight the incentives sufficiently .
There are solutions other than price management .
For example , it could be examined whether a greater surplus capacity in the refineries could offer solace .
Greater capacity can meet an increase in demand without the immediate need to put the prices up .
Thirdly , diversification according to the type of energy source is necessary , as proposed by the Commission and rapporteur .
That is why other energy sources need to replace natural oil in the sectors where that is possible .
Natural gas and renewable energy sources can thus contribute to a greater diversity of supply .
Despite this , sustainability is more than simply promoting renewable energy sources in a focused manner .
National sustainability strategies provide the market with a variety of policies providing additional cover .
At European level , it is important to avoid a situation where this diversification in terms of energy sources and geographical origin leads to competition at the expense of environmental standards and working conditions .
A first step in this connection is a certification system for type and origin .
Specific national policies are then possible for each energy source .
In the enlargement process , this approach might meet the need for flexibility for both Member States and candidate countries .
Finally , the pursuit of low prices to the exclusion of everything else will lead to countries with the lowest cost price dominating the market .
That is why price management must not be the main issue of the dialogue .
The preconditions for a reliable and sustainable energy supply , on the other hand , should be .
Mr President , I congratulate my colleague , Mr Linkohr , on this report .
It is a welcome contribution to the wider debate on security of supply of energy in Europe , on which I am working at present .
I should like to pick up on four points .
Regarding paragraph 1 , calling for effective dialogues with supplier countries , earlier this afternoon I attended a meeting where we heard about the work of the Energy Charter and the importance of putting that framework in place , in particular for our trading and investment relations with Russia as a primary source of oil and gas .
I would like to emphasise the importance of that initiative .
Next , paragraph 7 calls on the EU to make greater efforts to replace oil as far as possible .
I support that paragraph .
There is great potential and we are looking forward to hearing from the Commission later this year with proposals to encourage bio-fuels and other alternatives as a supplement - and perhaps a complement - to oil at present .
Thirdly , paragraph 27 , on a different tack , urges the Commission to encourage enhancing production of oil in Europe through improved techniques of extraction .
This also must surely be a sensible policy to make the best use of our own resources .
Fourthly , paragraph 30 calls on Member States to work on the housing and transport sectors as areas where we can dramatically improve our energy efficiency and our conservation of energy .
These both have to be a sensible approach .
Finally , it seems to me that perhaps the most important thing we have to do - which is a challenge ahead of us - is to influence and change public opinion on the need for conservation and efficiency .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank Mr Linkohr for his excellent report .
In my opinion , however , we are not dependent on oil but dependent on cars and transport .
This is what we are dependent on , this is what will soon consume 70 % of oil .
They also surround this building , all the European Parliament buildings and all the offices , the same vehicles which consume our oil .
By the way , who has ever heard of car-free offices ?
There is no such thing .
Engine technology can be changed and fuels developed but the most efficient solution can be achieved by reducing traffic or by switching to rail , as has now been suggested .
The rapporteur proposes more energy-efficient windows .
That is a good saving . It would save 20 % of oil .
We did this in Finland as far back as 25 years ago - triple glazing .
What next ?
Transporting energy is one problem .
I support local forms of energy .
In Finland , for example , 30 % of the land area is bog .
We use less than one percent of this and it does not have to be transported anywhere .
These are the right solutions .
Therefore , for us using the annual growth in peat makes sense .
However , it is clear that these savings will not be achieved in time .
Renewable energy sources are not sufficiently fast .
Therefore , we will have to do something else and as far as I am concerned this is either nuclear power or natural gas .
Let us choose natural gas , it can be found in the north in the Barents Sea area as Mr Pohjamo said .
There is an incredible amount of it there , more than in the Caspian Basin .
It could be the high point of the northern dimension .
I thank the Commissioner for the energy dialogue with Russia but it has to be speeded up .
My proposal is to focus on cooperation between the Union and Russia which will create shortcuts .
Russia ' s partners are large and they are used to shortcuts .
They will enable us to gain speed and at the same time develop legislation .
Besides , there is a war going on in the Caucasus and there is peace in the north .
There is nothing there except polar bears and silent Scandinavians .
This cooperation would work and would secure energy provision .
Mr President , Commissioner , what is the comparative of ridiculous ?
A parliamentary debate at the witching hour , just before the witching hour .
I apologise for being late , as were other fellow Members , but I do have an explanation .
We look around and think , hardly anyone is here and the few that are here , who were here before and have already spoken , evaporate like ghosts which materialise somewhere else shortly afterwards and then disappear again .
If this were merely a ghost debate , it would not much matter .
But we are taking about taxes , transparency , democracy , the substance of a modern economy and mobility .
Luckily we have a Harry Potter among us , played tonight by Rolf Linkohr , who is doing his best to ensure that we make some sort of progress here and who has a watchful , unwavering eye for fundamental principles of which many of us are simply no longer aware , fundamental principles for our present society .
The fact that only 11 Members are still here says much about both the strength and the powerlessness of this Parliament .
Nonetheless , the debate is a central debate , when you think what the problems are , and there are three problems , I think .
First , there is the problem of democracy , social justice and ecology in Europe .
Even if we manage to achieve the breakthroughs which we need in the area of democracy and maintain the tendency towards an equitable mix in the social fabric , the huge ecological question still remains .
And this is the subject of this report .
One point in this report demands our attention because it is , I think , a really important point . I refer to Amendment No 6 which , if it gets through plenary - and I hope it does - will change a general proposal to the Council into a clear demand to push ahead , at long last , with tax harmonisation .
Tax harmonisation , especially in the energy sector , is an absolute priority if our citizens are to understand that we have converged not just socially but democratically too .
We must put a stop to imbalances whereby a truck driver from Austria , for example , is exposed to totally different conditions of competition than another driver a few kilometres down the road in Germany or France .
This is where we call on the Commission and , more importantly , the Council , to do something .
I hope that we will make some headway here via this energy report .
Without transparency there can be no democracy , not even in Europe .
That is why I am ardently in favour not just of accepting the report but also of pushing ahead with tax harmonisation .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first of all I would like to thank Mr Linkohr for his excellent report , which is in line with the Communication on the oil supply that the Commission adopted in October 2000 , which in turn continued an initial statement that had been passed on to the Council previously in September .
I would like to also point out that in the mean time the Commission has adopted the Green Paper on the security of energy supplies which is so closely linked with this document and , of course , with Mr Linkohr ' s report .
I would like to say that today , although we are not in such as tense situation as we experienced last autumn , the reality is that brent prices are reaching 30 dollars per barrel and that , following the conclusions of OPEC last week , the price situation continues to be a cause for concern .

The cause of this volatility can be determined to a large extent , and currently it is mainly due to the low level of reserves , which have been historically low since the winter of 1999 / 2000 . However , it is , without doubt , also due to something else which is the lack of transparency in the oil markets .
In this respect , as Mr Linkohr rightly points out and has put as the first point in the motion for a resolution that he is presenting to Parliament , dialogue with the producing countries , whether or not they are members of OPEC , is an obligatory step to take in order to solve the problem of the instability of oil prices .
In this respect , we need to be able to make a joint commitment that will enable us to make an analysis of the markets with these countries and establish a permanent dialogue .
As Mr Purvis said , it is not about only talking when there is a shortage of oil and the prices are very high , but also when the prices are low .
This would therefore maintain a connection that would enable us to offer transparency for the market and maintain a greater stability of prices , which is in the interests both of producer and consumer countries .
In this context , the key issue is that Europe should be able to speak with one voice and that we should not find ourselves , as unfortunately sometimes happens in the field of energy , with a country taking a position that is outside what was agreed the day before - and this happened not long ago .
In this context , facilitating the development of production within the European Union , as has been said here and is advocated in the motion for a resolution , but also in countries outside OPEC and not in the European Union , would benefit the Union .
This includes issues such as cooperation on energy between the European Union and Russia , through the dialogue launched by President Prodi at the European Union-Russia summit on 30 October in Paris .
However we can say , in any case , that our options for energy policy should be focused on controlling demand , both in terms of oil and the other energy sources .
On the one hand , our energy sources are limited , on the other hand , neither can we forget our commitments on the environment ( and I am talking in particular about our Kyoto commitments ) on which we undoubtedly have a different position to the United States .
But going back to our Communication , aside from the dialogue that we referred to at the start , it stresses increasing the coherence of national policies between the different countries of the Union .
We must , therefore , consolidate our common approaches , both in terms of the strategic reserves and taxation .
We need to strengthen the mechanisms of strategic oil reserves by pooling them , and secondly , in terms of taxation , as Mr Linkohr ' s report rightly says , we need to resist the temptation to absorb the rise in oil prices through a reduction in tax on oil products .
Such an approach would go against our objectives in terms of the environment , particularly those arising from the Kyoto Protocol , and would mean transferring tax resources to the producing countries .
As a result , we should think more about bringing the special taxes in the different Member States more in line with each other and , in this respect , I think that we should move towards a broad range as the most appropriate option , whereby there could be a combination of a certain margin for the countries of the Union but , at the same time , with greater coherence and fewer distortions .
I would like to mention reducing the impact of oil on the European economy and , consequently , controlling demand , and remind you , first of all , that although it says in paragraph 23 of your motion for a resolution that we are going to present an energy saving plan in Gothenburg , ladies and gentlemen , we are not going to present it .
What we plan is , as part of the Green Paper that is being discussed in Parliament , a series of energy saving measures .
What we will do in Gothenburg is present one of the proposals in an articulated manner . For example , a proposal on improving the energy performance of buildings , a sector in which , as one of the speakers said , there is a great deal of potential for saving energy .
Finally , and given the growing demand for oil from the transport sector , we need to re-balance the relative importance of modes of transport , and this is going to be one of the focal points , if not the focal point , of the White Paper that I hope will be adopted by the Commission in the next few weeks .
Finally , the Commission also aims to promote support for the new generation of vehicles and alternative fuels , and we will soon present a communication on alternative fuels , which has been discussed here , and a directive in which we will put forward a proposal on the minimum level of use of biofuels and another on tax relief measures to encourage the use of biofuels .
Ladies and gentlemen , Mr President , the oil crisis has awakened and stirred public opinion on the problem of energy .
However , this crisis comes at the same time as other major challenges .
I am thinking about issues such as our increasing foreign dependence and the problem of climate change .
All this has led us to engage in a debate , an overall , systematic and comprehensive discussion through the proposals put forward in our Green Paper .
I understand that with this debate and the motion for a resolution in Mr Linkohr ' s report we are laying the foundations for what should be the conclusions of the future Green Paper and , in this respect , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur once again on the excellent work that he has done and thank all of you for your contributions .
Protection of pigs
The next item is the report ( A5-0210 / 2001 ) by Mr Busk , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council Directive [ COM ( 2001 ) 20 - C5-0039 / 2001 - 2001 / 0021 ( CNS ) ] amending Directive 91 / 630 / EEC laying down minimum standards for the protection of pigs .
Just the subject for a midnight debate .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to begin by thanking Mr Maat of the Group of the European People ' s Party and Mr Kindermann of the Group of the Party of European Socialists for what was unusually constructive and fruitful cooperation in the Committee .
There was , of course , overwhelming interest in this report , such that no less than 135 amendments were tabled .
We jointly made these into 10 compromise amendments adopted by a very large majority of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
I should also like to thank the Commission and the Swedish Presidency for their very constructive cooperation .
The Commission ' s proposal , which forms the basis for the measures concerned , contains many good features , but I do not think that it is sufficiently far-reaching .
What I do not see are common rules for European farmers competing in a single internal market .
Animal welfare and the needs of pigs are of course one and the same , whether the pigs concerned are in the north or the south .
Naturally , there are differences in temperature , but that only , of course , increases the need for overhead sprays , for harmonised rules concerning ventilation and for very good training for all EU farmers .
I also think we are obliged to adopt common rules for European farmers and that we must not only ever talk about minimum rules .
That is also , of course , what the Commission has proposed .
It is clear to everyone that the different Member States do not attach equal importance to animal welfare , and it is therefore necessary for ourselves here in Parliament , together with the Commission , to decide that these concerns should be raised jointly .
Otherwise , it will be possible justly to accuse us of not complying with our own decisions .
The fact that we in Europe make high demands in terms of animal welfare makes our European pig breeders less competitive than producers outside the EU .
In order to meet this problem and in order to ensure that consumers have clear and lucid information about products that witness to a high standard of animal welfare , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development would request the Commission to take initiatives to produce common rules for the labelling of pork that complies with these high standards .
I have a lot of sympathy for the amendments tabled by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy about introducing an import ban on products from third countries which do not comply with those standards we require . However , that is , of course , the same as proposing , or supporting the idea of , a trade war , and that is something I do not think we should do .
It is therefore a problem that the Commission should solve under the aegis of the WTO .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development would also ask the Commission to prepare a report on the situation regarding implementation of the existing directives from 1991 , for it is of course not only a question of fair competition in the world market but also , to a large extent , of fair competition in the internal market .
The Member States send information about the directive to the Commission , but we are not given this information here in Parliament .
The Commission ought now to gather the information and present it in a report explaining how the directive has been implemented , just as , this afternoon , we heard Commissioner Byrne provide a clear explanation of progress where animal transport is concerned .
It could well be that the Commission appreciates the need for common rules , such as those within the transport area .
I am very much looking forward to the Commission ' s relevant proposals , which we expect to receive in October of this year .
It is now , therefore , the Commission ' s task to look after the interests of European farmers in the forthcoming WTO negotiations .
As has been said , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development proposes partly solving this problem by introducing a common welfare-marking system .
It is , of course , obvious that every time European pig producers have a cost imposed upon them , it is not imposed upon our competitors , then we may be in danger of losing market shares .
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development also wants the Commission to propose rules for keeping pigs outdoors , now that the rules governing intensive pig rearing are soon to be in place .
We also have a duty to have definite rules adopted governing other pigs .
More and more pigs are kept outdoors , and it is therefore necessary to secure common rules governing access to mud baths and shade and any other facilities relevant to keeping pigs outdoors .
We have also tightened up the rules on training .
It ought quite simply to be a requirement for farmers to have practical and theoretical training so that they are able to look after their animals responsibly .
Like the introduction of overhead sprays , this tightening-up of the rules provides for animals ' greater welfare , and these matters are very , very important .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate Mr Busk on his excellent report .
He has managed to incorporate most of the legislation that went through the Committee on the Environment , which is important .
It is also important that we push this legislation forward so that the consumers can have a product which they know is perfectly safe , is reared in an environmentally-friendly manner and which they can eat with total safety , knowing that the animal has had an excellent life .
It is up to farmers to follow the legislation through .
Mr Busk touched on two or three important issues .
I will reiterate them very quickly .
One of them was transport of animals .
We are well aware of the importance of that and I know Commissioner Byrne , is equally aware of it .
Bringing that legislation into the WTO negotiations is vitally important , as is clear labelling .
Let me add , speaking not just from the viewpoint of the Committee on the Environment but also as farmer , that what we must not do within the European Union - and here I plead with the Commissioner , knowing his views on the way we import and export our products - is to end up putting legislation in place which exports the very industries on which we are legislating now in the EU .
If we do that , then we simply end up exporting animal welfare outside the European Union where we have no control over it .
We must have equality , not just within the European Union , but also for products coming into the European Union .
I plead with the Commissioner to make sure that sort of legislation is in place , so that we do not have products coming into the European Union which are not of the same standard that we set .
I know it is very difficult for people to understand this , but I hope that the Commissioner will follow it through and keep that legislation in place .
Mr President , I should first of all like to extend a warm thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Busk , for the excellent cooperation .
I should also like to thank Mr Kindermann , who helped us find a solution in a number of compromise amendments .
My second point concerns the Commission .
I should like to thank Mr Byrne for coming up with a proposal at any rate .
But at the same time , I am of the opinion that the Council should also be here today .
For if we consider this legislation on the welfare of pigs , I cannot help but observe that the discrepancies between the European Member States are unjustifiably huge , so huge that they are posing a threat to our free internal market .
It is , in fact , unacceptable in this Europe that , as a result , prices can differ between the various pig holdings in Europe by up to 30 to 35 % .
This situation is , at the same time , a criticism of the Council , which is requested to draft general rules .
In actual fact - that is why I am so pleased with Mr Byrne ' s presence here this evening - this matter is also of relevance to consumers , for we are once again debating a directive which has implications for farmers . But what about the implications for consumers ?
On behalf of my group , I should like to expressly underline that we are particularly concerned about this aspect for , in the final analysis , this proposal will lead to extra investments for pig holdings without any guarantee of an increase in yield .
This concern must be reflected in whatever approach is adopted , be it via a European premium policy or an extra surcharge for consumers .
In any case , animal welfare may no longer lead to huge differences in terms of competition , and the bill may not always have to be paid by European farmers alone .
I wanted to make this quite clear .
I will not elaborate on the content of the report .
Mr Busk made an excellent job of that .
Mr Sturdy expertly outlined the consequences for the WTO negotiations .
We all know that animal welfare is an incredibly difficult issue in the WTO .
But if European society cares about animal welfare , it also has the costly duty to ensure that it is put on the agenda in the WTO negotiations , and to take this matter into consideration in politics in general .
We could talk about this topic ad infinitum .
We have been approached by various organisations with different points of view , as well as by consumer organisations , animal protection organisations and farmers ' organisations .
I have increasingly noticed that , sometimes , there is definitely a basis for an alliance .
But such an alliance could only be set up if the necessary funding started to become available and if the consumer were far more involved .
Although my group welcomes the agreement reached , it is very concerned about the implications for farmers .
We also believe that , slowly but surely , the implications for consumers should be made clearer .
Mr President , following intensive negotiations and an excellent job by Mr Busk , we are now in a position to debate his report here in Parliament .
On behalf of my group , I should like to thank both him and Mr Maat for their work .
I think that the compromise proposals negotiated will bring us another step forward in improving how pigs are kept .
But it is and remains just a compromise .
Optimum demands , often couched in emotional terms , are self-evident but cannot be implemented as they stand .
In the final analysis , every new legal framework has a huge impact on the people affected .
It is important here for us to have flexible transition times .
Adjusting to other or new animal husbandry systems takes time and , more importantly , costs money .
The conditions of competition are particular harsh in the pig production sector .
I should like briefly to address another two points : first , extra space for fattening pigs and , secondly , castration .
Neither is covered by the Commission proposal but I think that the European Parliament should set higher standards for the protection of animals here .
The 1997 Scientific Veterinary Committee report on the welfare of pigs gives us a starting point here , especially for the space which fattening pigs require .
We would not be able to get the general ban on the castration of pigs which some people are calling for across to German consumers in my view .
Whether or not double vaccination of males can replace castration only time will tell .
But I think this is the most practical solution .
As far as the timetable is concerned , I think we have found an acceptable compromise .
Holdings will have time to change their production methods over a fairly long period of time .
Finally , I call on the House to adopt the report as it stands .
Mr President , Commissioner Byrne , when we received the Commission proposal , we were somewhat undecided in committee as to whether we should deal with it at all because , with all due respect , it was very insubstantial .
We received a poor quality , inadequate document and considered whether we should return it to sender and ask for a reasonable proposal on the protection of pigs .
But it must be said , Mr Busk , that you deserve our warmest congratulations on your work .
That includes Mr Maat and Mr Kindermann , who helped with the compromise amendments .
Now we have a proper proposal and , once again , Parliament has done a good job .
It is also a good thing that we intend to adopt it now because , had we decided otherwise and rejected the proposal , animal protection associations would again have accused farmers of wanting to stonewall , of wanting to put commercial interests first .
But that was never our intention ; we want to implement animal protection , obviously in tandem with farmers ' commercial interests .
As Mr Sturdy just said , we obviously need to ensure that the standards which we set at home also apply to products imported into the European Union .
In this sense , we have to work towards reasonable external protection which adopts a qualified version of what we describe here as the European way in agriculture and have again implemented in such detail here .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , before going into the directive on the minimum requirements for the protection of pigs in detail , I should like to make a few basic points .
I personally consider that it is high time we got the debate on animal protection back on track .
The debate on animal protection has thrown up highly exaggerated demands recently , in the wake of the BSE and foot-and-mouth crises and with regard to the quality of food , which are totally unrealistic .
I all too rarely hear any serious debate with qualified specialists .
Too often hysteria gets the upper hand and hits the headlines .
I will not beat about the bush : animals are animals and people are people .
We keep animals in order to make use of them and if we want animal husbandry which is suited to the species , then it must indeed be suited to the species .
This means , for example , that animals such as chickens , pigs or fish are not being kept in a way which is suited to their species if we try to apply humane or ethical concepts to them .
I know full well that agriculture is a difficult area , especially with the work it has to do and the problems that it has , and especially for those who are not directly affected .
That is why it is all the more important for us to be able to make an informed judgement and to apply that judgement so that everything we decide here can be implemented and applied in practice .
We cannot issue policy from an ivory tower and we have failed in our duty if our policy is not reflected in practical measures for our citizens .
Now to the report .
I can support the compromises found with all my heart because the minimum requirements set here pose no problems for Austrian agriculture or Austrian farmers .
Economic and ecological aspects need to be taken into account in the debate .
The geographical location of the farm also plays a part , as do structural requirements .
Development funds must be channelled to this sector because there is huge potential for investment .
I should like to close by saying that specialist training for stockmen and other people involved is absolutely essential .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has presented a proposal on minimum standards for the protection of pigs in order to improve the welfare of these animals .
I think it is a real pity that animal protection directives are being issued rather than regulations .
I say this as an enthusiastic supporter of regulations because , when directives are implemented , they generally bring new distortions of competition in their wake in my country .
I do not intend to address all the individual compromise amendments proposed here because a great deal of what we have set out here is , in my view , glaringly self-evident .
To cite just one example : training for qualifications is recommended , but young farmers in Germany gave up trying to survive in this fiercely competitive sector without qualifications a long time ago .
I think it is a great pity that the Commissioner does not have much time to listen but I shall address the controversial interests of consumer organisations once again , given that they are wheeled out in every debate and everyone keeps saying that consumers are calling for better protection for animals .
Just by chance , I received Commissioner Fischler 's press communiqué yesterday in which he said during an interview with a German broadsheet that consumer habits have now reversed post BSE .
According to Commissioner Fischler , people are increasingly turning to cheap supplies once more .
My many years ' experience confirms precisely that .
People obviously have to watch their budget and we need to be sensitive here and not overstep the mark .
Everything we do has a very decisive impact on costs .
Many of our proposed amendments refer to slot widths .
We almost make out that we are experts here .
I think others are far better placed to judge .
Mr President , I think that you know everything there is to know about pig production in Bavaria .
You know what it means when we talk about docking tails , castration , teeth clipping and all these important things .
I should like to close by saying that we need to strike a balance between animal protection , health and environmental aspects .
We also need acceptable transition times for the whole business .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I must first congratulate Mr Busk because he has worked hard , but I must express my disagreement with the content of the amendments that we are going to vote on this morning .
I am probably the only speaker from a southern country , which , moreover , is the largest producer of pigs in the European Union .
Like the rapporteur , I want all the standards to be as uniform as possible in the whole of the European Union , but we need to harmonise standards that can be applied from Lapland to Andalusia , and after that , each country or each region can set the levels as high as it likes .
What is neither fair nor contributes to European integration is trying to rigidly impose the standards , customs or traditions of one country on the rest , or trying to level standards upwards , because this makes us think , on the contrary , of obstacles to trade .
The circumstances surrounding breeding and agricultural activities are very different between the north and south of the European Union , because the temperatures , the hours of sunlight , the species that are bred , the technological situation of the sectors , etc. are all different .
And , as it says in Amendment No 7 , and I quote , " the scientific justification for laying down new conditions is based on the situations obtaining in the northern European countries " .
Indeed , it has not been taken into account that there is not a sufficient supply of materials such as straw in hot countries , because it ferments with the heat and causes infections , nor that the slatted systems for facilities in southern countries act as a regulator .
It is asked that irrigation systems be installed to regulate the body temperature of the pigs , but nothing is said about installing heating in cold areas .
Anyway , it has been shown that in northern countries many more piglets die than in hot countries , simply because it is cold and the piglets cuddle up to the mothers and the mothers squash them .
Neither is anything said about the health aspect of the animals .
And , with regard to the managers and workers on farms , I can assure you that , at least in my country , they are true professionals and take responsibility for training themselves , because therein lies the future of their farm .
I think that it is ridiculous to require in a directive that they study and have a qualification in order to do their job .
Allow me to finish , Mr President , by saying that Spain has many reservations on the proposal from the Swedish Presidency on the system for maintaining sows .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the directive before us centres around the welfare of the animals .
I am delighted that we are reforming animal protection at European level .
It would , of course , have been better , in order to safeguard equal conditions of competition within the Community , if we were to issue regulations , which are directly applicable and valid in the Member States , rather than animal protection directives .
Animal welfare must form part of our basic ethical philosophy .
However , this philosophy should not stop short at the borders of the EU .
Similar demands must be introduced in the forthcoming WTO negotiations and this , Commissioner , is a leitmotiv running through this evening 's debate .
We must be aware of the fact that high animal protection standards in the EU lead to higher production costs .
Our pig breeders then have to complete with imports from third countries which do not apply these animal protection standards and can therefore offer much lower prices .
That is the fact of the matter .
New animal protection standards also mean changes in farming systems .
Farming systems set up recently in accordance with the relevant legislative specifications are to be given a transitional period in which to adapt .
As far new investments in holdings are concerned , I agree with the proposal that the new specifications should be implemented by 2003 .
With a binding , cross-border ban on the castration of pigs , pig breeders and the market could , in my view , adapt perfectly well to the resultant changes .
But we now call on the Commission to supplement the annex to the directive by 2002 , so that male pigs are only castrated by people who have the knowledge and are qualified to do so .
Castration not performed correctly results in constant pain .
Account must be taken of specific details on holdings , such as the size of pens and how pregnant sows are kept .
In addition , account must be taken of the pigs ' natural habits , so that the pigs can keep themselves constantly occupied with food and any other material in which to root .
One thing is for sure : whatever efforts we make to improve how pigs are kept , consumer trends will confirm whether or not we have been successful .
I would like , first , to thank Parliament for the priority given to this issue .
Only two days ago the Commission , together with the Council presidency , had the opportunity to set out its views and commitments in relation to animal welfare .
I very much welcomed the broad support expressed by Parliament .
I would also like to thank Mr Busk , the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy for the support given to this specific issue of the welfare of pigs .
The intensification of pig farming in Europe over the past ten years has led to practices which cause unnecessary suffering and which are increasingly proving to be counterproductive .
I took the advice of the Scientific Committee on Animal Health and Animal Welfare very seriously in preparing the Commission proposal to bring current legislation in line with the scientific evidence .
The Commission proposal prohibits the confinement of sows during most of their pregnancy to individual stalls which severely restrict their freedom of movement .
The use of tethers for sows and gilts will be definitively forbidden .
The proposal also sets out rules to improve the living environment of pigs and piglets in general , setting requirements for living spaces , floor surfaces and proper feeding systems .
I can accept Amendment No 13 because it improves the Commission proposal .
Aware of the importance of the effects of stockmanship on the welfare of pigs , the Commission proposal introduced new requirements for the persons attending to the animals .
Amendments Nos 28 and 30 build on this , calling for certified training for the personnel attending to the pigs , and therefore can be accepted .
Even if I share the aim of Amendments Nos 1 and 26 , they are not acceptable because they request initiatives that the Commission is already taking .
I would make specific reference to the fact that the Commission has proposals in place under a Commission directive , under the comitology procedure , in relation to tail docking , teeth clipping , castration , light requirements and teeth grinding .
All of that will be dealt with under the issue of comitology .
I should like to take the opportunity to draw Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf 's attention to that particular fact , as I know he likes to take an overall view of the legislation that comes before the House .
A second proposal for a Commission directive amending the technical annexes to Directive 91 / 630 has been discussed by the Standing Veterinary Committee during the past months .
These technical amendments regulate noise levels and light access for the animals to food and materials for rooting , timing of weaning of piglets and floor surfaces ; they also prohibit the worst type of routine mutilations .
Amendments Nos 8 , 27 and 33 cannot be accepted because they reduce the possibility for the Commission to take urgent action to adopt technical improvements for the welfare of the animals .
I cannot accept Amendment No 38 because the definition of manipulable materials is already foreseen in the annex and will be discussed further in the Standing Veterinary Committee .
Amendments Nos 2 , 10 and 31 add new aspects to the Commission proposal and introduce further initiatives .
These are welcome , as is Amendment No 5 , that sets a date for the Commission report on further questions related to the welfare of pigs .
Further scientific elements are also necessary to establish new rules for the stocking densities applicable to pigs for fattening .
It is for this reason that Amendment No 11 cannot be accepted .
The Commission is already committed to further analyse the issue from the scientific and economic point of view and to take the necessary steps .
We are all aware that animal welfare carries a price and the measures outlined in this proposal are no exception .
In an industry as competitive as the pig-meat industry , where margins are extremely tight , even small price differentials can have important competitive implications .
The Commission is not blind to these implications .
The proposal is based on extensive consultations with experts from inside and outside the Commission that led the Commission to the conclusion that the additional costs are a price worth paying .
Amendments Nos 36 and 37 are not acceptable because the delay proposed for the application of the new requirements to all holdings is too strict and would significantly raise the costs of conversion .
Data available to the Commission show that the costs would be increased from EUR 0.006 per kilo for a pig carcass to EUR 0.02 if the conversion is carried out with a delay shorter than ten months .
That is 3.3 times the cost .
Amendment No 35 is unacceptable for legal reasons and because we have assessed the costs .
Amendments Nos 3 , 4 , 31 and 34 suggest that EU initiatives be taken on animal welfare only after having considered the global dimension of the agricultural trade .
These amendments cannot be accepted .
I should recall that the Commission is already considering the global dimension of the trade in animals and animal products , including in relation to the World Trade Organisation that a number of you mentioned .
There is a common misconception that putting forward animal welfare issues in this context is a protectionist agenda .
The Commission considers that we have a duty and a responsibility to press for recognition of these standards , both on purely ethical grounds in recognition of the need for the humane treatment of animals , and in recognition of the higher costs which these standards entail for producers and consumers in the EU .
These are legitimate issues , which deserve to be discussed on the international stage .
It is essential to share our knowledge of animal welfare with countries outside the European Union and to create a harmonised approach towards this issue .
I am grateful for the constructive approach given to this dossier by the European Parliament .
In summary , the Commission can accept Amendments Nos 2 , 5 , 10 , 25 , 28 and 30 in full , and Amendments Nos 13 and 31 in part .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
Exceptional financial aid to Kosovo
The next item is the report ( A5-0209 / 2001 ) by Mr Brok , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy , on the proposal for a Council decision [ COM ( 2001 ) 81 - C5-0138 / 2001 - 2001 / 0045 ( CNS ) ] on further exceptional financial assistance to Kosovo .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I am glad that I was able to listen to the last debate because , as you perhaps know , Mr President , I have always taken an interest in institutional matters and I was astounded to learn that the length of a pig 's tail is a comitology issue .
In this respect , I am that much wiser now and wished to thank you for that .
( Laughter , heckling : cynic ! )
Allow me to get to the point , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf !
The European Parliament is prepared to provide exceptional assistance to Kosovo as quickly as possible , which is why we accepted the request for urgent procedure this week .
We want to make our contribution as quickly as possible ; we do not want to throw up any obstacles which prevent peace from being restored in this region .
But , my dear Commissioner , please take our request seriously ; after all the cooperation in this procedure , this will only happen in the long run if we are given the information we need to carry out our parliamentary control function properly , safeguard coherence with other programmes , such as CARDS , and apply a uniform procedure here , in cooperation with UNMIK .
Because we have to understand that one of the main problems in this region is due to the fact that numerous groups are trying - with a great deal of commitment - to provide help , but with very little coordination .
It is an age-old problem which Parliament deplores and which the Commission itself deplores .
That is why , despite all this commitment , many of them are still failing to achieve the positive results which we consider necessary .
Because , if too little progress has been made in Kosovo so far , this also has to do with the fact that Macedonia is being destabilised from within Kosovo , with all that this implies .
Commissioner , we also think that a correlation needs to be established with other donors and how much rapid financial assistance they are willing to provide .
We expressly adopted a proposed amendment in committee which does not attach any conditions to services by other donors , but the correlation needs to be established , so that the European Union is not left standing alone in the front row here and other donors honour their promises accordingly .
The point of this programme is to build up a reasonable administration , to build up a reasonable infrastructure and to build up reasonable , self-perpetuating economic growth , thereby creating the conditions needed to bring about lasting stability and peaceful coexistence between people and ethnic groups .
That is why we look on this assistance as an offer to the people there .
But now the people must show willing and understand that the circle of violence has to be broken .
As Mr Lechner and I specifically discussed today , this political correlation needs to be clearly discussed here .
That is why , Commissioner , I should like once again to stress that we do not want to be a hindrance when it comes to approving funds quickly and that we need to make a joint effort to ensure that these funds are used sensibly and are not wasted and that urgent objectives are in fact achieved .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Brok , I agree with Mr Brok 's report and I fully subscribe to the content behind the form .
We need and we want to give money and we want to give it quickly .
We are more than prepared to do so but certain framework conditions have to be complied with .
One thing is for sure and that is that we demand that the majority in Kosovo give the present minority , i.e. the Serbs , Romas , Sinti , Bosnians etc. a chance to develop and live a proper life in this country .
This will be a particularly decisive question when elections are held in autumn .
How representative will these elections be ?
I am delighted that elections are being held , but how representative will they be if not everyone in the country can take part or those who do later flee ?

Secondly : another decisive point - as Mr Brok mentioned - is that we expect the Albanian majority in Kosovo to distance itself from all the small groups - not the Albanians per se in Macedonia , but the small groups , the KLA or quasi-KLA organisations up to no good in Macedonia . This is absolutely essential because Macedonia has a democracy , unlike in former Yugoslavia , where it is understandable up to a point when people take up arms in order to defend themselves against terrorism and repression .
But Macedonia has a democracy , democratic potential , and the European Union in particular will help the Albanian minority , which is a large minority in Macedonia , to develop .
But we expect the Albanian majority in Kosovo , with all due respect for the justified claims of their brothers and sisters in Macedonia , to distance themselves from terrorism .
Thirdly : I think that , as far as economic questions are concerned , it is important for Kosovo to develop its own economic resources over the course of time .
I refer in particular to the question of the mines in Trebca .
I know that mines are not necessarily a modern economy 's first choice nowadays , but I think that every avenue needs to be explored - even if the conditions of ownership have not been completely clarified - so that they can develop their own resources .
A problem arises in this context and I am delighted that Commissioner Solbes Mira is here and I can specifically ask him .
The problem which arises concerns the changeover to the euro .
What will happen to the de facto currency in Kosovo and in other areas of the Balkans , but especially in Kosovo ? I refer to the Deutschmark .
I read in a report recently that this will cause huge problems and I should like to ask you Commissioner if the Commission has thought about this or made any announcements on this ?
Will the Commission address this and , if so , when , so that some form of solution can be found to this question , which is fundamental to the development of Kosovo ?
Mr President , Mr Ârok is right to say that we are that much wiser now as regards the docking of pigs ' tails .
But we still have not worked out how to cut the Gordian knot around Kosovo , despite numerous attempts .
Ladies and gentlemen , if a neutral observer were to come to every sitting of the European Parliament , he would conclude that we are a monotonous lot .
FYROM , Kosovo , former Yugoslavia .
Our obsession with this subject basically illustrates that we are at an impasse .
We must find a way out of this impasse .
Meeting after meeting , prime ministers , ministers , representatives , visits , but still no results .
Today we are being asked to approve more financial assistance for Kosovo and we must approve it so that we can help the people working there to resolve the problems .
But , you see , every irregularity in the area as a whole emanates from Kosovo .
In other words , maybe we are providing a safe haven there , from which various terrorist groups are able to organise terrorist attacks on the area with impunity ?
We have witnessed the end of the Milosevic era and that is a good thing .
But immediately afterwards we witnessed a development in southern Serbia , a half-hearted attempt at destabilisation in Montenegro , which proper intervention halted .
And then , you see , there was the threat in southern Serbia that the Yugoslav army would return to the border .
Perhaps we should now allow the Yugoslav army to proceed to the border with Kosovo , as provided for by the UN , perhaps this threat can be partly defused ?
I find it really strange that , with thousands of soldiers in Kosovo , it is not possible to close the border , it is not possible to seal the border and prevent FYROM and the area as a whole from being destabilised .
It is most strange .
If one soldier were to sit next to another at five-metre intervals , they would form an unbroken barrier at the border .
So in this sense , it is good that the political efforts being made on all sides are accompanied by grim determination .
Because , you see , any continuation of this instability in the area will lead nowhere .
If some people think that new nation states are going to emerge from this tragedy , they are wrong .
The area is so badly fragmented by minorities , which in some places have the majority vote and in some places have the minority vote , that we shall end up with federations of villages , with federations of towns if we are to be able to say that there is some sort of cohesion .
In other words , if anyone ever dreams about ethnically clean areas , they will look like DNA diagrams .
In this sense , I believe that , apart from financial assistance , we need pressure , pressure and political unity to stabilise and develop the area , and we need political solutions within existing borders .
And that is what we must secure .
First of all , I would like to express my thanks to Mr Brok for his report and to Parliament for its swift reaction to the Commission ' s request and for speeding up the procedures that I hope will enable us to reach a favourable agreement on this issue .
I feel that it is essential to point out that we are not talking here today about part of the action used by the CART programmes and therefore , we are not talking about Kosovo aid projects as part of the European Agency for Reconstruction .
We are talking about macroeconomic aid to Kosovo , which is a different type of measure .
We are talking simply about budget aid for the United Nations administration in the area .
As a result , some of the problems that you have put forward in your proposals , as we will see later , should , in our opinion , be interpreted differently .
The Community made a contribution of this type in 2000 , amounting to EUR 35 million , and the proposal that we adopted in March of this year involves EUR 30 million , which will be allocated to the Kosovo budget in two parts , in order to start up or rather to maintain the operation of UNMIK in the area .
Of course we are responsible for the fourth pillar , and this also means paying particular attention to some of the essential changes to the economic system that are currently being made .
We are not talking about our aid , but about elements associated with the introduction of a market economy .
We have made a great deal of progress , for example , in establishing a banking and payment system , in developing the private sector and in aspects of taxation , including obviously all aspects of public spending .
We are talking about an exceptional type of aid , which is not dedicated to specific projects and is not linked to any other type of commitment .
In this respect it is radically different from the CART aid , which is why it needs a different legal basis , as we explain in our proposal .
With this aid , as in the past , we are going to fund the current expenditure of Kosovo ' s budget , and we are talking about salaries for judges , teachers , doctors , the sale , or rather support of public utilities , and , in short , about the basic costs of running the country .
It is true that there is some investment expenditure associated with public companies , but we are mainly talking about current expenditure .
Of course , in answer to some of Mr Brok ' s questions , first of all a system should be put in place to enable Kosovo to gradually take on its own financial costs .
We agree with this idea and our medium-term objective is for the Kosovo budget to be able to fund itself .
Last year , the funding was 50-50 .
Our aim is that progress should continue to be made and we hope that in 2001 , 75 % of the total budget will be covered by own funds .
Another of your concerns was to know what is happening with the other donors .
There is a reasonable amount of burden-sharing between the donors .
For the 2001 budget there are other donors who are going to contribute , namely the United Kingdom , the Netherlands , Denmark , Turkey , Canada and the World Bank , to a total of EUR 43 million .
Out of these EUR 43 million , EUR 31 million have already been paid out , which is clearly positive and enables us to be reasonably satisfied about the problem of equal distribution of the burden .
Of course we are not considering an additional budgetary allocation .
There are resources to carry out this funding with the proportion of the macroeconomic aid included in budgetary heading B7-548 related to the Balkans .
I would also like to stress that , when we implement this assistance , we not only insist on establishing a stable economic framework , but also on policies being created that are aimed at achieving economic stability .
Along with the other donors we are continuing with the necessary commitments in order to pay out these amounts , as the Kosovo authorities have to comply with the obligations and commitments made .
With regard to the amendments that have been put forward , I would like to make a few comments that could help the debate .
First of all , we can quite readily accept some of the amendments .
I am referring to Amendments Nos 1 , 3 , 6 and 9 .
We feel that there are other amendments that are not justified , not because we disagree with them in principle , but because they are not necessary : for example , Amendments Nos 4 and 5 , which refer to the distribution of the burden .
This is clearly covered in Recital 9 , which says that " the provision of external budgetary support , fairly shared among donors , is essential to help cover the residual financing needs " .
Nor do we consider Amendment No 10 to be necessary , because it states that the aid must clearly focus on the budget .
The aid is purely budgetary , and it is not therefore necessary to highlight a point that we feel should be taken for granted .
There is a series of amendments which , in my opinion , are mistaken in their understanding of the nature of macroeconomic aid : these are Amendments Nos 2 , 8 and 13 , which refer to linking this type of macroeconomic aid with the CART programme , and they therefore ask for the same conditions as for the CART projects .
However , we are not talking about CART , but about something completely different .
This is not one of my colleague Chris Patten ' s responsibilities . I myself have direct sole and exclusive responsibility for the budget within the area of macroeconomic aid .
Therefore , we think that these amendments should not be included , because they would cause some confusion .
There is a series of amendments regarding deadlines , procedures and monitoring , in particular Amendments Nos 7 , 11 and 14 .
I would like to comment on each of them .
A problem about which Mr Brok is particularly concerned is that of information .
Obviously we are prepared to provide all the necessary information .
The problem arises if this information has to be drawn up in the context of other aid , in accordance with the progress of the reform .
We are currently providing information on macroeconomic aid and we are prepared to do so and include this aid with other macroeconomic aid , providing all the necessary information so that Parliament can effectively carry out its monitoring work .
Amendment No 11 considers the possibility of creating a group within the Council , of a political nature , to undertake consultations on the implementation of this aid .
I stress this again , we are talking about a different type of aid , and we think that the systems already in place for macroeconomic aid should be applied , and not systems for other types of measure .
With regard to the problem indicated in Amendment No 14 , the need for the conditions of economic policy to be fulfilled and for a link to be established with Amendment No 4 and for the funds to be used for this type of aid , we do not think that this corresponds to the nature of this measure .
We are talking here about assistance , as I was saying , for UNMIK ' s budget , with very specific objectives .
It is true that we should also use these objectives in order to improve the economic situation and the market economy in Kosovo , but there are not conditions as with other types of aid .
I would like to make a comment on two other amendments that I think are of interest : Amendment No 12 asks for two things .
Firstly , for the aid to be implemented within a maximum of six weeks .
We can undertake to implement it as soon as possible .
We think that to aim to pay out the assistance in the middle of August , at a time when we all know the difficulties with budgetary procedures , is at best a risky idea .
For this reason we do not think that this request is correct .
With regard to the possibility of passing on the memorandum of understanding that is made between UNMIK and the Commission , I must point out that this memorandum contains some sensitive information and therefore we think that a more efficient system is for this information to be given to the chairmen of the various committees , but under no circumstances for the memorandum of understanding to be sent out .
Lastly , the Commission could accept Amendment No 14 if it were worded differently .
That is , if the report were presented in September of the previous year , as these reports are prepared for June and if we could provide the information by September , but not before .
The Commission accepts the spirit of the request , but we think that its wording needs to be improved in order to prevent practical problems .
A final comment on Mr Swoboda ' s question on the use of the euro in the Kosovo area .
I would remind you that , as you know , this was a unilateral decision taken by the Kosovo authorities .
The German Central Bank is perfectly aware of this information and of this situation , and the Kosovo bank and payment authority , the German Central Bank and the Austrian Central Bank are currently in contact in order to seek a solution to the problem .
I can therefore inform you that these talks are now taking place and I hope that they will achieve a favourable result so that the change will pose as few problems as possible .
The Commission is following this matter with the greatest interest , although it is more directly the responsibility of the European Central Bank and the national central banks than of the Commission .
Thank you , Commissioner Solbes Mira .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 11.30 p.m. )
Approval of the Minutes of the previous sitting
The Minutes of yesterday ' s sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , I would like to return to a matter which I am recorded as having raised in yesterday 's minutes .
Question Time to the Commission yesterday was truncated to a single hour , during which only five questions were answered .
One of the most important aspects of the structure of the Union is the real accountability of Commissioners before this Parliament , which must relate to questions of relative detail that can be raised at Question Time , not just to issues of general policy .
It will be disastrous for the Union if we carry on this practice of truncating Question Time and having very few questions dealt with properly .
One possibility suggested to me is that we might at least contemplate having a weekly Question Time in Brussels , as well as in Strasbourg , so as to provide for thorough questioning of the Commission on points which our constituents wish us to raise with them .
I am glad to see Mr Provan here today , because this kind of question falls within his remit as a Member of Parliament 's Bureau .
I put it to Members that it is vital that we question the Commission effectively .
We are not doing this at the moment .
We are taking note of your comment and it will be duly considered .
Mr Andrews has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , I refer to an administrative change that has been made in Parliament , which comes to me as news .
Apparently , a contract has been signed by a new travel agency to replace Wagonlit .
Since I came to this House in 1984 , Wagonlit has provided an excellent service .
Now we have a new travel agency coming in to takeover , maybe to save the Community a few pounds .
Travel for Members of this House is difficult enough without bringing in new agencies , without consulting Members .
Some of the best travel agents who have served the Members of this House are going to leave .
There should be more consultation when administrative changes of this kind are made .
I think it is not a Parliament decision but a Commission decision .
It is yet another undermining of the services to which Members are entitled .
I hope the President will inform us of the reasons for the allocation of these contracts and the savings made .
I have absolutely no interest other than the convenience of Members .
( The President cut the speaker off )
We are taking note of your concern and the Bureau of Parliament will consider the matter .
Mr Fitzsimons has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , I wish to speak briefly on another point of order in relation to the Minutes .
Much of the debate here yesterday focused on the Irish people 's decision in relation to the Nice Treaty .
I merely wish to say on this point of order that the Irish people took a democratic decision that we all accept .
The Irish people believe in the European Union and in enlargement , and will deal with these issues in its own time and in its own way .
My real point of order is this : I strongly deplore the fact that , while Mr Le Pen was speaking in this Chamber , the French National Front waved the Irish flag beside him .
I can assure the Members of this House that in doing so , the French National Front was abusing the Irish flag and everything it stands for .
Mr President , on a point of order .
Like Mr Andrews , I , too , feel a great deal of concern at the way this matter of the travel office has been handled .
I am not sure that the administration has actually raised it with the College of Quaestors , which would be the correct body to refer the matter to .
It is really for them to look after Members ' interests .

As far as Mr MacCormick is concerned , I am glad to see Mr Corbett sitting here because it is the Committee on Constitutional Affairs that is now looking at this matter , after the Bureau decided to refer it to them .
I think he has the matter well in hand .
Mr President , I would like to raise two different points .
First of all , I would like to point out that , with regard to the very legitimate question about the lack of time for Question Time , we cannot reduce the length of the Strasbourg sessions and then worry about the lack of time we have in which to deal with problems and propose to finish things off by overloading the Brussels agenda .
The terms of the Treaty make it quite clear . The Brussels sessions are intended to complement the Strasbourg sessions and we cannot , therefore , make them more intense , when we are not fully using the time that we have at the part-sessions .
This must be reiterated , otherwise we really do face the prospect of having sessions that are utterly disorganised .
Mr President , I have a second brief comment - completely unrelated to the first - which is to do with the Minutes that you approved with your customary diligence and your usual skill .
I would simply like to say , and I think that this can be added , as I made this comment earlier , that I abstained from voting on the resolution on Gothenburg - I did not vote in favour .
Thank you , Mr Bourlanges .
The correction that you have pointed out to us will be made .
Mrs Klamt has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , I wish to raise a point about yet another problem with the travel office in Strasbourg .
The administration of the European Parliament stipulates in the contract that only vehicles without taxi signs may be used .
This appears to contravene French legislation .
The French Ministry of the Interior stated in a letter back in 1998 that special rules apply in Strasbourg .
For about the last two months , drivers working for the European Parliament have been repeatedly stopped and checked by the police , as was the case on Monday at Strasbourg Airport , while Members of Parliament were sitting on the plane .
If we demand that they get an additional vehicle for the travel office just for the week of the part-session - which is now only four days long - then it would seem to me that we have overstepped the mark and are guilty of harassment .
I should therefore like to urge you , Mr President , to make representations to the French Ministry of the Interior on the need for a permanent , practicable regulation for the drivers .
If , in addition to poor flight connections to and from Strasbourg , further restrictions are imposed on Members via the travel office , Strasbourg will become an even less attractive location .
Thank you , Mrs Klamt .
We will deal with the matter .
Mr Corbett has the floor for a point of order .
Mr President , what Mr Bourlanges said just now about the lack of time in Strasbourg is somewhat exaggerated .
If you look at yesterday 's minutes , you will see that under Item 5 it says that ' the sitting was suspended at 11.30 awaiting voting time and resumed at 12.00 ' .
So we had half an hour to spare .
That time could have been used more profitably in this plenary session .
Hence it is totally incorrect to state that the problem with Question Time to the Commission stemmed from our not having sufficient time because we no longer sit on Fridays .
Thank you very much , Mr Corbett .
Structural measures
Mr President , the two reports that I am presenting affect seven regulations , the reform of which we are debating , and which refer to the outermost regions of the European Union , that is , Guadeloupe , Martinique , Réunion and Guyana , part of France , the Azores and Madeira , part of Portugal ; and the Canary Islands , part of Spain .
Distance , internal dispersion and climate have been significant obstacles to their development .
Distance and transport costs for imports and exports , and the small size of these territories have prevented them from attracting and benefiting from significant investment .
Declaring its duty of Community solidarity in responding to the needs of these outermost regions , between 1989 and 1991 the European Community adopted some other action programmes due to their remote and island nature , called the POSEIs .
The aim was to promote sustainable development and strengthen job-creating production sectors . This was done using the Structural Funds and by favourably adjusting common policies , particularly the CAP .
Special aid was thus established for particular local products and the supply of raw materials was improved through specific supply arrangements included in the respective POSEIs .
The favourable measures established by the Community have been combined with very significant efforts on the part of the Member States directly concerned : France , Portugal and Spain , and by the regional and local administrations .
Considerable progress has therefore been made , but despite this , there are still inadequacies , which is why we need to maintain the measures , even improving the mechanisms to seek even more positive results .
In any case , in order to continue to make progress in integrating these regions into the European area and in order to deal with phenomena that have appeared recently with the growing process of globalisation , we need to have a sounder legal basis and strengthen the regulations that have been operating up until now .
We have been working on this for months , also relying on the fact that in Amsterdam , the recognition of the specific nature of the outermost regions and the commitment to support them in order to overcome their problems was introduced into the Treaties in Article 299 .
The reform plan that was presented to us was moving in the right direction , but it fell short in its proposals .
For example , it did not propose the essential change to the legal basis in order to refer to the new text of the Treaties that I have just mentioned , but it was certainly a good starting point for our Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to work on . The committee had better cooperation from the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market , the latter in order to bring about the change in the legal basis .
We also listened to the authorities and social sectors of the territories that we are dealing with and we thus arrived at a series of amendments that were debated and adopted in the committee proceedings .
As well as the amendment on updating the legal basis , there are amendments that respond to joint demands from the different regions and others that are specific to each of them .
Among the joint ones it is worth mentioning the possibility of these regions being able to export products produced with raw materials introduced to the islands under the SSAs with rights to refunds , the need to increase support for the livestock breeding sector and to boost agricultural and food SMEs .
The amendments on specific sensitive products from each region concern tomatoes in the Canary Islands , livestock , milk products and the sugar industry in the Azores and the wicker industry in Madeira , and support for rice in some of the French territories .
With these amendments we are expressing our will to overcome once and for all the problems of our outermost regions .
They are not about subsidising economic and social backwardness in these territories , but about acting decisively to permanently overcome this backwardness and thus to offer those who live there living conditions and prospects for the future that are comparable to those of the rest of the citizens of the European Union .
Besides , the costs of the improvements that we are proposing are certainly insignificant in the context of the budgetary proportions that the Union deals with .
I will finish by thanking the officials of our Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their dedication and professional attitude , and also by expressing my thanks to the Commission and the Council , who have supported us by showing interest and understanding .
If , as I hope , Parliament adopts what the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is submitting for its opinion , it will be the Council of the Union that will have the responsibility of not disappointing our expectations , which are in fact those of the people of the Canary Islands , Madeira , the Azores , Martinique , Guadeloupe , Réunion and Guyana .
Please bear in mind that it is in measures such as this that the confidence of citizens in the activity of the European Union is at stake , as is , in short , the credibility of our project .
Mr President , my report also relates to the implementation in the fisheries sector of Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which concerns the EU ' s ultra peripheral regions .
The Treaty acknowledged the specific nature of these regions , and also defined them according to both their handicaps and the difficulties they face , which are due to their remoteness , their insularity , often because of their difficult topography and climate , and even occasionally their economic dependence .
Since the Treaty was signed , it has enabled the policies affected to be legitimately adjusted whilst safeguarding the coherence of the Community legal system .
In the fisheries sector , three Member States are affected ; Spain , Portugal and France .
Seven regions are also affected and these are the Azores , Madeira , the Canary Islands , Guadeloupe , French Guiana , Martinique and Réunion .
Many special measures are therefore permitted , namely , the Structural Funds , for both fishing and regional policy .
This adjustment has , of course , been approved in the report that I am presenting . Some amendments have also been tabled , which I would like to take you through briefly .
I tabled one in particular , which was adopted by the Committee on Fisheries .
This is Amendment No 5 , which concerns the FIFG intervention level , the financial instrument , in the ultra peripheral regions , which is very important for those involved , in other words , the fishermen .
The Commission is proposing to increase the Community contribution for these regions , which is a positive step , up to a maximum of 85 % , with the exception of fleet renewal and modernisation of fishing vessels and pilot projects , where the contributions remain exactly the same as in the previous regulation and are therefore unchanged .
My amendment and the amendment tabled by the Committee on Fisheries are therefore based on this ' exception ' .
Basing its argument on the current state of stocks and the need to protect them , as well as the obligation to maintain equivalent fleet capacity , the Commission is proposing that neither should the rate of Community assistance be raised nor the rate of private self-financing reduced for fleet renewal and modernisation .
This position does not appear to point in the right direction and does not fulfil the Treaty objectives designed to help the economies of the ultra peripheral regions catch up with the remainder of the EU .
We should , therefore , and this is what is being proposed to you , adjust the rates in Group 2 .
This would have a positive impact on the development of inshore fishing and the improved processing of catches and would also meet the expectations of those working in the sector .
Moreover , even though there may be over-capacity in more central areas , this is not the case in all the ultra peripheral regions , or at any rate , it is much less certain .
Lastly , Parliament has stressed the need to improve safety on board vessels . Vessel renewal and modernisation in the ultra peripheral regions is a key element in providing fishermen with proper working conditions .
This amendment proposes , therefore , to increase the A rate or the proportion of the European Union to 50 % and the C rate or the proportion of other national or regional contributions to 40 % .
In my view , this amendment to the report is essential .
There is a second amendment , Amendment No 6 by Mrs McKenna , which does not present any problems .
It states in the report that these adjustments and changes must not be used to maintain the system of flags of convenience ; we must , therefore , include a sentence in this report which refers to some kind of legal precautionary principle in this matter .
Lastly , there are Amendments Nos 7 and 8 , which raise the issue of non-retroactivity .
This issue was raised at the meeting of the Committee on Fisheries .
The Commission was , moreover , not very specific , and was even hesitant , not to mention the fact that it did not provide an answer in its reply .
The amendment is still on the agenda , since it was re-tabled .
The opinions of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development are positive .
At the beginning , the Committee on Fisheries did not deliver a favourable opinion , at least not wholly favourable , and took the view that this principle of non-retroactivity was a fundamental principle of Community legislation .
Given that the two other committees delivered a favourable opinion , however , and that the European Commission was not very specific , I propose to deliver a favourable opinion .
If this turns out to be absolutely impossible from a legal perspective , the law will settle the affair .
If it is possible , we must do so , and if we do , we will have voted in favour of a very good cause .
Mr President , as I think that you all already know , the negotiations to renew the fisheries agreement with Morocco came to an end without that renewal having taken place .
You will also be aware that the negotiations went on for an extraordinarily long time , 15 months , which placed the Community fleet in a truly unprecedented position , stopping activity for a period that had not been foreseen by Community legislation .
Article 16 of the FIFG Regulation , in letter b ) of Paragraph 1 , allows the temporary inactivity of vessels to be funded if a fisheries agreement is not renewed for 6 months , which may be extended for 6 more months , following the presentation of a conversion plan .
This period and the extension period ended on 31 December , while we were still in the middle of negotiations with Morocco .
The Commission realised then that shipowners and crews could not be left unprotected while the negotiations continued , which is why the proposal for a Regulation that is being voted on today was presented in order to change the legal basis of the FIFG Regulation with two objectives : on the one hand , enabling the aid to be extended for 6 more months , until 30 June , and on the other hand , authorising the Member States concerned to exceed the threshold of 4 % of the FIFG budget that they may use for aid due to the inactivity of the fleet .
The period had , obviously due to the extraordinary nature of the situation , had already been long exceeded .
It was therefore a totally reasonable proposal .
However , when the report that we are debating was practically finished , the Council of Ministers in April considered the negotiations to be completed , and in May the Commission had still not presented its proposal for measures that would consider the conversion plan .
We know that the Commission intends to put forward a proposal for a Regulation in this respect at the next Council of Fisheries Ministers on 18 June , but for technical reasons it will not be able to be adopted until 3 July , which will cause a considerable delay in the timetable , given that consultation by the European Parliament is also provided for .
The shipowners will also have to be able to closely consider the options available to them , according to the type of vessel that they have , as choosing between scrapping their vessel , locating it in another fishing ground or forming a joint venture with a foreign partner are business decisions that cannot be taken lightly .
On the other hand , the workers concerned will probably have to wait even longer , as they will be dependent on the decisions of their companies in order to know , for example , whether they are going to leave a fishing ground in order to fish in another or if they are simply going to be unemployed , in which case the formula chosen will be scrapping .
It is obvious that these decisions cannot be taken before 30 June , when the formulae that will ultimately be offered to them are still not known now .
Therefore , before this report was voted on in committee , I introduced an amendment to change the dates of the Commission proposal and put them back from 30 June to 31 December .
The Committee on Fisheries understood the situation perfectly and , also taking into account that extending the period does not carry financial consequences for the Community budget , as the aid will continue to come from the FIFG of the Member States concerned , it decided to unanimously support the amended content of the report .
I therefore hope that in the light of the reasons that I have given and following the unquestionable support of the Committee on Fisheries , this plenary will be able to also adopt the text that is being voted on today .

Meanwhile , I would not like to finish without being able to congratulate the two rapporteurs and especially , from my point of view , for the Committee on Fisheries , Mr Poignant , and I assure him that our group will support his report .
I would like to highlight Amendment No 5 to that report , because I think that it fits in much better with Article 29 , Paragraph 4 of Regulation ( EC ) No 1260 / 1999 , which allows a maximum contribution of 50 % to SMEs in the outermost regions .
We should not forget that measures to modernise vessels tend to be what makes the difference between a competitive business and a business in difficulties , as well as ensuring that its workers have a more decent employment .
Precisely for this reason , they should be the last public investments that should disappear or stop being well provided for financially .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and also on behalf of the Liberal Group , I would like to point out that the consultation that has been made in the European Parliament on the individual application of Community provisions in various areas to the outermost regions of the European Union , such as the agricultural measures of the POSEI and the structural measures in agriculture and fisheries , fulfils the procedure laid down in the legal basis that is in Article 299 , Paragraph 2 that was mentioned of the Treaty establishing the European Communities , modified in Amsterdam .
Secondly , I would like to point out once again that the majority of the outermost regions , which include the group of islands from which I come , the Canary Islands , are islands and are remote from the Community area and from sources of supply to the international markets of essential products for consumption and processing .
I would also like to say that , from a political point of view , these proposals , although they come late , come at an interesting time , due to the new context in which we find ourselves as part of globalisation , expansion and new agricultural agreements with third countries .
They recognise positive aspects , such as regional diversity and the individual socio-economic and geographical characteristics of the outermost regions .
They aim to fulfil the objective of economic and social cohesion , they are balanced for each and every one of the regions affected and implicitly recognise the rights of the citizens of the European Union within the financial neutrality recommended by the Commission .
In some cases we have incorporated significant changes , such as the inclusion of Canarian tomatoes in the assistance under the agricultural POSEICAN programme , and the review of some products initially included in the SSA ( Specific Supply Arrangements ) , and improvements in aid for the agricultural and livestock sectors of the French Overseas Departments , Madeira and the Azores .
All these things are aimed at increasing the competitiveness of the outermost regions , their businesses and employment , and at respect for the environment and recognising the strategic nature of the agricultural sector .
And most importantly , at European integration , so that from now on we will be able to talk about the remote dimension of the European Union .
For these reasons we congratulate the rapporteurs on their work , in particular Mr Martínez Martínez for his receptiveness , and we ask the Members and all the parliamentary groups to support these reports .
It will undoubtedly bring about a greater sense of European integration for the citizens concerned , and in our case , when we go back to the Islands we will be able to say ' mission accomplished . '
Finally , I must thank the authorities of the regional governments and of the Member States concerned : France , Spain and Portugal , as well as the Commission and the Swedish Presidency , for their interest in moving forward this package of regulations for the outermost regions , which are an example of solidarity between the peoples of the European Union .
I would also like to say on a personal level that I will not vote on the regulations referred to in Mr Martínez Martínez ' s report that affect the Canary Islands , as I have agricultural interests on the Islands .
Mr President , Commissioner , I support the reports by Miguel Angel Martínez Martínez and I consider it essential that the Council should accept the proposals made in them .
I shall remind you of some aspects of the opinion approved in the Committee on Budgets :
1 - The revision of the POSEI programmes must comply with the Community ' s pledges to increase support to the outermost regions ;
2 - As the Commission proposals are based on the principle of budgetary neutrality , they reduce the spending level for the programmes in comparison with the early 1990s , when they were launched , which is unacceptable ;
3 - The current revision must not threaten the livelihood of farmers operating under existing regulations .
Community support must be strengthened and not reduced ;
4 - New agri-environmental measures and measures for the development and adaptation of rural areas must be launched , and , lastly , the Commission should present new proposals if any of the measures prove to be insufficient or expire before 2006 .
Mr President , the extension of the specific programmes of support for agriculture in the outermost regions is a measure of basic need .
Distant as they are from the major markets , their normally small-scale agriculture is a mainstay of their economies and would be unable to survive without support in an increasingly globalised market .
The Commission proposal , however , errs on the side of meagreness , confining itself most of the time to prolonging the status quo , without addressing new market trends and the increasing difficulty for these regions to compete on international markets ever since the World Trade Organisation agreement was signed in 1999 .
Despite this situation and the insufficiency of the Commission proposal , I should like to lay great emphasis on the role played by the rapporteur , Mr Miguel Angel Martínez Martínez , who managed to work with all those involved in an atmosphere in which good dialogue could lead to compromise solutions , with a result that clearly improves on the Commission proposal .
In this context I should like to highlight some of the changes taken up by the rapporteur and approved by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development concerning the regions that I know best , the Azores and Madeira .
For instance : the eligibility of traditional varieties for the purposes of vineyard restructuring , including premiums for the grubbing-up of those varieties ; maintenance of the supplement to the special premium for the fattening of bovine animals , so as to encourage farmers who have no more milk quota to change over to beef and ensure that the added value of fattening does not leave the region in the form of very young cattle for export ; the flexibility of granting aid for the marketing of plants and flowers without the need to draw up annual contracts with producers ' organisations , which would be impossible in view of the inadequate organisation of agriculture in these regions ; the extension of aid to the marketing of potatoes for human consumption ; the increase in production rights and premiums for strategic productions , such as suckler cows , bovine animals for fattening , or sugar beet ; improvement of the special supply arrangement with the inclusion of certain raw materials essential for the competitiveness of the compound feedingstuff production sector and consequently for the livestock sector .
In conclusion , Parliament has done its job , having made a real effort to hold a dialogue both among Members themselves and between Members and those politically responsible for the outermost regions of the European Union .
We now hope that the Council will also do its job by accepting the measures approved by the Committee on Agriculture and this Parliament .
In accordance with this analysis , the European People ' s Party will vote in favour of this proposal , and I should like once again on behalf of my group to express our deepest thanks to the rapporteur for the great diligence and openness with which he drew up this report .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although the outermost regions were fully acknowledged in Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam , we are still awaiting the first far-reaching measures .
This is why I welcome today ' s debate and the structural and agricultural packages proposed by the Commission , because they undeniably seek to take better account of the realities of the overseas territories .
I would also like to congratulate the rapporteurs and particularly Mr Martínez Martínez and Mr Poignant on their excellent work .
Overall , the Commission ' s proposals can be considered as a step in the right direction and they are a satisfactory response to local needs .
First of all , on the structural measures , we can only welcome the alignment of intervention levels to 85 % for all outermost regions .
In practice , this means that we are giving the same opportunities to people who have to deal with basically identical constraints .
On the agricultural measures , since I am from Réunion , I welcome the measures to assist traditional farming and , in particular , transport aid for sugar cane , which our farmers have long been waiting for .
I have a few comments , however , to make with regard to some of the points .
First of all , I deplore the fact that the retroactivity of the measures has not been explicitly worded and I welcome the fact that many of Parliament ' s amendments forcefully emphasise the importance of this point for all types of farming , as we must think of the thousands of farmers who are waiting for these measures .
Next , I am sorry that the Commission did not automatically retain Article 299 ( 2 ) as a legal basis , which , in my view , runs absolutely counter to the spirit advocated by the Heads of State and Government .
I therefore welcome the fact that this omission was partially restored by the Council , because by limiting the scope of this article , we are undermining the very concept of what outermost regions are .
Lastly , I would like to end with a wish . I would like the reforms that have been proposed here to lay solid foundations for an even more ambitious policy for our regions , so that equal opportunities and the acceptance of differences become a reality for all the citizens of the European Union .
Mr President , I wish to speak on the Poignant report .
In committee we tabled an amendment on the increasing problem of fishing vessels flying flags of convenience , which was very narrowly defeated .
More and more unscrupulous shipowners are transferring their vessels to countries such as Belize , Honduras or St Vincent and the Grenadines .
They know perfectly well that these countries will turn a blind eye to whatever these ships do : how they fish and what they catch .
Commissioner Fischler has quite rightly referred to this problem as the ' scourge of the oceans ' .
At present , there is nothing to prevent a European shipowner from exporting his ship to one of these countries , receiving a very healthy subsidy of EUR 1 million or more and still keeping his ship .
We introduced an amendment to try and close this huge loophole , using criteria adopted by international fisheries management organisations .
I am glad to hear that the rapporteur supports our amendment , because it is scandalous that this loophole still exists .
I do not see how anyone in this House could actually support the use of EU funds - EU taxpayers ' money , that is - to allow shipowners to escape controls and then fish in competition with law-abiding shipowners .
I urge everyone here today to support this amendment .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , the difficulties specific to the outermost regions are well known : distance , fragmentation and small markets , all of which raise costs , especially transport costs , and hinder their development .
Now , based on Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which recognises the specific character of these regions and the need to adopt appropriate Community measures , it is possible to take measures aimed at encouraging sustainable development and enhancing the productive sectors that generate employment .
It is therefore important to use this legal base , regardless of any reference to articles of the CAP , the Structural Funds or other Community policies .
This is the context in which we must analyse the Commission ' s proposals , which may be positive but fall far short of the needs of these outermost regions , as I have been able to confirm directly with bodies in Madeira and the Azores .
Hence the importance of the work done by the rapporteur , Mr Martínez Martínez , whom I congratulate on the report he has drawn up .
In general , the report responds to the questions that the Commission has not addressed sufficiently but which are important for those regions .
With regard to the first package of proposals , which aims at revision in the sense of increasing the rates of assistance under the Structural Funds , it is important to make a greater effort by slightly increasing the Community co-funding percentages , particularly as regards agri-environmental measures and public aid to the productive sector , given that these regions are among the poorest in the European Union and their production , processing and marketing structures need to be strengthened .
In relation to the second package of proposals , which aims at reviewing the machinery for aid to agricultural production in these regions , so that support for agriculture may have a positive effect on farmers ' incomes and on lower prices for the consumer , the almost one hundred proposals contained in the report are important .
Those that deserve special mention , for their importance to the Portuguese outermost regions of the Azores and Madeira , are the need to strengthen the specific support for the restructuring of vineyards and vine growing , potato production and marketing , the livestock sector , not forgetting the matter of milk quotas , and the measures for ensuring the viability of sugar refining in the Azores , as well as increased support for tea , in addition to specific changes for Madeira wines and support for wicker production .
I therefore hope that the Commission and the Council will accept the proposals contained in the reports being debated jointly , also including the area of fisheries .
Mr President , the peripheral regions of the European Union are in a vulnerable situation .
After the collapse of negotiations with Morocco , which behaved in an incomprehensible way , it looks as if a portion of the fishing fleet will have to be rationalised .
In its Green Paper , the Commission announced that approximately forty per cent of the European fishing fleet will have to be scrapped if we still want to catch fish in European waters in ten to twenty years ' time .
Rapporteur Poignant opposes the notion that peripheral regions should also give up fleet capacity .
Although I can fully understand his concern for the working population , such concern is short-sighted .
In the future we cannot continue supplementing poor catches with contributions from the Structural Fund .
One way or another fleet capacity must be reduced .
As regards that reduction of the fleet I should like suggest an idea to Mr Poignant : that is , days at sea .
The Dutch fleet has a capacity that is nominally too large for the allotted fishing area .
However , by restricting the number of days that ships may be at sea , the impact of total fleet capacity on fish stocks is reduced .
In this way the capacity of the fleet at sea on a particular day is within the norms laid down .
Such a scheme makes it possible to modernise and improve the safety level of the fleet .
If we are unwilling to limit the catching capacity of the fleet , nature will do it for us .
In the peripheral regions too , we must treat the riches of the sea that we have been given sensibly .
Mr President , the report on agricultural products from the overseas territories does not appear , on occasion , to take into account the rules of globalisation and free trade , which are , moreover , advocated by the European Union .
Although it makes some good proposals , such as the increase in government funding for investment in agricultural holdings , this report comes up against some sizeable obstacles .
The first of these is the WTO and its declared ambition to reduce subsidies and direct funding for farming .
We would thus sacrifice bananas from the West Indies and the ACP countries , in order to please the American multinationals , with the introduction of a solely tariff-based system in 2006 .
The second obstacle is the enlargement of the European Union , which will deprive the overseas territories of a proportion of the Structural Funds .
The third obstacle is the bilateral and multilateral trade agreements that undermine the principle of Community preference and the fourth obstacle is tax harmonisation , which endangers dock dues and the advantages associated with the remoteness of these regions .
There are measures , however , for saving agricultural crops in the overseas territories , which are not mentioned in the report . These include bringing back Community preference , the strict application of safeguard clauses , favouring high-quality produce through designations of origin , guaranteeing tax advantages associated with the insular nature and remoteness of these regions , the application of export refunds for processed products and the checking of imported goods to avoid fraud and corruption .
Only at this price and under these conditions are we able to protect our traditional tropical products .
Mr President , it is nice to see the Commission respond in a positive manner to the desire of Member States to introduce flexibility into the management of the Structural Funds , from which the outermost regions can benefit in order to take account of their specific handicap .
Increasing the existing ceilings for the contribution of some Community funding is , therefore , a positive step .
On the other hand , some of the restrictions introduced by the Commission must be removed .
It is , therefore , imperative that the increase of the FIFG level be applied to shipbuilding activities , which are essential .
In the same way , in the field of co-financing , it is crucial not to impose the same strict rules on the outermost regions as on the continental territory of the European Union .
The effect of these provisions is extremely disadvantageous , particularly for the communities of the overseas territories on account of their recurrent budgetary difficulties .
Although the rule of co-financing can be retained , it certainly must be modified .
It seems to be all the more necessary to make these rules more flexible because the threats to the economic systems of the outermost regions and to the overseas territories are multiplying .
Some types of funding can be threatened overnight , as in the case of the banana crisis with the United States .
With the regional integration of the Caribbean islands into the Americas ' free trade area looming in 2005 , the overseas territories will have to contend with unfair competition from their neighbours .
Mr Lamy ' s ' Everything but Arms ' initiative will destabilise rice , sugar and banana production .
Since this provision is non-reciprocal , it will lead to unfairness .
The overseas territories will therefore have to import goods duty-free from the neighbouring LDCs , whereas the reverse will not be possible .
The LDC countries in the Caribbean will be able to ban European exports from the overseas territories using the negative list system .
It is therefore essential that structural aid granted to the outermost regions , even if not in itself sufficient , should benefit from special rules in order to allow European countries to make up , at least partially , for their structural handicap and the threats that they will face in the coming years .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as the chairman of the Committee on Fisheries of this Parliament , I would like to speak briefly in this debate to highlight the great importance of structural policy in the fisheries sector and the need for it to be flexible in order to be adapted to specific situations , which is demonstrated today in this debate .

I would like to start by congratulating all the rapporteurs , including those who are not part of the Committee on Fisheries , such as Mr Martínez Martínez , to whom I extend the congratulations , but I would like to focus , as is logical , on those who belong to our committee , Mr Poignant and Mrs Fraga , for the great skill of the work that they have presented to this Parliamentary sitting and for the strong support that they have achieved in our Committee on Fisheries .
In the case of the report by my colleague Mr Poignant , we must welcome the inclusion of Article 299 , item 2 , of the Treaty as a legal basis and as an essential starting point for a new concept of the true dimension of the concept of outermost regions and for adjusting the ceilings for assistance .
Our committee recently visited the island of Réunion on the initiative of our colleague Margie Sudre and I think that we all came back convinced of the need to help with generous solidarity to solve or at least to alleviate the specific and difficult problems that these very remote European territories have .
In the case of the report by our colleague Mrs Fraga , we should also thank our committee for its unanimous solidarity in supporting the initiative to extend assistance to 31 December of this year for a specific sector that is so affected by the failure to renew the fisheries agreement with Morocco .
The timetable for the European Union to approve a specific plan for those affected by this lack of agreement means that this extension is needed as a margin in order to carry out the plan without worsening the already very heavy impact that there has been .
I only hope that both the Commission and the Council will take note of the unanimous position of the European Parliament .
Mr President , the European fisheries sector is , ladies and gentlemen , going through an upheaval .
These are difficult times for fisheries and here today , as proof of this , we are debating the extension of FIFG aid for the fleet that was fishing on the Canaries and Saharan Bank until a conversion plan is implemented , as the rapporteur of this report , Mrs Fraga Estévez , has explained to us .
The European media are already saying that the Commission plans to allocate EUR 142 million , charged to the flexibility instrument , to this plan , but I , like the sector itself , have too many doubts about this , which I would like Mr Fischler to clear up for me .
Does using the flexibility instrument not limit aid to just one budgetary year , while the proposal from the Spanish government , which was for multi-annual assistance , would be much more appropriate for dealing with these people who have been removed from the fishing ground where they habitually fished ?
The Spanish government justified its plan and quantified it at EUR 540 million , 240 from the FIFG and 300 of additional funding .
Can the Commissioner explain to me why this is not being done ?
Commissioner , as you were at the Council meeting in Nice , could you explain to me whether what was agreed there on the conversion plan for this fleet included aid for the economic regeneration of the areas affected or whether it was purely limited to aid for scrapping , aid for shipowners and fishermen ?
The sector affected , which is a large sector , has more questions than answers about its future .
What is going to happen , for example , with the FIFG Regulation , which establishes that the aid that shipowners receive for temporary inactivity cannot be combined with subsidies for scrapping and that therefore , if they want subsidies for scrapping , they are going to have to return the aid for inactivity that they have already received ?
The sector wants to know whether this conversion plan for the fleet is going to be debated at the Council of Ministers on 18 June , whether the aid is going to be extended equally , as this report proposes , to shipowners and workers , or if it is only going to be for the latter , whether you have received the conversion plans from the governments concerned , the Spanish and Portuguese governments , and when are you , Commissioner , going to present your proposal to the European Parliament and the Council ?
Finally , in the Commission plan , whether funds are going to be included for the economic diversification of the areas , because in my opinion , simply redistributing and redirecting FIFG funds already allocated to the Member States , Commissioner , is taking from one mouth to feed another .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the nine proposals for regulation that have been submitted to us today represent the first wave of measures adopted for the outermost regions following the entry into force of Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam .
Even if the Commission has not yet addressed all of the requests made by the Member States , these new proposals are particularly important and open up the way to greater changes .
With regard to the structural measures , we can take satisfaction from the fact that the Commission is proposing to raise Structural Fund assistance rates and the public subsidy limit for the outermost regions , even though the aim is really to enable these regions to regain funding levels close to those in force in the previous programming period .
Nevertheless , I am sorry that the increase in these rates only target closed investment categories .
The consequence of this will be to impose a major limit on the scope of the measure and , ultimately , to prevent the outermost regions from matching their situation in the 1994-1999 period .
With regard to the revision of the agricultural chapters that have been submitted , we should emphasise that this is part of a very limited budgetary context , which is having a very powerful effect on the content of the measures and their scope .
I must remind you that the total appropriations for the programme of options specific to the remote and insular nature of the overseas departments ( POSEIDOMs ) have been reduced by 25 % , falling from EUR 46 million to EUR 35 million in the 2001 budget , whereas the financial forecasts for funding the reform stated that the financial requirement for 2001 was EUR 55 million .
Without going into detail on the proposals , which are , on the whole , a step in the right direction , it is crucial that Article 299 ( 2 ) should be kept as the legal base for this text and that the continuity of these measures is guaranteed in order to compensate for the delay by the Commission in drafting them and to prevent any interruptions to funding .
Lastly , with regard to the proposal for a regulation on the Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance ( FIFG ) , the special rates for fleet renewal and modernisation measures must be applied to ships of up to 16 metres in length .
This is a fundamental issue for fishing in Réunion .
I would ask you to support these proposals and the two amendments that I have re-tabled .
Mr President , the POSEI programmes were proposed more than 10 years ago as aid instruments for what we now know as the outermost regions .
In the three versions for the regions and departments of France , Spain and Portugal , the POSEI were designed and implemented as an expression of the political will of the Council and the Commission to stimulate the development of these regions , which are among the most disadvantaged in the Union due to their remote and island nature .
With the inclusion of the new Article 299.2 of the Treaty , the outermost regions now have a sound legal basis that has enabled the Commission to propose these new POSEIs .
In the budgetary context defined by the stability agreement reached in order to allow Economic and Monetary Union , the financial statement proposed by the Commission complies strictly with the criteria of budgetary neutrality .
I must say that practically all of the additional spending is compensated for by the savings as a result of the reform of Agenda 2000 .
Despite all this , the Commission ' s proposals respond to their desire to fulfil the commitments that have been gradually made over recent years , as is the case with cattle and milk production in the Azores or the inclusion of tomato production in the Canary Islands , to name just two examples .
There are still , of course , a few aspects left to resolve , such as the case of some products , especially in the agriculture and food processing industry , within the specific supply arrangements for the Canary Islands , which will have to be resolved as part of the decisions to be made in the Management Committee responsible , given that if the conditions envisaged at the moment were maintained , the result would be unsatisfactory .
Mr President , as Commissioner Fischler is going to have to speak immediately , perhaps I could ask him to pay attention to me so that he can prepare his speech .
I would like to congratulate you and thank you for the Commission ' s interest in the outermost regions and express the general satisfaction of the Members of this House .
I would also like to thank Mr Martínez Martínez and congratulate him on his work .
Above all , however , I want to point out three or four amendments to Mr Fischler that are of particular importance .
I am referring to Regulation ( EEC ) No 1601 / 92 , concerning specific measures for the Canary Islands and , specifically to Amendments Nos 29 and 34 , aimed at including aid for non-municipal public forests , and Amendment No 158 , also concerning aid for non-municipal forests .
I think that the Spanish authorities were mistaken in not requesting this aid at the time and now they must do so .
I am also referring to Amendments Nos 126 and 127 , which aim to protect local industry in the Canary Islands and , finally , the amendments aimed at protecting the Canarian tomato , which could encounter serious difficulties in the new phase of drawing up a Community policy that applies in Mediterranean countries . Also the proposed measures to support wine but to remove aid for imports to the Canary Islands of table wine and liquid milk , which could enter into competition with Canarian products .
In short , I think that we have a good proposal from the Commission and some good reports by Mr Martínez Martínez .
The European Parliament should adopt these proposals , which , incidentally , have not been amended at all in Parliament , as I think that the majority of Members consider that the text adopted by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development is a positive one .
I hope that the Commission will be able to take into account at least some of the main amendments , which I have just pointed out .

Mr President , honourable Members , may I start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Martínez Martínez , and the members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism , the Committee on Budgets and the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market for their detailed and constructive reports on the complex subject of outermost regions .
I should like , if I may , to quote a few statistics on the disadvantages of these regions .
Six out of seven of the outermost regions have an average per capita income of between 40 and 55 % of the European average and are hence among the lowest in the Union .
The unemployment rates in five of these regions are among the highest in the European Union at between 21 and 37 % of the working population .
The first proposal relates to contributions by the Structural Funds .
The maximum contribution by the Funds in outermost regions - and this is new - has been set at 85 % of overall eligible expenditure .
The maximum contribution of the Funds towards investments in small and medium-sized enterprises has been increased from 35 to 50 % .
The second proposal concerns the regulation on developing the countryside under the second pillar of the common agricultural policy .
The ceiling on the EAGGF contribution towards eligible investment costs has been raised from 50 to 75 % for investments in farm holdings and from 50 to 65 % in the processing and marketing sector .
In addition , aid will also be granted for woods and areas belonging to the local , regional and national public sector in the future .
The proposal also makes provision to increase certain financial contributions under the Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance .
All the additional expenditure incurred here can be financed from the budget approved for the 2000-2006 planning period .
I am delighted that Parliament supports the Commission proposals in principle and that we enjoyed such constructive discussion in the various committees .
I can agree with many of the proposed amendments , provided that we find the right wording .
They include the amendments increasing maximum aid rates to 65 % for the entire foodstuffs industry and to 75 % for SMEs , on condition that investments for sectors and enterprises comply with certain target specifications , to be decided at a later date .
They also include the amendments increasing agri-environmental measures in the agricultural sector and the three other flanking measures to 85 % and doubling the maximum amounts for agri-environmental measures in the sensitive areas of Madeira and the Azores .
I also agree that these measures should enter into force with retroactive effect from 1 January 2000 .
However , the Commission stands its ground on the legal basis .
Article 299 ( 2 ) should only be used for derogations from the Treaties or general legal principles .
Now to the agricultural part of the POSEI programme .
Having evaluated aid regulations on the basis of past programmes , it is clear that previous measures have , by and large , had a positive impact , although there has been repeated criticism on certain points .
The Commission 's proposals have been drafted in the light of both these evaluations and this criticism .
So what are the most important considerations ?
First , the present framework for specific supply regimes and specific aid for local agricultural production should be simplified , consolidated and improved .
Secondly , the specific supply regimes must be strengthened because their objective , that is , to bring production costs in peripheral regions into line with costs in the rest of the Community , is still valid .
Thirdly , the list of products has been revised and a number of feedingstuffs have been included on the list .
Fourthly , we want more competition between supply sources , which is why we have introduced the principle whereby aid must reflect the costs of transport from the European mainland .
Fifthly and finally , the common organisation of the market in milk and in beef and veal needs to be revised in order to harmonise the three POSEI regulations .
The Commission 's stand on the proposed amendments is based on the principle of budgetary neutrality , which must be maintained in all cases .
Nonetheless , expenditure on the three POSEI programmes can be increased to EUR 204.4 million between now and 2005 , with the same breakdown , as this proposal is covered by savings .
The Commission can therefore only agree to proposed amendments which impact on the budget if they are offset by equally high savings .
I shall finish , if I may , by listing the points on which I can agree .
I can agree to a specific supply regime for the French departments for products from all third countries , that is , not just from developing countries and other overseas departments , and to the fixed deadlines for the entry into force of certain articles of POSEIDOM which guarantee continuity and facilitate trade between the Azores and Madeira in products which come under the supply regime .
The conversion of vineyards planted with hybrid varieties can be continued in the Azores and Madeira under certain circumstances .
Promoting imports of fattening cattle could be included in a comprehensive programme to promote cattle breeding on the Canary Islands .
Finally , the transitional regulations should be strengthened in order to guarantee continuity .
Again , I cannot agree to apply Article 292 ( 2 ) here .
Now briefly to the fisheries reports .
I shall confine myself here to the proposed amendments ; obviously you know what they are because you are about to vote on them .
The first two proposed amendments concern the legal basis .
As the same legal basis must apply to the whole package of measures , the Commission stands by its proposal to apply Article 37 .
Article 299 should only be used in order to make provision for derogations from the Treaty , which is not the case here .
I can accept the third proposed amendment .
Amendments Nos 4 and 6 concern problems with fish and flags of convenience .
These problems were raised during the debate .
We are in full agreement with you here and I expressly welcome the fact that Parliament has a clear position on this matter .
We would prefer , however , to resolve this problem when we next amend Regulation 27 / 92 , which we are already working on .
We shall be sending a proposal to Parliament and the Council within the next few days .
As regards the fifth proposed amendment , a broad majority in the Council is in favour of a compromise solution on this question .
A compromise would be acceptable to the Commission , because the fleet segment in question comes under the heading ' small coastal fisheries ' and we want to avoid adverse repercussions , especially as artisanal coastal fisheries do not represent a danger to stocks .
In Amendment No 5 , you suggest that action to renew and modernise the fleets in question should be included and that national and Community investment rates should be raised for the entire fleet .
We cannot accept your Amendment No 5 because we feel that we should not keep on promoting the overcapitalisation of the EU fleet .
I can accept Amendments Nos 7 and 8 .
Then briefly to Mrs Fraga Estévez 's report .
This proposal is the first in a package of measures ordered by the European Council in Nice .
Today 's proposal meets one of the specifications set in Nice , namely to extend the current aid regulation to 30 June .
The Commission will be adopting the second measure in the package ordered by Nice in June as well .
This proposal for a Council regulation will contain a series of derogations from the provisions of the Financial Instrument for Fisheries Guidance and will propose specific measures for which additional funds will be earmarked .
However , as this proposal will not pass through the Council until the autumn , we can agree to your proposed amendment extending aid to the fishermen and shipowners in question under this proposal until the end of the year .
I think this is justified for social reasons .
I hope that , despite the noise here , anyone interested in hearing my report and my position has been able to do so .
Thank you .
Mr President , I understand that at the beginning of today 's sitting a point was raised about the travel office and the fact that the current staff are to make way for a new company .
I would like to make it clear that the Quaestors were not consulted about this change .
They should have been , and an undertaking was given that they would be before a tender was awarded , but they were not consulted .
I have managed to speak only to Mary Banotti so far , but I can assure you that we will take this matter up .
Mr President , in relation to the point that you raised after Commissioner Fischler had spoken .
I feel the noise in this Chamber is an absolute disgrace .
I know all the Presidents try desperately to stop it .
I suggest the presidency look at possibly having a five-minute break between the end of Commissioners ' statements and the vote .
We cannot continue to allow Commissioners to be treated this way .
I entirely agree .
Something needs to be done about it .
It sets a disgraceful example .
I do not know what the people in the public gallery must think of this House .
VOTE
Thank you , that was clear and helpful .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Report ( A5-0163 / 2001 ) by Rolf Linkohr , on behalf of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , on the Communication from the Commission on the European Union 's oil supply ( COM ( 2000 ) 631 - C5-0739 / 2000 - 2000 / 2335 ( COS ) )
( Parliament adopted the resolution ) President .
That concludes the vote .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
Report Hughes ( A5-0196 / 2001 )
Thank you very much , and please pass on my regards to your mother .
Mr President , I would like to use my explanation of vote to explain my voting on the Hughes report .
I voted against all the amendments .
In my opinion these amendments have nothing to do with safety at work , road safety or health aspects , but instead were only a question of making the position of small and medium-sized self-employed hauliers more difficult .
We already have Regulation 3820 / 85 on driving and resting times which also regulates suitable driving and resting times for small haulage businesses .
This directive talks about total working hours and I find it appalling that the European Parliament is trying to regulate the total working hours of the self-employed in their own businesses and I voted against all these amendments .
Mr President , in the debate yesterday a number of speakers from remote parts of the Union drew attention to the potentially severe effects that this new law would have on outlying places .
Mr Hudghton , for example , drew attention to the problems of drivers coming from the Hebrides onto the mainland of Scotland and then onwards .
Ms Kauppi made similar points as I recall about Finland , and other colleagues made points about Portugal .
We were told that during the debate that the intention is to provoke a conciliation and obtain a compromise position between the Commission and Parliament at conciliation .
I voted as I did in the hope and expectation that the Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee will take proper and full account of the very severe problems of remote parts of the Union in relation to this law .
We voted for limiting the working hours and the driving time for so-called self-employed drivers , a category whose existence has until now been one way of getting around the law in this area .
We also condemn the fact that rest periods are excluded from working time , which means that the driver is not able to use this time as he wishes .
Furthermore , it is unacceptable , having stated that ' if night work is performed , the daily working time shall not exceed eighthours in each twenty-four-hour period ' , you immediately add that this period may be extended to 10 hours , as long as the average of 8 hours is respected in a longer reference period .
It is unacceptable for an ' average ' working time to be calculated , since accumulated tiredness on any given day , beyond the 8 hours , is not relieved by a monthly or annual average , with the risks that this implies for the safety of the driver and of other road users .
. The UK Conservative Delegation voted against the Hughes amendments for the reasons set out in my speech in the debate .
However , we voted in favour of my Amendment No 23 , calling for a thorough Business Impact Assessment to be carried out and published within three years of the adoption of this Directive .
We did this in spite of the frankly outrageous comment by Commissioner Palacio at the end of the debate yesterday that ' of course ' she could not accept this amendment as it would be an unreasonable administrative burden !
The Hughes amendments , if adopted by Council , would place further burdens on the self-employed and on SMEs .
It is therefore particularly important that the impact on such businesses is clearly identified and thoroughly assessed at an early stage , so that further revision of the Directive can be considered .
. ( PT ) The European Commission proposal is unacceptable in that it excludes self-employed drivers , since this puts important objectives in the common transport policy at stake .
The system it proposes will create conditions of unfair competition , jeopardising the objective of road safety and not helping to encourage quality of service .
The position adopted in the Hughes report is thus of the greatest importance , and we therefore voted for it even though the proposals we presented during the debate have not been fully incorporated .
It is essential , as we have maintained , that self-employed drivers should be included immediately within the scope of the directive to be adopted , or at least this should happen in the very near future .
This will be the only way to ensure that road safety is encouraged and to prevent unfair competition .
This report is a first step , albeit a cautious one , but nevertheless quite necessary to regulate the road transport sector , in which the unfettered exploitation of both salaried and self-employed drivers is the norm and in which , just as in maritime transport , there is a real culture of complacency , with businesses registered outside the European Union , and fleets of trucks and equipment that fall short of all standards and conventions of employment law .
Europe must move towards improving existing legislation , revising Regulation 3820 / 85 in particular , and towards harmonising the best gains made by salaried drivers across the Union in terms of the length of working time and night work .
No country and no business must be excluded from the directive and no exemptions must be granted .
In order to ensure that the legislation is implemented , the European Union must provide itself with the human and financial resources , particularly by hiring sufficient numbers of qualified employment inspectors .
A driver ' s working time might currently reach 60 or 70 hours , of which at least 50 might be spent behind the wheel .
The phrase ' working time ' must not only mean driving time , but must cover all other activities too .
Night work must be drastically shortened - 8 hours ' driving is still too high - with the corresponding compensation and it must be limited to the transport of certain goods .
Lastly , the rules must apply to self-employed hauliers as well as to salaried drivers .
In view of this progress , we have voted in favour of this report .
. ( DE ) The fundamental objectives of this recommendation are to increase road safety , guarantee a minimum standard of health and safety for those working in the sector and establish equal conditions of competition with other transport operators .
The common position adopted by the Council fails to take proper account of these objectives , especially on the following points :
the inclusion of self-employed truck drivers
the exclusion of employees in haulage companies based outside the EU
the definition of the working times and standby duty
the definition of night work
Although we realise that accepting the recommendation would lead to difficult negotiations with the Council , my group voted in favour because :
1 .
Self-employed truck drivers need to be included within two years of the transposition of the directive in order to resolve the problem of bogus self-employment so as to get round restrictions on working times .
2 .
The working times of self-employed truck drivers must include not just the time at the wheel but also the time needed to check the vehicle , do administrative work , run the business etc . , because otherwise rest periods are too short , thereby jeopardising drivers ' health and lowering road safety because numerous serious accidents are caused by overtiredness .
3 .
The definitions of standby duty , night time and night work must take account of social aspects .
4 . All truck drivers must provide proof of the time spent at the wheel , irrespective of whether they are employed or self-employed .
. ( NL ) Labour is still a commodity .
It is attractive to employers if they can get their employees to work at the times that involve the least costs .
They prefer drivers on the road who can be called on at any time of the day or night , all through the week .
Sometimes twenty consecutive hours , and at other times five times a day for a couple of hours .
This helps them avoid having to take on more people to share tasks .
However , the result is that people become stressed and over-tired , cause more accidents and scarcely manage to maintain a private life .
Only a well-coordinated campaign by government and trade unions can help put a stop to this .
Now that road traffic is becoming increasingly international in nature and cheap Eastern European companies with poor conditions of employment are trying to capture a portion of the market in the European Union , there is an increasing need for measures .
Above all in the field of cross-border problems there is an urgent need for measures on a European scale , but the Council has been sabotaging those measures for two years and even now only wants a toned-down version .
It is good that the rapporteur wants to continue the main thrust , and calls for measures to prevent large transport companies avoiding their responsibility by offloading commercial risks onto their unprotected freelance drivers .
As representative of the Swedish Christian Democrats , I am choosing to support the second reading for the organisation of the working time of persons whose occupation is the performance of mobile road-transport activities , since this is important , especially from the point of view of road safety .
However , I have decided to vote against the report on the following points : the proposal that the employee be informed at least 24 hours in advance , the proposal that time spent next to the driver is to be counted as working hours and the proposal concerning a maximum working time of eight hours when driving at night .
This is based on the position that a good balance must be found between road safety and reasonable terms for entrepreneurs .
Report Skinner ( A5-0156 / 2001 )
As you know , Mr President , I am the national secretary of the Pensioners ' Party in Italy , and therefore I represent pensioners .
Unfortunately , many pensioners , including young ones , are such because they have had accidents at work .
I therefore applaud this report which seeks to reduce greatly accidents at work caused by working at a height .
This is a scourge which afflicts the whole world , especially Europe and , within Europe , the countries where people work hardest , and so I think this is an example of how important it is that Europe should produce Community legislation to govern these activities , which cause so much harm and so much grief in our Europe .
Just as at the first reading , we have abstained from voting on Mr Skinner ' s report concerning the minimum safety and health requirements for the use of work equipment by workers at work .
This is an area in which the EU should not have such a great influence .
Our basic attitude towards the European Union is positive .
European integration provides an opportunity to find solutions to cross-border problems such as the environment , trade , movement across borders , human rights and conflict management .
We also believe in the principle of subsidiarity whereby decisions are to be taken as close to those affected as possible .
That is why we are actively driving forward the issue of a constitution for the European Union , in which the division of responsibility is clear to everyone .
It must be absolutely clear to all citizens that the EU is only to be engaged in the matters at which it is best - cross-border issues .
We are convinced that the EU is not the best level for legislation concerning , for example , how steps are to be used in work above ground or floor level .
National requirements must be allowed to decide how structures are to be erected and how work is to be carried out .
For us , it is important that the EU instead concentrate on a small number of areas in which it can really do some good .
This is not one such area .
Detailed regulation is not the right way .
Consequently , it cannot be the task of the EU or the European Parliament to establish rules on the gradient of steps , how they are placed in relation to buildings or the fact that they must not rest on a slippery surface .
However correct and well-intentioned this may be , it cannot fall within the competence of European politics .
The European Parliament must effect this demarcation by showing restraint in what it applies itself to and seeks to have decision-making competence over .
The reasonable solution would have been a directive under which the Member States have a duty to take appropriate and sufficient measures to ensure a certain level of safety in the workplace .
A common market should have certain minimum rules and common aims in order to achieve better health and safety at work .
However , it is reprehensible to regulate in detail at EU level how these aims are to be achieved .
We Swedish Christian Democrats see it as a high priority task to work for a clearer division of competence between the EU and the Member States .
The EU ' s legislation must be kept free of detailed regulations , and new legislation must take the principle of subsidiarity into consideration .
EU directives should essentially aim to establish goals , not to rule on details and describe the way to achieve those goals .
Let the Member States themselves decide how rules and regulations on workers ' health and safety are to be elaborated so that the required aims of the directive are achieved in the best possible way .
Certainly , European parliamentarians - like national politicians - are expected to master a number of subject areas and to relate to a wide spectrum of political issues .
Rules on the anchoring of , and support system for , steps can hardly be amongst these , however .
. This report , which culminated in the common position , promotes health and safety for all workers across the EU who have to work at heights on temporary equipment .
It is a law which is both employer-friendly as well as efficient at directing attention towards the ' safety culture ' and practices required to save lives and reduce injuries .
The Labour Group has sought at all times to reduce any unnecessary burden on business whilst at the same time to promote the most effective and practicable of solutions that can be realised by legislation .
Report Sterckx ( A5-0208 / 2001 )
Mr President , it is important that today in the European Parliament we have been able to adopt at first reading the so-called Erika II package , the name of which reminds us of the sad case of a vessel that sank at the end of 1999 , a year and a half ago , causing a great tidal wave and considerable consequences on the coast of north east France and its marine environment .
With this second package , the European Commission has put forward regulations to establish a European Maritime Agency and a compensation fund for damage caused in European waters by oil pollution , and to establish a Community monitoring and information system on maritime traffic .
In order to do the latter , vessels under Community flags and others that stop over in ports in the Union will be obliged to be equipped both with automatic identification systems ( transponders ) , so that the coastal monitoring stations can automatically identify them , and with voyage data recorders ( black boxes ) to securely store information on position , movement , physical condition , control and checking .
All this is essential in order to solve accidents and , above all , to prevent them , if it is used with appropriate monitoring .
The Member States , for their part , will be obliged to develop ports of refuge and safe anchoring areas , for vessels that are in distress , and also coastal monitoring stations , which the vessels would also be obliged to provide with the updated report on their safety condition , drawn up by the classification society responsible for inspecting it , all of which is following the adoption of the amendment tabled by me , on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance .
I hope , Mr President , that this second package of maritime safety measures will be more successful than the first and will be accepted by the Council of Transport Ministers , so that it can quickly enter into force and so that through it , human life and the environment are better protected .
- ( DA ) The Danish Social Democrats have today voted in favour of an improvement to maritime safety .
We have voted in favour of a European monitoring and information system for maritime traffic , for a fund to provide compensation for oil pollution and for the setting up of a European maritime safety agency .
Many pollution accidents could have been avoided if there had been better safety .
We have seen all too many accidents during the last couple of years .
There was the loss of the tanker , Erika off Brittany in December 1999 , resulting in considerable oil pollution , and the loss of the Italian chemical tanker , Ievoli Sun .
Most recently , we have seen an extensive oil spill in the Baltic , which could have been avoided if we had had better European rules .
Ship owners do not think that a black box has anything to do with safety .
However , that is not the case .
A black box is very useful in the investigation after two ships have collided , as happened , for example , in the Baltic .
If we become better at discovering the causes of accidents , we also become better at preventing them .
We cannot wait for international rules in the IMO .
The EU must take the lead in the IMO by adopting better rules .
We cannot compromise on safety .
We must have safety so that fish , birds and people can use the sea without being covered in oil and chemicals .
- ( FR ) This directive seeks to improve the identification of ships en route to European ports and of all ships in transit in areas with high traffic densities or in areas which are dangerous to shipping and to make it compulsory for these ships to be equipped with transponder systems , by means of which they can be identified automatically and continuously monitored by the coastal authorities .
Once again , we feel that this directive presents clear advances in terms of control , but that it contains serious loopholes , particularly with regard to crews .
It is unacceptable , given what we know of the tragic situation of seamen on many dangerous ships , that examining the state of the crew ' s health and physical conditions is not part of the compulsory inspections .
By the same token , the inspections must be carried out by a sufficient number of properly trained staff .
Lastly , the concept of a ' port of refuge ' will only become a reality if effective facilities exist for these ports .
We shall be voting in favour of this directive , whilst continuing to work to ensure that all individuals - both seamen and inspectors - are given their rightful place , which is pride of place !
Report Sterckx ( A5-0208 / 2001 ) and Mastorakis ( A5-0205 / 2001 )
Although we are abstaining on the Mastorakis report on establishing a European Agency for Maritime Safety , we shall be voting in favour of the Sterckx report , because it lays down practical measures to limit the risks of pollution and danger to crews ' lives .
It must be emphasised , however , that it has taken disasters , particularly those caused by the oil tanker Erika and the shipwreck of the chemical tanker Ievoli Sun , for measures finally to be proposed .
What we need now is for these measures to be implemented .
No particular restrictions are being imposed to make these measures absolute obligations , either for shipowners or for charterers .
The minimum that should be done in this area is to make both groups responsible , in addition to their other duties , for any non-compliance with these directives .
Report Mastorakis ( A5-0205 / 2001 )
I was between eleven and fourteen years old , Mr President .
Every morning , since I lived on a hill in the city of my birth , Genoa , I had a magnificent spectacle in front of me : the port of Genoa seen from up high ; ships sailing in , ships sailing out ; many ships of all kinds waiting offshore to berth , there was so much traffic .
That is where my love of the sea and fascination with ships started .
I therefore believe that no city in Europe could represent the problems of shipping and , especially , maritime safety better than Genoa .
I hope , therefore , as a Genoese man and as a sailor , that Genoa will be chosen as the location for the Maritime Safety Agency .
If this draft regulation is adopted , it will lead to the creation of a European Maritime Safety Agency .
Where safety at sea is concerned , it seems appropriate to address the issue at European level .
This agency will provide coherence for training action , for scientific and technical support to Member States to implement legislation , for the compilation of data on maritime pollution , for monitoring and for possible proposals to change current legislation .
This is a tool which will not interfere with Member States ' political decisions , but which will aid decision making and monitoring .
This agency is also something that almost all operators in sea-related industries want .
Nevertheless , the role of the Commission in appointing the executive director and the members of the management board and in the agency ' s management is so important that the European public , which has called for this agency to be created are in danger of being cut out of the picture .
This is why we are tabling several amendments , which seek to improve on the initial proposal .
It is quite reasonable that members of national parliaments , regional representatives and seamen ' s rights and environmental protection associations should have a place on the agency ' s management board .
It is also reasonable that the agency should produce regular reports on the results of its actions .
Report Esclopé ( A5-0201 / 2001 )
This regulation will enable us to establish a fund for the compensation of oil pollution damage in European waters .
The oil slick of December 1999 demonstrated once again the inadequacy of compensation on offer .
Most of the victims have still not been compensated .
The proposal is a definite improvement but it is inadequate , because it does not take the idea of making both the shipowner and the charterer responsible to its conclusion .
It is an improvement because the money for the fund will be guaranteed by European businesses , which will enable the compensation to be both substantial and rapid .
The proposal contains major shortcomings , because this regulation does not establish the unlimited responsibility of polluters and does not deduct the payment from the total damages caused .
This is why we are tabling amendments .
Some of them are designed to establish unlimited responsibility : by clearly establishing the link between shipowner and flag State , and by placing the obligation on owners and charterers to underwrite unlimited insurance .
Other amendments seek to make the management of the COPE funds more transparent by means of the composition of its committee .
We shall be voting in favour of this text , but we shall continue to try to ensure that all damages are paid for out of the immense profits made by the polluters .
I wish to focus my speech on the issue of compensating the victims of oil pollution , which our House has quite rightly proposed to extend to pollution by hazardous substances .
The current system of limiting the financial responsibility of shipowners , which is an absolute scandal , and of oil-tanker owners limiting their own responsibility , under an International Oil Pollution Compensation Fund ( IOPCF ) with resources that are capped and which bear no relation to the real cost of the pollution caused , has led to tragically inadequate cover for damage suffered by victims .
It is unacceptable that the victims , or more often the taxpayers , should have to stand in , in financial terms , for those responsible for causing the pollution .
The Commission is therefore proposing the creation of a specifically European Fund ( COPE ) , which would operate on the principle of the Member States standing in for the parties involved in acts of oil pollution .
The responsibility of each party and , of course , top of the list are the shipowner and the charterer , must be able to be clearly identified and brought to book by the victims .
We agree with the stated objectives , which are to fully compensate the victims for the damage they have suffered and to ensure that the compensation mechanisms function efficiently and speedily .
On the other hand , we are concerned at the methods proposed for the operation of the COPE Fund , in particular with regard to bringing the COPE procedures into line with those of the IOPCF .
In these circumstances , the victims risk coming up against the same problems of proving the pollution and of companies refusing to pay .
This is why , like the rapporteur , we are calling for specific procedures to be drawn up for the implementation of the COPE Fund , so that it can properly fulfil its objectives to the benefit of the victims .
Report Collins ( A5-0203 / 2001 )
From the sea , Mr President , we go up to the sky ; from maritime safety we move on to air safety .
I applaud the aeroplane pilots , the aviation technicians , all the crews , the air traffic controllers and so on , who have made flying by far the safest of all means of transport .
I find this really reassuring because , ever since I have been a Member of the European Parliament , I have been constantly up in the sky in aeroplanes .
The aim of the directive which is the subject of the Collins report is to improve this safety even further , so let us have it !
A thank you to the Commission for having made this proposal and to us Members for having approved it !
. ( DE ) My group is delighted that the European Commission has taken account of the demands made by the European Parliament in the wake of the debate on harmonising safety standards and reporting systems in 1997 and has presented its own proposal for a directive on occurrence reporting in civil aviation .
Reports on faults , defects and malfunctions , which represent vital safety information , are now mandatory in all the Member States of the EU .
At the same time , all such information is to be treated in confidence .
We all want to see constant improvements to air traffic safety , passengers , airlines , technical services and responsible political forces such as the Members of the European Parliament alike .
Especially since the volume of air traffic is expected to spiral in forthcoming years .
It is a proven fact that most air traffic accidents are caused by human error , which is why introducing a uniform system for collecting , recording , exchanging and disseminating information on dangerous or potentially dangerous occurrences in all the Member States of the Community will allow a wide variety of occurrences to be evaluated , conclusions drawn and preventive measures taken .
Systematically evaluating cases in which the wrong decision or wrong action was taken will be particularly important for staff training .
Recreating and simulating situations in which a decision is required will help to ensure that staff are better prepared and react calmly to irregularities and emergencies .
In addition , safety risks can be reduced by recording and storing any technical problems , faults or defects which occur in a database to which the safety authorities have access and by evaluating and disseminating the conclusions .
We therefore welcome the Commission 's proposal for a directive and are in favour of the report presented by Mr Collins and the few proposed amendments to it .
Report Busk ( A5-0210 / 2001 )
.
( DE ) Animal welfare is part of our basic ethical understanding .
However , we must not forget that high animal protection standards result in higher production costs in the EU , which is why we must ensure that our pig breeders are not exposed to competition from imports which do not have to comply with the same animal protection standards and are therefore able to charge lower prices .
We therefore need to prevent imports of pigmeat from third countries which do not have the same laws on animal protection and animal health standards , which is why the whole question of animal welfare needs to be dealt with during the forthcoming World Trade Organisation negotiations .
We should also consider that arrangements for animals change when new animal protection standards are introduced .
Pig breeders who only recently built pens which comply with current standards must be given a reasonable transitional period to amortise their previous investment and make changes when current rules are changed or rather tightened .
The new regulations will contain specific details on how pigs are to be kept , that is , pen sizes , the design of pens and arrangements for pregnant animals .
We must bear in mind when endeavouring to bring about changes in agricultural policy that anyone who wants better and better standards of animal protection must also bear the consequences as a consumer , that is , they must be prepared to pay more for pigmeat produced under better conditions of animal welfare .
We have a quality mark for such pigmeat in Luxembourg , for which there is a growing demand , proving that consumers understand perfectly well that they need to dig deeper into their pockets for quality agricultural products .
. ( NL ) Shortly , when we discuss swine fever later in the agenda , it will again become apparent that what matters in livestock farming is still more meat , cheap meat and satisfying the requirements of world trade .
Not only people and their environment but also animal welfare is sacrificed to the free market .
National rules for protection are brushed aside by great economic interests and European liberalisation .
The further liberalisation is carried , the more it works to the advantage of whoever produces cheapest .
The fact that poor working methods are used in order to be so cheap does not matter .
Pigs and chickens are shut up in very unnatural circumstances in too small a floorspace where they get in each other ' s way .
That saves space and hence costs .
Quite rightly individuals and organisations have campaigned for years to highlight this fact .
For that reason it is positive that some more political interest is at last emerging in animal suffering caused by intensive livestock farming .
Every regulation that brings some improvement will have my support , although I am far from being convinced that approval of this proposal will put an end to unnecessary animal suffering .
Report Brok ( A5-0209 / 2001 )
On the pretext of helping Kosovo , this report proposes helping to privatise that country ' s economy , which means , according to the examples given in the text itself , putting it into the hands of Western banks .
Our vote against the report expresses our indignation at the entire policy maintained by the Western powers , particularly those from the European Union .
This policy consists , having littered Kosovo with bombs as it did with Serbia , of making the very ruins of those countries into an additional outlet for Western capital .
The Western powers must realise that repairing what they destroyed is the least of the matter .
Only a fraction of the money spent during the war , only a part of the resources and equipment that were used , would be enough to repair infrastructures , to rebuild roads , railway and telephone lines and to rebuild the buildings and business that were destroyed .
This should be paid for by the Western powers , or more precisely , out of their military budgets , without generating private profit in the West .
For the moment , despite all the self-congratulating that is taking place , the economic balance sheet of the European Union ' s action is reduced to carving up what remains of Kosovo ' s economy and to putting it into the hands of Western banks and the grip of the mafias .
Report Martínez Martínez ( A5-0195 / 2001 ) and ( A5-0197 / 2001 )
Mr President , this is one of the most useful measures of all those we have voted on in Parliament .
Providing differential , specific aid through the Structural Funds to the outermost regions and islands of Europe , that is , the Azores , Madeira , the Canaries , Guadeloupe , French Guiana , Martinique and Réunion , is an extremely positive fact .
I am happy for my friend , Mr Fernando Fernández Martin , Governor of the Canary Islands , whose seat is next to mine , who will thus be able to go round the Canary Islands with greater pride in the knowledge that Europe is close to those more peripheral regions and islands of Europe .
Let us hope that this example will be followed whenever decisions must be made on the outermost regions of Europe .
We are entirely in favour of aid for overseas territories , which centuries of colonisation and exploitation by European countries have kept in an underdeveloped economic situation .
We must , on the other hand , express our reservations about the way in which the European Union is planning its aid for these regions , which it calls ' outermost ' , because the aid is not intended solely for the poor communities of workers and country folk but is also intended to support interests , whether or not they are native to these regions and which have no need of aid , by promoting ' the spirit of enterprise ' as well .
We are in favour of aid , but under different conditions .
This is why we abstained , but voted in favour of the amendments likely to promote the interests of the working classes in these regions .
. ( PT ) The European Commission proposals for the revision of Poseima fall well short of meeting expectations .
In view of the good results achieved since it was launched , the profound qualitative change that occurred with the introduction of Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on European Union and the successive declarations of intention by various European Councils , one would have hoped for more .
This opinion of Parliament therefore takes on greater importance , and it is essential that the Council should accept it in its entirety .
I must highlight the proposals made by the rapporteur , Mr Martínez Martínez , either on his own initiative or based on the contributions of several Members , including myself , through the presentation of 20 draft amendments to the Commission ' s text , which I am pleased to see included in Parliament ' s position , which has been approved by such a substantial majority .
Nevertheless , although I voted in favour of Parliament ' s position , I must make the following reservations :
I cannot accept that Poseima should remain restricted to the agricultural sector and residually to the fisheries sector ;
I cannot accept the ' principle of budgetary neutrality ' either , which means that the spending levels proposed for the future will be less than at the start of the programme in the early 1990s ( still without the article in the Treaty on European Union ) ;
Neither can I accept the nature of the measure proposed to safeguard the principal production of the Azores : milk .
I consider the 70 000 additional tonnes allocated to Azorean farmers insufficient and I disagree with the transitional nature of the measure , in force only until 2003 , in clear contradiction to Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty on European Union .
I hope , however , that the possible reduction in some measures has been averted , as was apparent in the text of the Commission proposal .
In this respect , I must point to the opinion approved by the Committee on Budgets , annexed to the Martínez Martínez report , which addressed all these reservations .
.
( PT ) The Treaty of Amsterdam incorporated a legal base ( Article 299 ( 2 ) ) recognising the need for the EU to give the outermost regions special treatment in accordance with their unique and specific reality .
This was now a ' legal-constitutional ' recognition and no longer , as was the case until Amsterdam , a ' de facto ' recognition , done through declarations annexed to the Treaties or instruments such as Poseima , symptomatically called the Programme of Options Specific to the Remote and Insular Nature of Madeira and the Azores .
I therefore give my full support to Parliament ' s favourable opinion on a set of measures that we have just debated , presented by the European Commission , which aims to put into practice the outermost region principle .
A special mention , finally , for the proposed revision of Poseima . This is a programme that has proved highly significant in that it has guaranteed the application of important aspects of the common agricultural policy to Madeira and the Azores in a manner suited to the specific conditions of agriculture in these regions .
Poseima has thus made a significant contribution to the maintenance of our agriculture .
Poseima has also been crucial in that it includes specific measures aimed at cutting supply overheads , particularly in terms of transport , for foodstuffs for consumption or industrial processing .
The proposed revision of Poseima with the changes recommended by Parliament is highly positive .
New instruments are introduced and current ones are modified in the light of the experience acquired .
I hope the Commission will accept the changes proposed by Parliament .
. The British Conservative Delegation of the EPP-ED Group voted against the Martínez Martínez report on specific measures for agricultural products for various countries .
My colleagues and I are wholly sympathetic to the special needs of the EU 's outermost regions given their isolation and the problems this causes .
However , it is our view that the Commission has produced a sensible proposal to combat their difficulties and that going beyond this , as the rapporteur proposes , is not justifiable in terms of policy or budgetary implications .
Across Europe , the agricultural sector is in severe difficulties and stretching its budget further does not seem feasible at this stage .
Similar thinking instructed my delegation 's decision to vote against Mr Martínez Martínez 's other report on structural measures .
Report Fraga Estévez ( A5-0185 / 2001 )
. ( PT ) After the expiry of the fisheries agreement with Morocco on 30 November 1999 , the Community fleet was left inactive .
In view of this situation , the Commission proposed a change to the rules on structural assistance with two objectives : to prolong the period for the granting of compensation for inactivity until 30 June 2001 and to allow the 4 % FIFG aid threshold to be exceeded for this type of aid , because of the number of fishermen and shipowners affected by this cessation of activity in Portugal and Spain .
In this report , Mrs Fraga Estévez proposes an extension of aid until the end of 2001 , which I think is adequate given the uncertainty still surrounding the remote possibility of a renewal of the fisheries agreement and the delays in making available the means needed to cover the high costs of restructuring the Community fleet in the event of non-renewal . Renewal is in fact becoming less and less likely because of the stalemate in the negotiations and the conclusions of the last council of fisheries ministers .
For Portugal the situation is highly complicated since about 30 vessels and 600 fishermen are living in this constant uncertainty ; therefore the extension of aid , although late , may minimise the consequences of the cessation of activity and even those of a more profound restructuring .
I therefore voted for the report .
Report Galeote Quecedo ( A5-0199 / 2001 )
( PPE-DE ) , in writing . ( SV ) We Swedish Christian Democrats wish to stress that it is important that any establishment of a College of European Diplomacy , as is proposed in Article 9 , does not lead to the intention of this replacing each Member State ' s own national diplomatic training .
It is important that each country ' s foreign service has basic training of its own in order to be able to serve its citizens fully , especially in their own mother tongue .
Report Linkohr ( A5-0163 / 2001 )
Clear skies , swallows flying in from all around , calm seas , incredible sunshine .
Are we perhaps in Italy , Mr President ?
No . We are in Sweden , on the beautiful island of Gotland .
What , you will be wondering , has this to do with the European Union ' s oil supplies ?
It does have something to do with it because , last Saturday and Sunday , I was at a meeting on renewable sources of energy on this same beautiful island of Gotland , in Sweden , where 50 % of their energy comes from renewable sources , like wind , the sun , biomass and so on .
Well , I hope that the use of renewable forms of energy will be boosted in Europe .
- ( DA ) We have together voted in favour of the report , for we think it important that alternative energy sources to mineral oil be found .
However , we have voted against Paragraph 8 of the report , for we are , in general , opposed to the use of nuclear energy .
The report ' s recitals maintain that " high oil prices and price fluctuations affect the poorer sectors of the population disproportionately " .
The explanatory statement also states that price increases are basically the result of speculation .
All the other factors , however , demonstrate the self-inflicted powerlessness of the European institutions , and indeed of the Member States , to intervene .
Each speculative price increase represents a huge levy imposed by some oil groups and capitalist middlemen on the population , including the poorest sections , who pay directly or indirectly .
With regard to the Member States , not only do they fail to intervene to put a stop to these increases , they also profit from them through fuel taxes , which is yet another indirect tax , as unfair as VAT , because it hits the richest and the poorest in the same way .
It is untrue that the public authorities could not ban price increases .
It is untrue that they cannot abolish tax on fuel for personal use .
The Commission is incapable of taking the measures that are required and is content to reel off hollow phrases .
We have therefore voted against this report .
The Member States must give serious consideration to becoming less dependent on energy supplies from outside the European Union .
They must do so firstly for strategic reasons , which will take on greater importance as oil becomes more scarce , more expensive and more concentrated in one part of the world , one which is not necessarily one of the most democratic .
Secondly , the problem of climate change linked to the greenhouse effect has forced us to respect international commitments .
This is why the Member States must do everything they can to reduce their consumption of fossil fuels .
In order to achieve this , one method open to us is to develop bio-fuels .
The European Commission ' s proposals have not taken sufficient account of this : we are able to produce large quantities of oleaginous crops , sugar beets and cereals which can produce millions of hectolitres of fuels as a replacement for fossil fuels .
The more enlightened car manufacturers and oil companies are supporting this strategy .
We therefore feel that the Member States and the Commission must do everything they can to facilitate research , development and productive investments in bio-fuels , particularly through special tax measures .
It is crucial that the Member States understand that bio-fuels must not be subject to taxes that cover fossil fuel products .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
Direct support schemes under the CAP
The next item is the report ( A5-0184 / 2001 ) by Friedrich-Wilhelm Graefe zu Baringdorf , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) : direct support schemes ( amending Regulation 1259 / 1999 / EC ) ( COM ( 2000 ) 841 - C5-0762 / 2000 - 2000 / 0335 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , the report now being debated is about simplifying the direct payments introduced in 1992 and then reviewed under Agenda 2000 , at least at the bottom end of the scale .
The Commission 's proposal allows for global payments of up to EUR 1 000 and abolishes the complicated application procedure for small farms .
We in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development support this proposal but feel that EUR 1 000 is rather low and have proposed that this limit be raised to EUR 1 500 , thereby allowing about a third of all farms in Europe to apply for global payments .
Of course , this varies from one country to another .
I think Mr Cunha will be addressing this point .
In Portugal the proportion is , of course , much higher .
We also suggest that the provision in Articles 3 and 4 of Regulation No 1229 / 99 requiring environmental standards to be observed should also apply here .
What we do not want is for global payments to small farms to be used to make savings .
If a farm claims global payment , it is not entitled to increases to compensation payments under Agenda 2000 as years go by , because global payments are based on past payments .
This means that these farms are not entitled to increases , which is why we suggest a 20 % increase in global payments .
It could be argued that this 20 % increase would also be justified by revising payments directly in line with increases .
We take the view that this is rather too complicated , but we do not want small farms to be punished by this regulation when payments are made .
You know all about the arguments in connection with premium payments : large , rationalised farms in Europe , wherever they may be , receive a very large sum of money for their labour force .
Given that such a small sum is paid to small farms , which also need a labour force , I think that the Commission should not be looking to make savings from this labour force and from these farms .
Commissioner Fischler , you have proposed or rather considered that farms of this size could perhaps receive up to EUR 5,000 in future under the second pillar in that , because of how they are managed , these farms help to shape the countryside in the ecological and social sense , provided that they observe certain environmental standards .
We should not therefore be looking to make savings with this regulation and from these small farms by excluding them .
Otherwise we would have to advise these farms not to claim global payment , because they are of course entitled to full payment - this does not repeal the law - if they do not opt for global payment .
This could lead to a situation in which this measure , which we feel is reasonable , is not taken up by small farms because they say , no , we want the full payment , even if it is only a very small amount .
However , because it is such a small amount and because it only affects small farms , which basically do a good job in the countryside , you should reconsider .
Mr President , I shall begin by welcoming this proposal by the European Commission , which through its timing and content aims at simplifying the procedure for small farmers applying for direct aids under the CAP .
In fact the experience we now have of implementing the CAP is that in practice it marginalises small farmers , defined in this proposal as those who have received less than one thousand euro per year on average over the last three years .
First , because aids per hectare or per head of livestock made up only a tiny part of the income of these farmers , who often have no more than five or ten hectares of arable land or half a dozen animals .
Secondly , because as a rule small farmers have to do the same amount of paperwork as is required for 10 , 50 or even 100 times as much aid ; sometimes they have to fill out a dozen different forms every year to get a sometimes ridiculous amount of aid .
In other words , the small amount of aid for these farmers added to the paperwork involved means that the great majority of small farmers do not feel at all motivated to apply for the aid to which they are entitled .
While this assessment of the proposal being debated is positive in principle , I should like to make three observations : the first is that I think the change approved by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development to raise the threshold from one thousand to fifteen hundred euro seems reasonable , as it will include potentially a third of the farmers in the European Union and more than two-thirds in some countries , like mine .
It is a cautious but realistic start , which I think is both reasonable and important .
In addition , the change also approved here to increase the level of aid over the last three years by 20 % is important in my view , in part because this level has not yet stabilised following the Agenda 2000 reform , and it is also yet another incentive for small farmers to apply for aid .
Certain aids , however , have still been left out , such as those for olive oil , bananas , tobacco , potato starch , etc . , and I hope that these too will be included in future .
Secondly , the principle of uncoupling aids from farmers ' productive options has some potential , but it cannot lead to the abandonment of the requirement for a farmer to have some effective production .
Otherwise we might be encouraging absenteeism .
My third observation is that in future we will have to consider another scale of aid for small farmers , who should receive a relatively higher rate of aid than large or middle-sized holdings , or else this aid will be ineffective .
This is fundamental .
Aid to small farms cannot be calculated at the same basic rate as other aids .
We will also have to have new bases for allocating aids , since basing them on an average amount received over the last three years excludes those small farmers who grow products that are not eligible for aid , but which from the standpoint of multifunctionality should also be entitled to it , like the others .
Mr President , the Socialist Group is pleased with this proposal because it is one step further towards simplifying agricultural policy and favours small-scale farmers .
The proposal recognises that in many instances the administrative costs of managing and processing the aid do not match the amount of aid that these small-scale farmers receive .
According to the Commission ' s own data , 23.2 % of farms receive direct payments of less than EUR 1 000 , the amount set by the Commission as the maximum to be received under the simplified system .
However , 48 % of farms receive less than EUR 2 000 and , as has already been pointed out , there is a great deal of variation within the Member States .
This indicates to us that if we want the simplified system to be effective , the maximum amount should be increased to EUR 1 500 , as approved by the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
Moreover , we feel that it is unacceptable for any change to the management and payment system to be financially detrimental to those farmers with the lowest income capacity and who receive a lower percentage of aid .
We therefore support the rapporteur ' s proposal that single global payments , which are calculated on the basis of the actual payments received in previous years , should be increased by 20 % to compensate for the increase in future payments outside the simplified scheme .
This will prevent discrimination and the possible negative financial effects that this proposal could have on small-scale farmers .
I wish this initiative , which seems to be an experimental one , every success in its implementation and I hope that the Commission will continue to put proposals to us that move forward in the sense of simplifying the system and the management of agricultural policy , which is essential for achieving greater transparency , bringing Community policy closer to the European people and helping them to understand it .
Mr President , seldom have we encountered such a brief proposal with such potentially far-reaching effects .
The CAP aid schemes needed simplifying .
Despite the simplifications , we must guard against the risks of spoiling them or reducing their effectiveness .
In this context , what is surprising in the Commission proposal is the lack of detail in the scope of the measure and the fact that the Commission is relying on the accounting network to evaluate it .
The value of the Graefe zu Baringdorf report thus deserves recognition .
I would recall that I prepared a report and later Mrs Redondo prepared another which proposed statistical treatment of the EAGGF ( Guarantee Section ) payments to provide us with accurate information about the implementation of the CAP .
The Commission did not accept it at first , but then agreed to move in that direction .
I believe that if we had done that we would today have much more precise information about the subjects we are dealing with .
Returning to the subject in question , I think there are certain finer points that have to be taken into account with regard to the Commission ' s initial proposal : the granting of aid without making it conditional on keeping up the activity runs the risk of deteriorating the economic fabric and creating a system of patronage in the sector , which over the last ten years has seen the loss of 30 % of holdings and over 25 % of jobs .
There may also be problems with this system regarding its ability to differentiate between aid for small-scale holdings and that for part-time farming .


In these conditions I believe that what Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf has done is of enormous value and has the support of my political group , and I would just like to say that we should have liked even more to support Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf ' s initial proposal in its entirety and not as it ended up , as a result of the vote in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
In any case , we shall be supporting his report .
Mr President , Commissioner Fischler , on behalf of the Liberal Group I thank the Commission and the rapporteurs for this excellent work which does not seek only to simplify administration but this time also has an excellent goal from the point of view of farmers : simplifying the procedures for applying for support .
In this sense this move is a very fundamental one .
When travelling anywhere in the EU , talking to farmers , the first and only thing you hear is that bureaucracy , vast amounts of paperwork and the associated difficulties are creating a very negative picture for farmers .
This is a very important issue especially as far as the smallest farmers are concerned .
In the long term the scheme should be developed so that rural development activities are linked to it .
The scheme should also include an expansion bonus , even now in its initial stages .
It surprises me that the Commission is working on the basis of a policy whereby growth in income under the scheme would be set at a fixed level rather than being index-linked .
The rapporteur has correctly intervened in the matter and pointed out that there is an opportunity for raising support outside the scheme by virtue of the agenda solution .
I see this as a very important point .
To make the scheme attractive also to farms attempting to improve production , our committee ' s proposal on raising the level of support is justified .
The level can be discussed but the principle especially on this matter is very important .
For this reason this trial , which at the moment is experimental and temporary , should receive widespread support .
Mr President , the Commission proposal misleadingly confines itself to an administrative matter which does not even merit discussion and deliberately overlooks the way in which direct Community aid is distributed to farm holdings and the worsening situation of small farm holdings .
According to the scant information contained in the report and from the farm accounting data network , 23.2 % of the farms in the network are paid less than EUR 1 000 per annum in direct aid .
The actual figure is much higher if we take account of farms outside the network , which are obviously small holdings , meaning that far more than 23.2 % of all Community holdings receive a mere 1.4 % of total direct aid .
This item of information , which the Commission deliberately omits , proves that statements by senior Commission officials to the effect that the supposed aim of the Community budget and direct aid is to iron out inequalities between the rich and poor farming regions of the European Union and between large and small holdings are pure hypocrisy .
As a result , 20 % of the large farm holdings in the European Union receive 80 % of Community subsidies , as the former Commissioner , Mr MacSharry discovered to his surprise and , unfortunately , the situation is getting worse .
Because the way in which direct aid is distributed benefits large farm holdings at the expense of small farms , thereby constantly increasing the income differential between rich and poor farming regions and between large , capitalist-style holdings and small , family-run farms , because the way in which direct aid is distributed is helping to wipe out small holdings and because the Commission proposal makes no attempt to get to the nub of the problem , the members of the Community Party of Greece will be voting against the Commission proposal and the parliamentary report .
Mr President , apart from its costs , the common agricultural policy makes it difficult to allocate small farmer support to countries like Portugal , where 75 % of farmers are small-scale .
Simplification of the direct support scheme has become essential , and so it is important to make progress in this field , even if only experimentally .
Parliament ' s report improves the Commission proposal by broadening the scope of the simplified scheme to include farmers who get up to 1500 euro per year and also increasing aid by 20 % .
However , given the characteristics of the agricultural sector in Portugal , we would have preferred the threshold of the scheme to be put at 2500 euro , as Friedrich Wilhelm Graefe zu Baringdorf had proposed , which would ensure that many more Portuguese farmers would enter the scheme .
I therefore regret the proposal by Arlindo Cunha to reduce this threshold to 1500 euro .
Yet we must be careful that this simplified scheme is not used by the Commission to achieve other objectives , that is , in connection with a reform of the CAP : clear conditions for access to the simplified scheme must be defined in collaboration with the national governments with a view to guaranteeing that agricultural activity is maintained .
In any case , I support the report presented by Parliament .
Mr President , Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , I should like to start by thanking you for your detailed report on this proposal .
Honourable Members , the Court of Auditors complained in its opinion on the Agenda 2000 reforms that the authorities in the Member States disburse relatively modest sums in aid to a relatively large number of farmers at considerable administrative expense .
Quite a few Member States have expressed similar views at working party meetings chaired by the Agriculture Directorate-General .
The present proposal is the Commission 's answer to these complaints .
It should make life easier both for the national authorities and , more importantly , for the farmers who are entitled to use this simplified system in future .
The most important advantage for the farmers is that they will have to fill in fewer forms and the conditions which they must meet in order to obtain aid will be much simpler .
For the national authorities , the time needed to process applications and carry out controls will be cut .
I am hugely in favour of simplifying the common agricultural policy .
This proposal is a first step in this direction ; it is something completely new and , having concentrated in the past on simplifying provisions which then prove to be difficult , complicated or too expensive to apply , this is a new approach , although we shall certainly continue to work on simplifying provisions already in force .
As numerous aspects of the small producers ' regulations have yet to be tested , we must ensure that this is an endeavour which can initially be implemented up to 2005 .
This is also why the Commission has deliberately limited the scope of the regulation to a specific selection of direct payments and set a relatively low ceiling in order to preclude any risks and ensure that it stays in the Court of Auditors ' good books .
This regulation will be evaluated before the trial period ends and I sincerely hope that this evaluation will then form the basis for a more comprehensive , more ambitious , long-term solution .
Now to the individual proposed amendments .
The environmental requirements in Regulation 1259 / 99 will continue to apply because they are already covered in the regulation , meaning that Amendment No 1 is redundant .
The 20 % increase to payments proposed in Amendments Nos 2 and 3 will , I think , cause problems .
First , the regulation would no longer be without any impact on the budget and we would have to reckon on additional costs of about EUR 100 million per annum .
Secondly , the sole purpose of the proposal is to find a simpler way of getting current aid to farmers .
May I also point out that farmers can , in any case , opt to use the average of the last three years or the previous year as a basis .
It is true that , to an extent , we are in a transitional stage .
However , this transition has closed today for all surface area premiums .
As far as beef premiums are concerned , there will be a further increase next year .
I can confirm that .
If a farmer really feels that he would lose money here , then he is entitled to file a normal application again this year and not to join the global payment system for another year .
In other words , it is not the Commission 's intention to disadvantage farmers .
Nor is there , however , any justification for increasing premiums through the back door .
The Commission can accept the suggestion in Amendment No 4 to raise the proposed ceiling above EUR 1 000 but will have to reject Amendment No 5 .
The decision to apply this system must be taken at the trial stage at national level when the Member States are given the opportunity to apply the small producer regulation on a regional basis .
Mr President , allow me to ask the Commissioner a question before the debate closes .
You said we would need another hundred million .
According to the calculations in your proposal , the payments affected here - if I remember correctly - represent 1.6 % of all payments .
In other words they are minute .
As Mr Pesälä said , we were not looking to increase premiums , we were just trying to keep things simple .
If the Commission makes sure that it adds the additional premium increase for the farms to the global payment system , then we would be satisfied .
We are not trying to increase premiums through the back door , even though these holdings are sorely in need of an increase .
That is another kettle of fish , however .
To make savings here is out of order , however .
Given that you were so quick to work out or to get someone to work out the figure of one hundred million for you , then we would be most interested to know how much would be saved if the premium was not increased .
Because that would represent a saving and a reduction in premiums to the detriment of these small farms and I think we should prevent that .
Mr President , the Commission also takes the view that we should not be looking to make savings , but nor should we be looking to extend premiums .
As we understood the proposal , there would be an across-the-board increase of 20 % , which would generate considerable additional costs here .
As I have already said , all increases in premiums under Agenda 2000 are covered here , with the exception of the last increase which is due to be applied to the beef sector on 1 July .
All the others have already been included ; and the increase in the beef sector next year will not be 20 % , it will be around 10 % .
So if a farmer - and he has the choice - feels he would do well to wait another year before opting for global payments , then he can do so , and then this beef farmer would enter the global payment system a year later .
He has that choice and will not be disadvantaged as a result .
Our objective is not to make so-called savings and no such insinuation should be made ; our objective is to make people 's lives easier here while guaranteeing budgetary neutrality .
For the rest , as I said , this first step is a trial and once it has been applied for three years - no even sooner , because we want a sort of midterm review ; in theory we can check whether or not things are working out once it has been up and running for a year .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6.30 p.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 1.05 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

TOPICAL AND URGENT DEBATE
The next item is the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
Biological and toxins weapons convention
The first item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0434 / 2001 by Patricia McKenna and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the Compliance Protocol for the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention ;
B5-0436 / 2001 by Pedro Marset Campos and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the Compliance Protocol for the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention ;
B5-0446 / 2001 by Bill Newton-Dunn , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the Compliance Protocol for the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention ;
B5-0454 / 2001 by John Walls Cushnahan and Bernd Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the Compliance Protocol for the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention ;
B5-0462 / 2001 by Jan Wiersma and Margrietus Van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the Compliance Protocol for the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention .
Mr President , as everyone knows , the leaders of the EU and the American President are meeting in Göteborg today .
Obviously some of the things they will air are their differences about the Kyoto Protocol on the environment and global warming and about the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty , which needs updating .
But there is another important matter , however , which has received very little publicity and to which this debate is designed to draw attention .
It is the six-year negotiations that are nearing completion to update the 1972 Biological and Toxic Weapons Convention .
The problem with the 1972 convention is that while it banned production of biological weapons it contained no means of verifying whether they were being produced on the quiet .
Despite six years of negotiation , it now appears that the new US Administration is backing off and is unwilling to support the terms that have been negotiated to date , including by its own predecessors .
In the widespread opinion of this House , the presidential elections last November did not suggest that the American people wanted a wholesale change in government policy , but favoured a continuation of the previous policy .
Nevertheless , there are now very alarming signals that the Americans may not support the work that has been done so far .
If that is the case , and if there is no final agreement on containing biological and toxic weapons , what kind of message will it send out to what President Bush calls the ' rogue ' states of the world ?
We cannot get involved in the negotiations but the most important thing we can do - and I hope the House will agree - is to give strong support to the EU negotiating team and say to the Americans : ' come on , sign up , we need this agreement ' .
Mr President , the last century began with the widespread use of poisonous gas in the First World War , that is , with chemical weapons .
Then came the use of atomic weapons after the Second World War and the last quarter of the twentieth century , beginning with the Vietnam War , was marked by the development of biological weapons .
We have to understand that our era , with the possibilities offered by genetic engineering , brings with it the potential for appalling destruction .
Man 's ability to destroy - and we are talking irreversible destruction - is increasing ; at the same time , unfortunately , the international legal order is failing to keep pace and the foundation needed for the international legal order , especially common moral concepts and common ethical values , is becoming weaker rather than stronger ; in other words , we have a weaker ethical basis alongside greater potential for destruction .
This illustrates just how tremendous our responsibility is , which is why we urgently need to comply with and strengthen international law and work towards multilateralism on these issues .
The USA obviously has a great deal of responsibility , as does the European Union , and we must guard against a tendency to play a part whereby , rightly as it happens in this case , we protest about the Americans but are unable or unwilling to act as an independent , powerful factor in the international play of forces .
We are quick to criticise the leading role of the USA - and I believe that this leading role is , in fact , too big .
That is not the fault of the USA , however , it is the result of political and , above all , security policy weaknesses in the European Union .
I call on the Gothenburg Summit to set the right priorities once and for all and to focus on foreign and security policy at the summit so that the European Union can at last work as an equal partner with the USA .
Then we shall be able to resolve these problems .
Mr President , President Bush ' s visit to Europe is taking place partly in the context of his plans for a national missile defence system .
This is supposedly to protect the United States against attacks from so-called ' rogue states ' .
To put it mildly , we are not very enthusiastic about these plans and want a multilateral approach to the threat cited by the United States .
For that matter that missile defence system will not protect the Americans against the threat of , for example , biological weapons , which can be spread in many ways .
It is ironic but also tragic that the United States does not seem to want to cooperate in the strengthening of the convention on biological weapons .
Biological weapons are easier to develop and spread than nuclear ones and the danger of these weapons can only be effectively combated with multilateral agreements and that includes an adequate monitoring mechanism for tracking those breaking the agreements .
That mechanism is required urgently .
Reaching agreement on this will mean at last another success in the struggle against weapons of mass destruction .
The political conclusion of an agreement would be that there definitely are international alternatives to unilateral action in the security field .
Mr President , the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction poses a major threat to the world .
The misuse of biotechnology for hostile purposes must be addressed straight away .
The use of biological and toxic weapons has to be tackled .
It is disgraceful that there is no mechanism in place today to verify compliance with the Biological and Toxins Weapons Convention .
A legally binding protocol to strengthen compliance with the BTWC is a matter of the utmost urgency .
We would urge the States Parties to show maximum flexibility and readiness to compromise , so that a short deadline can be met and a protocol adopted before the Fifth Convention Review Conference in November / December of this year .
We would also like to see States create a stronger possible verification regime in order to curb the hostile misuse of biological technologies .
This means maintaining at the very least the measure currently outlined in the chairman 's draft text .
We would recommend that the final version of the compliance protocol establish a modern and open verification regime capable of adjusting to changes in political climate and in technological capabilities .
Mr President , the Commission fully supports the resolutions tabled by the different groups in the European Parliament .
It is indeed critical at present that effective progress be achieved by the international community in the field of non-proliferation and disarmament .
As regards the specific case of the BTWC signed in 1972 , the lack of a verification protocol has been a major flaw vis-à-vis non-proliferation in the international community .
The Ad Hoc Group was created to resolve this issue .
After five years of difficult negotiations at the Disarmament Conference in Geneva , the time has now come to conclude such a protocol .
The EU praises the commitment of Ambassador Tóth , Chairman of the Ad Hoc Group , to achieve effective progress in time for adoption of the verification protocol during the BTWC Conference at the end of this year .
The Commission hopes that all States Parties will accept the composite paper as a good starting point towards enabling the task of drafting and agreeing on the protocol to be finalised in time for the BTWC Conference .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6.30 p.m.
Situation in the Central African Republic
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0431 / 2001 by Didier Rod and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Central Africa ;
B5-0437 / 2001 by Fodé Sylla and Joaquim Miranda , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in the Central African Republic ;
B5-0447 / 2001 by Bob van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in the Central African Republic ;
B5-0455 / 2001 by John Bowis and Philippe Morillon , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the situation in the Central African Republic ;
B5-0463 / 2001 by Margrietus Van den Berg and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in the Central African Republic .
Mr President , it is a tragedy that we are discussing here .
A rich country that has almost become bankrupt , State employees who do not receive their salaries , civil rights violations , attempted coups and oppression , armed conflict and hundreds killed .
We condemn the violence against the lawfully elected government , we demand lawful conditions and peaceful dialogue , and we would ask the Commission and the Council to help with humanitarian aid and to contribute to the dialogue , if that is possible .
I believe we can all agree about that here in Parliament .
However , your initial difficulties in finding someone who was here to speak about this point are highlighted by the fact that there are only about 10 Members here , and I am afraid that there will scarcely be hundreds of us here when , in a couple of hours ' time , we vote on these resolutions .
I hope that you will take the matter up in the Bureau so that we can have these very important matters properly discussed at a time when both the Council and a fair number of MEPs are also present , for this way of proceeding is not good enough .
Mr President , the situation in the Central African Republic has , once again , just grown worse and several hundred people have been killed in the wake of the attempted coup and the consequent repression .
This crisis is , once again , striking a population that has suffered from tribal fighting in a country blighted for decades by a serious economic crisis , as Mr Haarder has just reminded us .
This crisis is all the more worrying because it has led to the intervention of foreign armed forces and militias , which is exactly what happened in the Democratic Republic of the Congo .
It is in danger of plunging the Central African Republic into a similar chaos , which will create even greater suffering .
Faced with this tragedy , the European Union cannot turn a blind eye .
It does not have to return to a policy of interference , but must simply not give in to the temptation of indifference .
The resolution , which is soon to be put to the vote in this House , expresses our compassion and condemns this return to violence .
The European Union has the duty to do more , by increasing humanitarian aid , of course , and mainly by closely allying itself with the efforts of the United Nations to establish a climate of reconciliation . I feel that these efforts would be made easier , to a great extent , if a corps of peacekeepers were deployed in the country , similar to the one which played a positive role between 1998 and last February .
We have suggested this in our proposal for a resolution , which the Group of the European People ' s Party will give their unreserved support .
Mr President , we support the passing of this resolution condemning the repression employed by the Central African Army following the attempted coup d ' état of 28 May and the ethnic-based nature of this repression .
From its first recital , however , the resolution is concerned with the non-repayment of debt to the World Bank by one of the poorest countries on earth and by its population , which is dying of hunger .
The resolution condemns the presence of foreign armed forces , which happen to be Libyan .
How can we ignore the fact , though , that the foreign armed force that remained longest in the country , which sealed its fate , was the French army ?
It was the French army that enforced colonial domination and it was the French army that installed one of its junior officers , Bokassa , as the head of the Central African State once it gained its independence , without asking the opinion of the population .
How can we forget the protection given for years to the dictator Bokassa and his escapades , the presence of French ministers and of the President himself at the farce that was Bokassa ' s self-coronation as emperor ?
Therefore , whilst we condemn the leaders of the Central African Republic and their army , we would like point out the infinitely greater responsibility of the French state and we shall abstain from voting on the resolution .
Mr President , democracy has still not been achieved in Africa .
That emerged yet again in the attempted coup in the Central African Republic , in fact a classic scenario .
A leader refuses to accept the outcome of the elections and does everything to regain power , supported by soldiers from his own ethnic group and this is followed by repression and cleansing operations .
However , the difference is that this time troops from other African countries intervened to support the democratically elected leader .
So that , given the indifference of the international communities , African countries are slowly learning to solve their own problems for themselves .
The fact that in the process , a country like Libya gains more power and esteem in the continent is a regrettable but obviously inevitable side effect .
There is more to it than that , however .
The events in the Central African Republic are also an extension of the war in Congo .
The perpetrators of the coup were supported by pro-Kabila troops , who are trying to attack the Congolese rebels from the rear and cut their supply lines .
The war in Congo , the war in Central Africa is spreading like an oil slick across the continent .
Unfortunately Europe is looking on indecisively and passively .
The lack of interest , but mainly the divisions within the European Union , leads to indecisive and inconsistent action against countries that break the Lusaka agreements .
I should like , in this context , once again to argue strongly in favour of our not forgetting Africa , neither in their interests nor in ours . For if we wish to avoid hundreds of thousands of Africans migrating to Europe , then we must apply ourselves to conflict prevention and conflict management and ensure that these people are give the chance to survive in their own countries .
Mr President , the Commission is concerned about the recent attempted coup in the Central African Republic and the increasing political and social instability in the country .
In this context , the Commission , together with the Central African Republic , has recently finalised a country support strategy aimed at promoting good governance and a more stable , social and institutional environment as prerequisites for sustainable development .
The Community 's cooperation is to be focused on the transport and health sectors .
This strategy may have to be reviewed in the light of recent events .
It should be emphasised that the crisis did not turn at any time into a widespread mutiny and remained essentially confined to military operations .
The resulting humanitarian crisis appears to be well identified and manageable .
The Commission 's humanitarian aid office ( ECHO ) has , since the beginning of the crisis , been in regular contact with the delegation and international NGOs coordinating with the UN on the ground in Bangui .
In consultation with these partners , and in response to this crisis , the Commission will be providing up to EUR 1 million for a two-month operation .
This will include emergency food aid for 35 000 children and other particularly vulnerable groups , such as pregnant women and the elderly ; medical assistance in the form of drugs , medical equipment and small-scale rehabilitation to enable looted health centres to reopen immediately ; and reinstallation assistance in the form of basic household items and , possibly , support to refurbish badly damaged homes .
Mr President , I do not have a great deal to add , because the Commissioner has answered the questions that I wanted to ask .
Having said that , I would just say that it is important that we focus perhaps one last time on the fact that all the causes of what is happening today in a country like the Central African Republic are linked to these famous ' structural adjustment ' policies , which were imposed on countries by the IMF and the World Bank , which force whole populations to live in poverty and which prevent them from effectively resisting dictators across the world .
Commissioner , Mr President , I am very anxious that the European Union should continue to increase its efforts to come to the aid of civilian populations , and of democracy itself , by fighting against these policies of structural withdrawal , because they are unfair .
They help to strengthen dictators , not democrats .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6.30 p.m.
Human rights
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
Guatemala - B5-0430 / 2001 by Monica Frassoni and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the human rights situation in Guatemala ;
B5-0438 / 2001by Giuseppe Di Lello Finuoli and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the human rights situation in Guatemala ;
B5-0448 / 2001 by Carles-Alfred Gasòliba I Böhm , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the human rights situation in Guatemala ;
B5-0456 / 2001 by José Ignacio Salafranca Sánchez Neyra and others , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on Guatemala ;
B5-0464 / 2001 by Margrietus Van den Berg and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on Guatemala .
Electoral fraud in Chad- B5-0439 / 2001 by Fodé Sylla and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on electoral fraud in Chad ;
B5-0449 / 2001 by Bob van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the Presidential elections in Chad ;
B5-0457 / 2001 by John Bowis and Philippe Morillon , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the current situation in Chad following the Presidential elections ;
B5-0465 / 2001 by Marie-Arlette Carlotti and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on Presidential elections in Chad ;
B5-0472 / 2001 by Nelly Maes and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the situation in Chad .
Egypt- B5-0422 / 2001 by Bastiaan Belder , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the situation in Egypt ;
B5-0425 / 2001 by Olivier Dupuis and others , on behalf of the TDI Group , on the case of Mrs Nawal Saadawi and Mr Saad Eddin Ibrahim in Egypt ;
B5-0440 / 2001 by Yasmine Boudjenah and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the human rights situation in Egypt ;
B5-0450 / 2001 by Bob van den Bos and others , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the case of Mrs Nawal Saadawi and Mr Saad Eddin Ibrahim in Egypt ;
B5-0466 / 2001 by Margrietus Van den Berg , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the case of Mrs Nawal Saadawi and Mr Saad Eddin Ibrahim in Egypt ;
B5-0471 / 2001 by Daniel Cohn-Bendit and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on the case of Mrs Nawal Saadawi and Mr Saad Eddin Ibrahim in Egypt .
Malaysia- B5-0433 / 2001 by Patricia McKenna , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on detention without trial under the Internal Security Act ( ISA ) in Malaysia ;
B5-0441 / 2001 by Luigi Vinci , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on detention without trial under the Internal Security Act ( ISA ) in Malaysia ;
B5-0451 / 2001 by Jules Maaten , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Malaysia ;
B5-0458 / 2001 by John Cushnahan and Bernd Posselt , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on Detention without trial under the Internal Security Act ( ISA ) in Malaysia ;
B5-0467 / 2001 by Glynn Ford , on behalf of the PSE Group , on detention without trial under the Internal Security Act ( ISA ) in Malaysia .
Afghanistan- B5-0423 / 2001 by Bastiaan Belder , on behalf of the EDD Group , on the further human rights abuses by the Taliban regime in Afghanistan ;
B5-0424 / 2001 by Olivier Dupuis and others , on behalf of the TDI Group , on the situation in Afghanistan ;
B5-0427 / 2001 by Crisitiana Muscardini , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the situation in Afghanistan ;
B5-0429 / 2001 by Jill Evans and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Afghanistan ;
B5-0442 / 2001 by Geneviève Fraisse and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the further human rights abuses in Afghanistan ;
B5-0452 / 2001 by Cecilia Malmström and Astrid Thors , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on further human rights abuses by the Taliban regime in Afghanistan ;
B5-0459 / 2001 by Thomas Mann and Charles Tannock , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on Afghanistan ;
B5-0468 / 2001 by Margrietus Van den Berg and Vattimo , on behalf of the PSE Group : the situation in Afghanistan .
Guatemala
Mr President , my group supports the recommendations of the Commission for historical clarification , in order to put on trial those who in the past violated human rights in Guatemala .
It is right and proper that the European Parliament , and that the European Union should support those who have the difficult task of tracing and bringing to justice the guilty parties .
I am talking about human rights activists , lawyers and judges .
In the past , support for such people from the Guatemalan authorities has often been lacking .
Consequently , I fervently hope that that support will increase after and because of this resolution .
But - and here I am appealing to those fellow Members of the PPE-DE who are present - in that case we must be honest and not place people above the law .
That is what is threatening to happen now .
You probably know who I am talking about , Mr Rios Mont , at present speaker of the parliament .
He too , he more than anyone , will have to account for his past as military dictator and accordingly , I hope that this Parliament will include that responsibility of his and others ' in the 1980s explicitly in the resolution .
Mr President , a year ago we called in this House for an end to the impunity which meant that those guilty of the murder of Bishop Gerardi had not yet been sentenced .
Fortunately , we know today that three army officers and a priest - it is terrible that a priest should have been involved - have been sentenced for this crime .
We believe a series of proceedings should be started against all those involved in the murder of Bishop Gerardi , as suggested in the very well-balanced report on the case , entitled ' Guatemala , never again ' .
Otherwise impunity would become a serious problem for the future of Guatemala .
To this end we believe the European Union should help protect all the witnesses , judges and defenders of human rights in Guatemala who are working towards this .
I am quite sure that we in the European Union can do this .
We must demand that all those working against impunity should be protected and that the facts with which this report is concerned should be made known .
Mr President , we fortunately live at a time when oppressed people and ethnic minorities can have their rights acknowledged and when the deeds of bullies and tyrants can be exposed and condemned .
Punishment is not always the crucial factor .
What is crucial is to bring out the truth .
Prosecutions must be brought because the truth must come out if people are not to be deceived again .
Guatemala has ratified the Geneva Convention and the convention aimed at preventing and punishing genocide .
The Truth Commission has asked that the authorities now take legal proceedings against those who have practised or supported genocide .
The President has supported this , but we see both judges and others associated with the legal authorities being persecuted and killed , and it is regarding these matters that we too in this Parliament must keep the closest possible eye on the situation and keep up a maximum of pressure so that these processes are carried through with transparency and so that the truth emerges and the skeletons come out of the cupboard .
Mr President , this Parliament has always upheld its commitment to the Guatemalan peace process ever since the signing of the 1996 peace accords , at which this Parliament was represented , just as we have repeatedly reiterated our intention and desire for national reconciliation in Guatemala , without this meaning the rule of impunity .
The joint resolution we have tabled , resulting from the unanimous agreement of all the political groups in this Parliament , underlines the homogeneous and consistent position of this House , which has for so long been committed to human rights in general and the Guatemalan people in their search for peace in particular .
The recent court sentences , such as the one that has been mentioned regarding the murder of Bishop Gerardi , have revealed just how important it is that justice and the rule of law should take their usual course and function normally , as in any democratic system , but we must not forget or stand in the way of the changes and pressures that have arisen in this process .
We must show our concern for the situation of violence , involving assaults on individuals and members of the judiciary , that has occurred and which has , of course , caused turmoil .
The rationale of wounds kept open for a long time is in any case unjustifiable , and the sooner a stop can be put to this the sooner Guatemala can move towards democracy , respect for the rule of law , development , peace and social improvement , leading to prosperity and the creation of the climate of peaceful coexistence and mutual respect that we so strongly desire for Central America and Guatemala .
We are not in favour of supporting Mrs Frassoni ' s amendment to take concrete action against military commanders .
In our opinion the indiscriminate nature of this amendment is not good .
Moreover , we would be taking over the role that belongs to the courts , whom we want to support in their vital task of pacification and re-establishing the rule of law .
Mr President , on behalf of the Social-Democratic Group I should like to say about the wonderful country and remarkable people of Guatemala that they have of course been through a very dark period , in which the vast majority of the population have in fact as indigenos been ruled and dominated by a minority of whites .
The whole history of huge estates , owned by the capituleros , goes back much further .
That also explains why a country with such an institutional background , finds it terribly difficult , despite the peace agreements , to resource the authorities , values , the standards and the democratic capacity really to put its past behind it and to regard the peace agreements as a new beginning .
Rigoberta Menchu is someone who appealed strongly to the indigenous population .
It is still that population that is afraid and feels how strong the opposition is , but I believe that President Portillo is sincere in this and is trying to take new steps .
That is also the reason why I , contrary to what the honourable Member from the PPE-DE said , still believe that the amendment is meaningful . Because it makes it clear that even those circles which have long regarded and felt themselves to be beyond and above the law , must be subjected to the full force of the law and not exempted .
Someone like Rios Mont with his coterie of relations and contacts definitely belongs to those circles .
On that point I also hope that the Commission will draw strength from this . It will not do so without sufficient international support .
In that sense what we do here in the European Parliament is also of great value and significance .
In this resolution the new phase in which Guatemala finds itself is recognised , and the legitimacy of the government is fully recognised .
I hope that the resolution will also be in honour of Rigoberta Menchu .
Electoral fraud in Chad
Mr President , Commissioner , I think that the elections in Chad are a textbook case for those throughout the world who want a user ' s manual for producing an electoral farce .
First of all , there is a climate of persecution against all opponents , with union activists being arrested and then the ballot boxes are stuffed with an extra one million votes .
I would say , however , to all those who still doubt whether a policy of neo-colonialism is at work , that it is the international community and above all , my country , France that bear responsibility for what has happened in Chad .
France has maintained a military presence in that country since independence .
The army printed the ballot papers and made the ballot boxes .
It is the army that transported the material needed for voting to the most distant provinces of this vast desert country .
I therefore feel that France bears direct responsibility and that France has colluded in this electoral fraud , or , in any event , has directly or indirectly contributed to it .
The silence of the international community is due to the fact that enormous oil deposits have just been discovered in Chad .
The Commission and the European Union , Commissioner , must immediately condemn the role of the international oil companies , which not only show no concern for the environment , but also care little for the interests of the communities they affect and even less for democracy .
I therefore feel that this is a real textbook case , which we could still call , forgive me for saying so , a neo-colonialist policy in Africa .
Mr President , the newly elected President Deby has made wonderful promises to his people , the European Union and the World Bank .
He announced that he would tackle the widespread corruption and would respect human rights .
He was going to remove his country from the poverty spiral with the aid of oil revenues .
Is Deby aware that he is irrevocably bound to honour the agreements he has made ?
The World Bank did not put almost NLG 4 billion into the oil project lightly .
Nor are the European Cotonou resources unconditional .
The aid creates obligations but all the indications are that the president is trying to wriggle out of them .
Deby used part of the oil consortium ' s advance millions to acquire weapons .
In so doing he broke his promise to the World Bank that he would use the money to fight poverty .
The elections appear to have been heavily rigged .
The restrictions on press freedom and the arbitrary arrests among the opposition once again underline the lack of democracy .
Europe must make it clear to Deby that he cannot break his word with impunity .
Mr President , last year Mrs Maes , Mrs Carlotti and I were in Chad to look at the pipeline project and its impact on the local people and communities and on the environment .
We were also looking at human rights in that country .
Today we three have tabled this motion because our concern then for human rights has been compounded now by allegations following the presidential elections .
It is right that we should not jump to conclusions .
It is right that we should take note of the OAU monitors , who thought that the elections were broadly fair .
It is equally right that we should take note of the views of those other observers and human rights groups who thought they were not .
The government of Chad needs to reassure public opinion in Chad and throughout the world by holding an independent and a public inquiry into the allegations that have been made .
The European Union should insist on this .
We are major investors in Chad and we should certainly be thinking of sending monitors from this Parliament to Chad for next year 's parliamentary elections .
However , there are questions to which we demand answers .
First , if there are 4 million voters registered in Chad and another half million registered abroad , how can 5.6 million people have voted ?
Is it true that children were seen with ballot papers ?
Secondly , why were the OAU and other international observers not allowed into the north of the country ?
Thirdly , why were the officials of polling stations in the north replaced at midday by military and other civilian personnel ?
Fourthly , if the total votes recorded in the south were overwhelmingly for opposition candidates as alleged , how can the overall vote have been calculated as it was ?
Fifthly , is it true , and I believe it was , that a women 's delegation seeking to present a petition to the French Ambassador was shot at and dispersed by military personnel ?
Sixthly , is it true that the six opposition candidates were arrested after the election and one of these , Mr Yorongar , was beaten and wounded ?
I met him in Chad and I met him again this afternoon when he showed me evidence of the treatment he has been receiving in a Paris hospital .
All these questions must be answered and accounted for .
That is our demand and it is the demand of the people of Chad .
Mr President , the Socialist Group is also extremely concerned about the unrest that has arisen in Chad since the re-election of Idriss Deby .
Accusations of electoral fraud , arrests and torture of members of the opposition , demonstrations broken up violently . We condemn these violations of fundamental rights in the strongest possible terms .
I have a further question - in fact I agree with all the questions posed by the honourable Member from the PPE-DE .
Is Idriss Deby in fact a new oil dictator ?
It is of course not very friendly to put it in those terms , but it looks very much as if the money earned from oil extraction is being misused to keep him in power .
Does this mean that Chad will follow in the footsteps of countries such as Nigeria , Angola and Sierra Leone ?
We know the impact of the extraction of raw materials such as oil and diamonds have had , and are still having , on the conflicts in these countries .
The Chad-Cameroon pipeline project is receiving help from the World Bank and the European Investment Bank .
Parliament expressed its concerns about the pipeline project as early as January 2000 .
Unfortunately , recent events in Chad seem to have proved us right .
The special set-up of the project is intended to guarantee that the proceeds are used for the economic and social development programmes for the benefit of the poor , but the unstable situation in Chad is threatening these good intentions and that is unacceptable .
Both the World Bank and we in Europe must increase pressure on Chad to ensure that the human rights situation there is improved .
This may , as far as I am concerned , eventually lead to the cutting off of funding .
At the same time the international companies involved must take their share of the responsibility .
I would argue again - as I have previously done with other countries in Africa - for a code of practice between the international institutions and multinational oil companies , according to which the companies concerned commit themselves to the conditions of socially responsible business .
Signature of this code of behaviour - which could be an initiative of the European Union or the Commission - should be a minimum precondition for multinationals to participate in projects in developing countries where public funding is used .
Mr President , honourable Members have highlighted at length the way in which the elections were rigged in Chad .
Again we see that democratic elections or elections intended to be democratic , are not conducted democratically .
In Chad it turned into a real electoral hold-up .
A coup in democratic guise , and foreign public opinion must not be fooled .
We have spoken to the representatives of Chad , as Mr Bowis has already mentioned .
The people of Chad have no faith in their democratic institutions and they have been proved right .
Attempts are being made to convince us by submitting pieces of legislation that supposedly guarantee that the oil revenues will be duly returned to the population and that the development of both north and south will hence be promoted .
On the contrary , people warned us back then that President Idriss Deby , again undemocratically elected , would do nothing except use the oil money to strengthen his military power , and military power is replacing democratic power .
Reportedly no less than four and a half million out of six million inhabitants voted .
Voting cards were distributed .
They were sold . The population in the north was artificially increased and that in the south artificially reduced .
To prevent the number of votes cast finally exceeding the number of inhabitants , votes from abroad by citizens of Chad were simply not counted .
In short , we cannot accept such a travesty .
The complaints submitted up to now appear to have been all rejected by the highest authorities and reportedly the results of the election have been declared definitive .
We simply cannot take this . In so doing we are depriving ourselves , our citizens and own democratic institutions of credibility .
I should also like to urge the French government most strongly not to shirk its responsibility .
Whenever we go to a West African country , we can see the extent to which French influence is still present there .
It serves purely neocolonial ends and we cannot support it .
Mr Yorongar , who was tortured , is here with us .
I should like to pay tribute to him .
Mr President , only yesterday the electoral commission in Chad confirmed the re-election of President Idriss Déby and the result of 67 % of votes cast in his favour in the elections of 20 May .
Such a percentage should not leave any doubt as to the legitimacy of his election , were it not for the accusations of irregularities made by the other candidates and the independent national election monitoring body .
President Déby has himself declared to high profile media that irregularities are common in African elections and democracies , but one should not hide behind a general evil to justify internal outrages .
In this case , we are not talking about technical problems , which may occur , even in the most stable democracies .
We are talking about the use of coercion against opposition candidates , restrictions of the most basic freedoms that have to be set in motion during an electoral process , and finally we are talking yet again about the operation of the rule of law , which even at the most basic levels is open to question on this occasion .
As so often happens , it is up to the European Parliament to appeal to the European Union bodies responsible for foreign relations to assess whether , with the confirmation of the election result , democracy in Chad is making any progress .
If we are to believe some of the complaints , the facts that emerge are so serious that they are absolutely unacceptable in the twenty-first century .
Yet again we must reiterate the need to use all the means at our disposal , especially those provided for in the Cotonou Agreement , and our cooperation with the community of ACP countries , particularly the African ones , to prevent and to correct highly dubious acts such as those that have just occurred in Chad .
We must all ensure the success of those who are working hard to achieve decent levels of democracy , freedom and progress in those countries , as a necessary precondition for stability and prosperity to become a reality in their societies .
The Group of the Party of European Socialists asks you to support their resolution and also asks the Commission to adopt their declaration so that the government of Chad can learn of our concern and the sections of Chadian society that have been edged out of the electoral process can realise that they can count on our solidarity .
There will be further opportunities , particularly the legislative elections announced for March 2002 , which must not be thwarted , to create a real framework of democratic coexistence in Chad .
Egypt
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the cases of Mrs El Saadawi and Mr Ibrahim involve a country that is not often in the news .
Our Parliament chooses to some extent to forget this country and the others that belong to the Barcelona ' mish mash ' of countries that are party to the Euro-mediterranean agreements .
Nevertheless , in Egypt , rather strange things are happening .
The case of Mrs El Saadawi is typical .
She is accused of apostasy and is threatened with compulsory divorce , a custom which , I hope , my fellow Members will want to take a closer look at .
Mrs El Saadawi is in danger of being sent to prison .
I wish to thank the one hundred fellow Members who agreed to sign an appeal on her behalf , together with many international celebrities .
Mrs Bonino and other Members of the European Parliament will be in Cairo over the next few days in order to defend her and to be with her during her trial .
I think that it is Parliament ' s duty to react robustly .
The procedure that has inspired this court case is called ' Hisba ' and can only be initiated by men or women of the Muslim faith .
The procedure runs completely counter to the Egyptian Constitution , especially to its Article 40 .
I therefore call on all honourable Members to support this fight , of which I do not think we have seen the last and I also call on the Commission to support Mr Ibrahim .
Mr Ibrahim worked with Commission funds and has been accused of fraud , even though the Commission usually carries strict controls .
It would , therefore , be only appropriate for the Commission to come to his defence as vigorously as possible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it could perhaps be said quite simply that witch-hunting has started up once again in Egypt , since a number of writers and artists are now being censured and their basic rights are being threatened ,
One example of basic rights might include the one laid down in Article 7 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights for which we have just voted , protecting individuals ' private lives .
If Mrs El Saadawi is found guilty of apostasy , she will have to divorce , which is a violation of her private life .
We could go down that road , but first of all , we should talk about her , because in 1972 , this woman was brave enough to condemn female ' circumcision ' .
This was thirty years ago , at a time when making such a condemnation was no easy matter , especially if you were from one of the countries in which this is practised .
Since then , Mrs El Saadawi has ceaselessly pursued her feminist struggle , in newspapers , articles , books and by maintaining a considerable public presence .
We are fully aware , then , of who this woman is .
In treating her as she is being treated today , a lack of respect is being demonstrated to all her commitment .
Perhaps we should focus on the fact that the prosecution is now recommending that the charges against her be dropped .
As Mr Dupuis has just said , her trial will take place next week , but perhaps under international pressure - and I thank Mrs Bonino for having made this appeal , which I myself signed - Egypt will , as we hope , reconsider its decision .
I would nevertheless remind you that divorce ...
( The President cut the speaker off )
Mr President , Egypt is crucial to stability in the Middle East .
The country maintains important relations with the United States and Europe .
Unfortunately there is still no internal stability .
As long ago as 1967 a state of emergency was declared and has never been revoked .
Egypt is still far from being a democracy .
It lacks essential political freedoms and human rights are violated .
The government restricts the activities of political parties , human rights organisations , professional associations and the press .
People are imprisoned without trial and tortured .
Show trials are still held .
The recent sentencing of the American sociologist Ibrahim fits very well into this poor picture .
It proves that jurisprudence is controlled by political motives and is unjust .
As an important partner of Egypt ' s , we should protest emphatically against these abuses .
The Barcelona process will never get off the ground if democratisation is bogged down in autocratic reluctance .
Stability means something else besides stripping people of rights .
The human rights situation in Egypt is giving rise to increasing concern .
As other Members have told you , the suffering that Mrs Nawal El Saadawi is having to endure is edifying and it has also been said today that she will soon have to appear before a criminal court and risks imprisonment and a forced divorce .
Several other human rights defenders are also experiencing legislative and judicial harassment .
The state of emergency , the law on association and the judicial system have been put in place to repress all freedom of expression , which reveals how far off course the government is with regard to respect for human rights , especially where torture and ill treatment are concerned .
As for the torturers , they continue their ruthless acts with total impunity .
The government does not respect the obligations of international law or the international undertakings given over recent years , including Article 2 of the Association Agreement concluded with the European Union .
It is therefore vital that the Egyptian authorities condemn all these expressions of violence and ensure the protection of its citizens .
It must implement real measures , especially on behalf of women , minors and prisoners .
It must guarantee an independent system of justice with investigations and inspections and renounce any legislation which restricts freedom of expression and association . It must not enforce a state of emergency whenever it wishes to restrain democratic freedoms and the activities of all these human rights campaigners .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur for the Association Agreement between the European Union and the Arabic Republic of Egypt , I would like to remind you of the importance of this agreement for the construction of a total partnership , which is not only commercial but also political and cultural , with this key player in the Middle East .
Nobody would be mistaken for thinking that this is an agreement of the heart with this friendly country .
Given that negotiations were concluded in June 1999 , the Association Agreement is due to be signed very soon and we will be asked to take a stand on this text .
I hope it will mark the start of a new momentum in our relations with Egypt and the strengthening of our exchanges and our mutual understanding , as this is one of the crucial objectives of this Association Agreement .
It seems to me that we must not impose our own models and concepts and condemn certain attitudes out of hand . We must instead analyse , understand and support without , for all that , tolerating the unacceptable .
This , to my mind , is the justification for this compromise resolution and I would like to thank those of my colleagues who helped to draft and support it , especially Mr Purvis and Mr Dary .

The aim of this resolution is to demonstrate the unfailing vigilance of my group and of this Parliament regarding respect for human rights around the world and especially in relation to our Mediterranean partners .
We owe it to ourselves to remain intransigent on these issues whilst at the same time encouraging those who take the correct path . Mutual understanding is crucial and that is one of the messages I would like to get across today .
Urgent or topical resolutions must not make us forget this . On the contrary , they must become the instrument of choice in our mutual understanding .
Having raised this issue on numerous occasions with the Egyptian authorities , I know that they understand this and are willing to comply .
That is what is important .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the forthcoming signing of a partnership agreement between Egypt and the European Union must enable us , particularly in the field of human rights , to iron out the difficulties faced on the ground by the various associations that defend these rights .
However , we must not systematically give way to urgent resolutions and I believe that , in the institutional relationships of confidence which have clearly been established between the European Union and Egypt , it would have been preferable to base our own opinion , our own debate , on the steps that certain Members of Parliament have already taken in this Chamber .
That is why , for my part - and it is my own opinion that I am expressing here and not necessarily that of my group - I think that this resolution is premature and that the situation was conducive to examining the human rights situation with a view to improving conditions in Egypt under the Association Agreement .
Members representing ' Lutte ouvrière ' will vote for this resolution in order to protest against an unacceptable attack on the freedom of speech .
By the same token , we take this opportunity to denounce the torture practiced in Egyptian police stations .
The facts related by Amnesty International , which alerted us to these practices , concern a number of cases of men , women and even children being tortured , in some cases to death .
The Egyptian police can only get away with this loathsome practice with the tacit authorisation of the Egyptian government , or indeed on its orders . There is every reason to believe that the leaders of the regime know that the great powers will turn a blind eye to it .
Yet the great powers , especially those of the European Union , have the means to put considerable pressure on the Egyptian regime , which benefits from considerable support from the West .
The European Parliament as a whole must take a stand against these barbaric practices of the Egyptian regime .
If it does not , then we will gladly comply with the wish of Amnesty International that Members of the European Parliament take action against state torture , if only in the form of personal letters of protest sent to the authorities .
If these police practices do not stop , this would perhaps go some way towards saving the victims who are currently in the hands of torturers .
Mr President , freedom of expression in Egypt in 2001 AD : the official writers ' union expels the author Ali Selim from membership .
The reason for this draconian measure ?
Selim is campaigning for normalisation of relations between his country and the neighbouring state of Israel .
For that reason I should like to add his name to those in the resolution before us .
For that matter , Selim ' s expulsion does not come completely out of the blue .
For the last four years the actions of this brave , independent Egyptian author has been a thorn in the flesh of his colleagues .
The reason is plain .
The Egyptian writers ' union forbids its members to have direct contact with Israel .
Nevertheless Selim has so far visited Israel seven times .
True to his vocation , he published his Israeli travel experiences .
They were not well received by the writers ' union : exaggeratedly positive about Israel , was the collective judgment .
However , author Selim went further .
He spoke out openly in favour of an end to the present Palestine Intifadah .
This was the last straw for the writers , since it bases itself on the so-called ' Aksa-Intifidah ' .
In short , Selim 's exclusion was inevitable .
At the same time eleven other authors received warnings because of the same attitude as that of Ali Selim .
Meanwhile the renowned member of the Egyptian writers ' union , the Nobel Prize winner Nagid Mafouz , has protested vehemently against these censorship measures .
I should like to see the Commission also take action in this matter .
After all , regimentation of thought combined with the propagation of purely anti-Semitic ideas is diametrically opposed to the values and norms that the Member States of the European Union claim to advocate .
In addition , the EU would in this way be contributing to reviving the flagging peace process in the Middle East .
In any case this peace process is incompatible with the general political tenor of the Egyptian state press .
The latter in fact deals wholesale in the most fantastic anti-Israeli and anti-Western stories and / or accusations .
In its pages you can read the following , for example , about the visit of Colin Powell to " his bosses in Tel Aviv " : " The American foreign minister had no qualms about abasing himself when he was in Israel .
There he stood , humbly , a Jewish yarmulke on his head , in front of the monument to the ( fictitious ! ) holocaust of the Jews . "
No wonder that this year ' s guest of honour at the Cairo book fair , the Arab equivalent of the Frankfurt Buchmesse , was Roger Garaudy .
A man characterised in the European press as " the internationally infamous and hounded holocaust denier " .
All in all , the Egyptian interpretation of freedom of expression is highly selective politically .
The Commission should also take the authorities in Cairo to task about this .
Mr President , this is an unnecessary and undesirable urgency debate .
Certainly it is premature , as Mr Dary said .
It was initiated by the Bonino radicals and was based on erroneous and tendentious accusations against the Egyptian justice system .
In the process of discussions between the groups we elicited the facts , which even they had to agree .
The result is that the proposed compromise resolution says virtually nothing more than could be required of any of our own Member States , that is , that freedom and human rights are fundamental to democracy .
Despite this , the authors of this motion have been peddling shameful and unfounded accusations in their speeches .
However , Commissioner , there is one question I wish to ask you and I would like an unequivocal response , if that is possible .
Paragraph 4 of this resolution expresses our support for the Khaldun Centre for Democracy and requires the Commission to continue its financial support for this organisation and its activities .
My question is this : is the Commission wholly satisfied that the Khaldun Centre for Democracy has properly managed and accounted for its funds and , more particularly , the European Union funds it receives ?
That is one of the this case .
If ' yes ' , I shall be pleased to support Paragraph 4 .
If ' no ' or ' perhaps no ' , I believe we should vote against Paragraph 4 until we are satisfied , and also vote against the resolution as a whole if it still contains Paragraph 4 .
An answer please , Commissioner .
Malaysia
Mr President , I have followed developments in Malaysia for a number of years through visits and acquaintances there .
It is depressing to see how Prime Minister Mahatir is increasingly doing violence to quite elementary democratic principles and general decency in order to put down his political rivals .
This Internal Security Act , or ISA , is used and abused for the purpose of getting at the Prime Minister ' s political and personal enemies , as in a dictatorship .
The same applies to the paragraph in the Malaysian constitution , the intention of which was to secure peace in the country and between the ethnic groups and which is now being used for the government ' s own purposes .
The former Prime Minister , Tunku Abdul Rahman , said as long as fourteen years ago that it looked as though Mr Mahatir was on the way towards authoritarian government .
It can safely be said that he has since continued along the same path .
That is deeply regrettable , and it is good that Parliament is today getting to debate the matter and that we are getting a strong statement from the government .
Malaysia should know the truth when we meet with the Malaysians in the various fora during the coming weeks and months .
Mr President , no discussion of Malaysia would be complete without making reference to Tungku Abdul Rahman , the wise man who founded the state of Malaysia in the 1950s and who managed to integrate and strike a clever balance between ethnic groups and religions while ensuring that justice was meted out to one and all .
He reminds me of a figure in European history , Kaiser Karl IV , a Luxembourgois , like Astrid Lulling , who managed to integrate Germans and Czechs , French and Italians at the heart of Europe and whose Golden Bull gave the Holy Roman Empire the most up-to-date and most cleverly balanced constitution of the Middle Ages .
The role played in Europe by Karl IV was played in twentieth century Malaysia by Tungku Abdul Rahman , who managed to strike a balance between Hindu , Muslim and Buddhist , Malay , Tamil and Chinese interests within a federalist structure headed by nine different families of sultans which take it in turns in a clever revolving system to rule this multi-ethnic state .
This fragile structure is based on respect for other people 's culture .
It is based on respect for the law .
It is , of course , based first and foremost on respect for the rule of law , which is why it is a serious problem that this sensitive balance in Malaysia has been increasingly disturbed over recent years by the centralist policies of Prime Minister Mahathir , who started by showing a lack of respect for the individual states , followed , in his abuse of the Islamic faith , by an increasing lack of respect for the other religions , and who is now upsetting the balance between the various nationalities .
It is against this background that the so-called Internal Security Act is now being used to silence political rivals from within their own camp and drive the rule of law in Malaysia further and further back .
This is particularly worrying because Malaysia occupies an important geopolitical position .
It is also an important country economically .
Above all , it is an important member of ASEAN , our partner community in South-East Asia .
This is why we must do whatever we can to help Malaysia resurrect the spirit of Abdul Rahman or the Luxembourg spirit , which does so much to foster integration in our European Union .
I think that Mr Mahathir 's time is up and that new democratic forces need to take the helm in this country and renew the rule of law there ; otherwise this complicated , multi-ethnic , multi-religious structure will become immersed in a blood bath as a result of excessive centralism and authoritarianism .
Mr President , may I jump the queue and ask Mr Posselt a question ?
I have listened to his history lesson most attentively but was somewhat surprised by his criticism of Mr Mahathir , as Professor Rinsche has always taught us that Mr Mahathir was the greatest of all Asian statesmen .
Do the German Christian Democrats know something we do not ?
You said , Mr Posselt , that Karl IV was a Luxembourgois like Mrs Lulling .
I had always assumed that Mrs Lulling was a Luxembourgoise .
If I have misunderstood , please do enlighten me .
Afghanistan
Mr President , I will not reply to Mr Purvis personally .
I think that his way of perceiving events that have taken place or which are still ongoing in Egypt is very selective and that is up to him .
Unfortunately , the future , as indeed the past , is unlikely to prove him right .
As far as Afghanistan is concerned , I still believe that we may frankly be disappointed by the policy pursued by the European Union and , in particular , by the Commission and the Council as regards Pakistan which , as we know , is crucial for the future of Afghanistan .
Until we adopt a very firm policy towards Pakistan , the Taliban will continue to do what they have been doing for years .
The news is still fresh : the Taliban recaptured a town in the centre of Afghanistan .
The first thing they saw fit to do was to bomb and destroy the hospital and to bomb and destroy the centre for humanitarian aid .
This is a daily occurrence in Afghanistan . This is the Afghanistan we will continue to support indirectly until we have a tough policy against all those states which continue to support it , starting of course with Pakistan , but not forgetting Saudi Arabia and some other States .
I would therefore like to ask the Commission if it could give us any clear , precise indications as to the policies it intends to implement with regard to states which help this renegade state to remain in place .
We know about the disasters , we have spoken about them very often , starting with the situation of women , but unfortunately they go far beyond that .
They include the exclusion of the whole of Afghan youth from any form of education worthy of the name .
We are very well aware that the Afghan version of the Koranic schools has nothing to do with education .
It is therefore high time we got some concrete answers from the Commission and the Council , which is once again absent .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , after the sinister fate that befell Afghan women and the Buddha statues of Bamyan the Taliban are taking a further step in their merciless religious fanaticism .
The Sikh and Hindu minorities will be required to wear a yellow identification sign on their clothes .
The Human Rights Watch today reports the very latest atrocity in this never-ending story : 60 citizens imprisoned and official , residential and commercial buildings destroyed .
When the regime in Kabul took over power it was to be recognised on the basis of three criteria : stamping out the drug trade , fighting terrorism and respecting human rights .
The Taliban have scored a notable success only in reducing opium production .
Consequently they are convinced that they will never gain international recognition , and hence opt for massive suppression , in other words mass murder , of their people .
The first result of the policy of isolation is that all negotiations have become impossible and hence the only consequences of the sanctions is that a sorely tried people is being punished , that can do nothing but flee to camps in the hope of reaching Europe .
So that the question is no longer whether the Taliban are violating human rights , but what conclusions must be drawn .
Accordingly our group is submitting two amendments .
If the Taliban also conquer the Panchi they will see themselves as the great victors over the West and the Russians , as a result of which they will completely abandon the attempt to achieve compromises with the international community .
That might result in the NGOs being thrown out , which are the sole remaining source of information .
Europe could suggest lifting sanctions and at the same time increasing the diplomatic pressure on Pakistan .
This would slow down the advance of the Taliban and especially bring them back to the negotiating table .
However , this will only be possible if at the same time there is investment in the NGOs operating there that are trying to improve the situation of men , women and children .
Mr President , two days ago , Médecins du monde alerted us in the towns of France as we in the European Parliament seek to inform public opinion on Afghanistan .
Médecins du monde added that the European Community budget given to NGOs in Afghanistan was in sharp decline .
I ask myself how we can receive representatives of the Afghan resistance , how we can support Afghan women - which I feel is a very positive thing - without going further and without having the means to express our indignation .
I think that that is the purpose of this resolution , which is much better than the one we drafted two months ago , which I found rather weak , especially with regard to discrimination against women .
Now , we seem able to talk about crime , about rape , about apartheid , about everything which reflects the situation of women nowadays .
The current situation is difficult .
It has perhaps been made worse by our support for Commander Massud , Afghan women and many others , as well as the entire Afghan population , which is dying of hunger .
If , in future , however , the effect of our support were to worsen sanctions , to prohibit women from driving for the NGOs working on behalf of women and to close bread shops which enable women to work , to feed themselves and to feed others , we must do more .
And to do more , as has already been said , is to call the countries supporting the Taliban to account .
I believe that the European Community , the European Union , must not only give more money , it must know how to politically call to account those who support this regime and who allow this regime to survive .
This is the logical outcome of our indignation and our support and it is also our responsibility .
It is my hope that we stop confining ourselves to drafting resolutions which , even though each one is better than the last , are still too timid in relation to what we have to do for this suffering population .
Mr President , previous speakers have said that we have repeatedly condemned the violence that is happening in Afghanistan and the human rights violations that take place every day .
What are we to do , however , when the situation gets worse for women and for the Hazars , as mentioned today ?
We have a situation in which 170 civilians were executed in January and , as mentioned by Mr Dupuis and the others , there have been attacks in Yakaolang .
What are we to do ?
On the other hand , we know that , after the Tampere Summit in 1999 , the EU approved a recommendation from a high-level working party concerning how we should deal with the Afghan situation .
I believe that this strategy needs to be soberly appraised .
We need to review it again .
How should our embassies in Pakistan receive people who apply to be allowed to come to our countries ?
I have heard it said that they are sometimes treated like criminals .
I am pleased to see that we are seeking an Echo office in Afghanistan , something which should be reiterated .
We must also give our support to the Christian organisations that are working in Afghanistan .
There are Christian organisations that are doing an incredible amount for the Afghan population while maintaining a low profile .
They , too , need our support .
As has also been said by other speakers , we must also devote ourselves to getting the arms embargo into force and to ensuring that the UN gains access to the country in order , for example , to investigate the atrocities committed against the Hazars .
These are some of the measures that are needed .
We cannot get any further by condemning matters time after time .
One feels really powerless .
We need a more intelligent policy in this sphere . I think that our experience in areas close to home has shown that a presence in the country can also yield good results and , above all , has a humanitarian basis .
Mr President , the dubious honour of holding the world record in human rights abuses goes to the Taliban regime in Afghanistan .
A few weeks ago , as previous speakers have mentioned , the statues of Buddha at Bamiyan were destroyed and radicalism continues to gain ground .
Religious minorities - first the Hindus and now all non-Afghans - are forced to wear a yellow patch to identify themselves , resurrecting fatal memories of the totalitarian Nazi regime in my country .
Since the Taliban took over , the situation of the civilian population has deteriorated dramatically : women and girls are systematically oppressed , forced to wear the veil , denied an education and face the death penalty for adultery .
Women are not even allowed to take part in the distribution of bread under the UN world food programme .
They are no longer allowed to play leading roles , and the work of international organisations is being hugely obstructed .
Men must wear a fez and grow a beard , thieves are maltreated and their hands are chopped off in public as a deterrent .
The high Islamic priest of Egypt and numerous Muslims , Farid Wasil , is refusing the Taliban knowledge of the true values and ideas of the Koran and has declared their religious values and fatwas to be null and void .
Commissioner , we call on the government of Pakistan to refuse this regime any form of support , be it financial or moral .
Almost nothing has come of earlier promises to destroy poppy fields and opiates .
Last Wednesday , German customs seized six kilos of heroin and 64 kilos of hashish worth EUR two million in a container from Afghanistan .
Drug dealing is used to fund campaigns by religious fanatics and international terrorism .
Bid Laden is still in Afghanistan , feted instead of extradited .
The UN sanctions must stay in place , Commissioner , until Afghanistan makes the transition from the mediaeval world imposed by Mullah Omar to the modern world and hence to democracy and the rule of law .
Mr President , I do not want to repeat everything that has already been said by Members in the course of this debate , which has seemed very eloquent to me , but every so often we find ourselves once again discussing this problem of the attitude of Europe and the international community towards Afghanistan , because each time it seems that the previous record of human rights violations has been beaten .
Recently - this also affects me as an Italian - an Italian hospital in Kabul , one of the few that was working in a decent , modern way , had to be closed because the staff were threatened with reprisals , since the regime would not accept that women could work there in close contact with male doctors and nurses .
It has already been said that the regime has also recently ordered minorities to wear specially marked clothes in the street , which sadly recalls a Nazi practice that we hoped had disappeared for ever .
All this has left us unable to believe any more in mere verbal condemnations and wondering what effective means there might be for the European Union to put pressure on Afghanistan .
As has been said and as the joint resolution has emphasised , it is a question now of putting pressure on the countries that recognise Afghanistan diplomatically and also sustain it economically - Pakistan , Saudi Arabia , etc. and effectively organising independent forms of assistance both inside the country , with the European Union supplying and distributing humanitarian aid , and outside on its borders where there are refugee and displaced persons ' camps , as in India and Pakistan .
All this is extremely urgent , not just to help uphold human rights in that country but also to prevent the Taliban from helping to spread a fanatical , blood-shedding image of Islam in the West , which would add to the image cultivated by our own fundamentalists and racists .
Mr President , on Tuesday , Mohamed al- ' Owhali was sentenced to life imprisonment in New York for the Nairobi US Embassy bombing , whilst his boss , Osama bin Laden , is given sanctuary by the Taliban as an Islamic hero of Afghanistan .
This country is now so extreme and medieval that paper bags are banned in case they contain pulped versions of the Koran and women are veiled , segregated from men and unable to work at all .
Even chess and the flying of kites have been banned as un-Islamic , though there are many Islamic scholars who would contest such interpretations of the Koran .
Indeed the rules imposed by the Taliban would appear to derive less from the Koran than from the tribal customs dependent on a view that sees women 's value as essentially procreative and economic alone .
Until recently the focus has been on ensuring that Muslims behave in accordance with Islam .
However , in March , following a takeover of the Taliban by a hard-line faction linked to bin Laden , the extraordinarily beautiful 5th-century Buddhist statues in Bamiyan were destroyed with dynamite .
Now echoes of Nazi Germany are heard as Hindus , many tens of thousands of whom I represent as a community in London , are required to identify themselves visibly in public with a yellow cloth .
I am not suggesting that direct intervention in the country which defied the Red Army is either appropriate or feasible .
Moreover , intervention in the internal affairs of other states by outsiders can often exacerbate and prolong a conflict , as may have happened in the Balkans .
It may be that we simply have to wait for things to burn themselves out .
Nor should it be forgotten that there is peace of a kind in most of Afghanistan now .
However , the Taliban should be left in no doubt that , should they want our help , they will have to listen to the widespread concerns of people around the world , who are shocked and horrified at the brutal character of their medieval regime .
Mr President , I shall deal first of all with the debate on the situation in Guatemala .
The Commission is closely monitoring the situation there .
There are increasing concerns within the EU and the international community about the considerable deterioration in that country in the situation in key areas such as human rights protection , justice and good governance .
The Commission 's main priorities for relations with Guatemala are to support the implementation of the 1996 peace accords , which should lead to better respect for human rights ; to promote the modernisation of the state ; and to bolster good governance .
The EU has been very supportive of the peace process in Guatemala , both politically and financially .
The cooperation programme with Guatemala is aimed at giving adequate support to the peace process .
The Commission has assisted civil society and state organisations , with the aim of contributing to the reconciliation process in the country .
At the same time the Commission is preparing a programme to improve the justice system .
Furthermore , a Memorandum of Understanding , signed jointly by the European Commission and the Guatemalan government on the 26 March 2001 , confirms our commitment to the peace process , with EUR 93 million of additional funds for the period 2001 to 2006 .
The Commission and Member States have also used the regular political dialogue with Guatemala to reiterate the importance of respecting human rights .
The most recent EU actions raising concern about Guatemala have been the Joint Declaration of San José 17 meeting last March and the recent Declaration by the Swedish Presidency on the third anniversary of the assassination of Bishop Gerardi .
In this respect the Commission welcomes the recent sentence in the Bishop Gerardi murder trial as encouraging proof of the commitment of the Guatemalan judiciary to improving the human rights situation .
In addition , during a visit to Central America at the end of March 2001 , my colleague , Commissioner Patten , called on President Portillo 's government to take urgent action to avoid a negative spiral of events in Guatemala and reinvigorate the stalled implementation of the peace accords .
The Commission is also closely monitoring the situation in Chad , after the announcement by the National Independent Electoral Commission of the result of the presidential election of 20 May .
The calmness of the population on polling day and the high turnout demonstrated a civic commitment which should be praised .
According to international observers the voting procedures conformed to legal regulations , but there were organisational deficiencies .
A statement from the observation mission reported that opposition candidates listed certain instances of irregularities and fraud which they said had marred the vote .
On 12 June the Constitutional Council announced the official election result confirming that Idriss Déby had won a second term in office with 63 % of the votes .
The Council reportedly rejected the vote in some polling stations .
The situation is being closely monitored by the EU heads of mission on the ground .
In the spirit of Article 8 of the Cotonou Agreement , the Commission will continue its ongoing political dialogue with Chad .
Chad has been engaged in a democratic process for the last ten years .
This effort is leading to greater human and civil rights protection .
However , it is recognised that these rights and liberties are not sufficiently respected by all actors .
It will be essential to address these issues in order to ensure sustainable peace in the country .
The ninth EDF country support strategy , which is at the final preparation stage , contains an important programme of support for civil society , including human rights organisations .
The recent sentencing of the well-known human rights and pro-democracy campaigner , Professor Saad Ibrahim , and his colleagues has aroused widespread interest in the international community .
The case against Professor Ibrahim and his 28 co-accused at the Ibn Khaldun and HODA centres has been closely followed by the European Commission and Member States .
When they were initially held without charge last year , the EU made its concern clear at the highest levels , with respect not only to the imprisonment without charge , but also to the intensive and prejudicial press campaign against the accused .
When charges were eventually pressed against the accused , and when it was made clear that these included a charge of accepting foreign ( that is , EU ) funds without authorisation , the European Commission delegation in Cairo reminded the appropriate authorities that grants to civil society organisations were perfectly proper and covered by the EU-Egypt framework convention on financial and technical cooperation .
Support for civil society is also an integral component of the Barcelona Process and is an explicit objective of the Barcelona Agreement of 1995 , to which Egypt is a signatory .
The charges also claimed the misuse of EU funds allocated to the Ibn Khaldun and HODA pro-democracy programmes .
The statement issued by the European Commission in Brussels on 13 December last made it clear that the projects concerned were subject to normal monitoring procedures , including an external mid-term audit .
In answer to Mr Purvis 's question in particular , I should stress that in 1999 the Commission received satisfactory progress reports from both projects regarding a satisfactory and independent financial audit .
The Egyptian authorities have so far provided no evidence or information to support their charges related to the projects financed by the EU .
There have been EU observers present throughout the trial and the EU has always made clear its expectation that due legal process and justice would prevail .
It has scrupulously avoided any intervention that might prejudice that expectation .
However , the timing of the sentencing a month earlier than expected and without apparent regard for the defence case presented in the closing day of the trial , and the severity of the sentences - 7 years for Ibrahim and lesser but nonetheless heavy sentences for all the accused - were entirely unexpected and quite disturbing .
The sentencing gave rise to an oral statement by the Commission on 23 May and a Presidency declaration on 25 May expressing deep concern .
The EU used the opportunity to stress the importance it attaches to the development of civil society and reiterated that programmes to this end were an integral part of the EU 's bilateral programming with Egypt .
The European Commission is continuing to monitor the case closely .
The court is obliged to give its reasons within one month of sentencing , and these will be read with interest .
There are also limited possibilities for an appeal .
The legal process is not finished , and it is to be hoped that the final outcome will reflect the best traditions of the Egyptian legal system .
The Egyptian authorities are well aware of international interest in the case and of the implications of a final conclusion that is perceived as being unjust .
Nawal el Saadawi , the well-known feminist writer , was charged with apostasy , but the Prosecutor-General threw out the charges on 23 May .
However , this does not appear to be an end to the matter , and charges may yet be pressed in another court .
The situation is being carefully monitored by the Commission .
The Ibrahim and Saadawi cases have both raised issues of real concern , although further legal steps and the possibility of a sensible outcome remain open .
The overall situation is complex and not entirely clear .
There are also some signs of optimism in some areas , for instance women 's rights , elections controlled by the judiciary , social legislation and so on .
There is an increasing section of Egyptian society which fully subscribes to the view that Egypt must adopt the highest standards and is working to that end .
In relation to Malaysia , the Commission has followed closely the events relating to the detention by the Malaysian police of ten pro-reform activists under the Internal Security Act just days ahead of the second anniversary , on 14 April , of the conviction of the former deputy prime minister , Anwar Ibrahim .
It strongly regrets that on 2 June the Minister for Home Affairs signed two-year detention orders for four of the ten opposition activists and that three of the other six ISA detainees remain in police custody .
The Commission is deeply concerned at these events , which it considers contrary to established democratic practice .
They reinforce concerns already expressed in the past regarding the general human rights situation in Malaysia .
In this respect , the Commission welcomes the fact that the Malaysian National Human Rights Commission has questioned the basis of the arrests and that government representatives have stated that the ISA needs to be abolished or at least radically revised .
It also welcomes the fact that the High Court of Malaya , in setting free two of the ISA detainees under writs of habeas corpus on 30 May , called on the Malaysian Parliament to review the ISA thoroughly .
The Commission is ready to support EU action to press the issue of the human rights situation in general , and of the ISA in particular , with the government of Malaysia on all appropriate occasions .
The Commission , like Parliament , is deeply disturbed by the ever-worsening humanitarian and political situation in Afghanistan .
On the humanitarian front , the Commission continues , together with other partners , to provide assistance to vulnerable groups and populations inside Afghanistan and to refugees in neighbouring countries .
This assistance is given throughout the country to areas of greatest need , where access and security permit .
This is in line with the EU common position on Afghanistan , which sets the objective of providing effective humanitarian aid on the basis of an impartial needs assessment .
Commission representatives regularly take part in field visits and assessment missions inside Afghanistan in order to see conditions at first hand and to ensure that aid can be directed towards the areas of greatest need .
On the political front , Commission representatives , acting as part of the EU troika , have sought to persuade the two factions in the current conflict to promote a peaceful solution .
The EU troika , consisting of its ambassadorial representatives based in Islamabad , recently visited Kandahar and Faizabad to explain the EU 's common position on the Taleban side .
They noted a reluctance to consider new peace initiatives .
The EU , with other partners , is currently looking at how best to promote a process of engagement .
Two things are clear concerning the future of Afghanistan .
First , outside involvement in the conflict in Afghanistan can only prolong the fighting .
This applies to the support given to either side by third countries , which are pursuing their own agendas and their own national interests .
Secondly , a military solution to the Afghan imbroglio is not possible .
The history of the country shows clearly that no one faction can ever impose itself and its political and cultural philosophy on the whole country .
I might reinforce that , particularly in response to what Mr Dupuis said , by drawing attention to the fact that the Commission does not provide aid to factions .
It is delivered to vulnerable groups and populations according to need and where access and security conditions permit .
Given that the Taleban control 90 % of the territory of Afghanistan , it is obvious that much of the EC 's aid will be delivered in Taleban-controlled areas .
For these reasons the EU maintains an arms embargo covering the whole of Afghanistan and continues to call for a halt to third country interference .
The EU , at the same time , supports the peace efforts of the UN and stresses the need for a broad-based government in the country .
Finally , in answer to the contribution from Mrs Fraisse , fighting between the Taliban and the forces of the Northern Alliance has reintensified after the winter lull and the Taliban can be expected to try to expel the Northern Alliance forces from the approximately 10 % of Afghan territory which they currently occupy , while Northern Alliance commander Massud and his allies try to spread the conflict to areas already under Taliban control .
In the meantime the effects of the worst drought to affect the country for 30 years continue to afflict Afghans in the south , central and western regions of the country in particular .
Large numbers of Afghans have been forced by fear of famine and the conflict to leave their homes and are now living in IDP camps inside Afghanistan or have crossed the borders into either Iran or Pakistan .
In 2000 or 2001 , an additional 500 000 internally displaced persons or refugees fled the fighting or the drought and the country is heavily dependent on food aid , much of which is supplied by the United States .
Mr President , I would like to ask Mr Purvis if he is going to table a vote of no confidence in the Commission , given the false information and the deliberate lies Commissioner Byrne has just uttered before the Members of Parliament present here today .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6.30 p.m.
Nepal
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0426 / 2001 by Olivier Dupuis and others , on behalf of the TDI Group , on the situation in Nepal ;
B5-0428 / 2001 by Gerard Collins , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the aftermath of the massacre of the royal family in Nepal ;
B5-0435 / 2001 by Reinhold Messner and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Nepal ;
B5-0443 / 2001 by Luigi Vinci , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Nepal ;
B5-0460 / 2001 by Thomas Mann and Charles Tannock , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on Nepal ;
B5-0469 / 2001 by Jean-Claude Fruteau and Pedro Sánchez Aparicio , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Nepal .
Mr President , following the tragedy in Nepal , which wiped out almost the entire royal family , this tiny kingdom in the Himalayas is now threatened with civil war .
We must also remember that it is hemmed in between Tibet , which now belongs to China , and India , with tensions threatening to come to a head between these two heavily populated countries .
The facts on today 's Nepal . Nepal is about the same size as Switzerland and Austria put together .
Twenty-two million people live there and , if you think that a large part of the country is highly mountainous , then these people do not have a great deal of space .
The flat land is overgrazed , the forests have all been cut down and ecological meltdown threatens .
There are hardly any schools , hardly any infrastructure and corruption is rife .
Nepal is one of the poorest countries in the world and its only source of income is tourism .
Then there are the Maoist groups which oppose the royal family and have already seized control of part of the country , mainly in the west , and who are even more sceptical of the new king , the late king 's brother , than they were of the old royal family .
What this country needs now is enlightenment .
These people also need our solidarity , they need hope and suggestions .
Tourism must not run dry , which is exactly what will happen if there is a civil war .
I think that Europe should play the role of peacemaker here , hence my proposal to send a small EU delegation to Nepal to take preventive action before it is too late .
We must bring our values of transparency , democratisation and hope to this country .
We must not abandon this country , which has so many friends in Europe .
Mr President , the death of the Nepalese royal family rocked the world .
We would like to tell the people of Nepal that they have our solidarity .
King Birendra , whom I met once as Vice-Chairman of the SAARC delegation , was very popular and very well liked .
His espousal of democracy , of a majority party system , gave a great deal of hope to this country , a country which - as Reinhold quite rightly says - is so bitterly poor economically but so rich culturally .
The tragedy in the royal palace in Kathmandu , in which King Birendra , his wife Aishwarya and other members of the family died , leaves a vacuum .
The curfew and the ban on meetings can only go some way towards calming the situation ; there have already been quite a few violent attacks .
The first positive sign was when the new King Gyanendra said he would sign the old Nepal constitution , his brother 's constitution , in order to continue the democratisation process begun by the family .
Setting up a committee of inquiry was also important as a first step towards winning trust in the face of huge reservations on the part of the people about the new ruler .
The committee is chaired by the head of the supreme court , which is neutral enough , but the committee will only win credibility if members of both the government and the opposition sit on it together , of course , with international observers .
So if a delegation is to take part , it must be the SAARC delegation of the European Parliament .
The Maoist underground rebels have tried to grab this opportunity to destabilise the country still further .
The government and the opposition must finally realise that they have to meet each other half way and reach some sort of consensus .
They must remove the conditions in which terrorism and subversion thrive and that requires a common approach , not personal ups and downs .
The PPE-DE Group calls on the king and the politicians responsible to do everything in their power to relieve the people of their anxiety and concerns and the EU , Commissioner , must send out a suitable signal .
I again call on the European Commission to open an office in Kathmandu , where the SAARC secretariat-general has its headquarters , which we can use as a base from which to implement the excellent cooperation agreement between the European Union and Nepal .
This agreement is an excellent basis , as acknowledged by the European Parliament several years ago .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to express my solidarity with the pain of the Nepalese people , who are currently experiencing one of the most difficult moments in their history .
As Vice-Chairman of the South Asia delegation , I had the opportunity to meet King Birendra , a man of stature who was able to shake up his country ' s secular political traditions by establishing a constitutional monarchy .
A veritable force for stability , he represented the hope that the Nepalese people would emerge from absolute poverty and that the rule of law and democracy would become established for the long term .
The tragic death of the person whom the people of Nepal regarded as the symbol of the nation ' s unity and the force binding it together is the source of numerous concerns and raises countless questions .
Indeed , behind the drama a political process has been brutally called into question .
A link of confidence between the political class and its people has been broken .
It is a significant change in the balance of power in a region where instability reigns .
The European Union attaches great importance to respect for human rights and to democratic principles .
We must therefore roundly condemn the repression and arrests which followed the death of the king .
Nor can we remain silent over the distressing problem of the refugee camps in Bhutan , to which I am particularly sensitive , having visited them last year as a member of the delegation , and hope that the positive actions which were embarked upon to solve this problem are pursued with the same vigour .
Lastly , I too would like to appeal to the Commission for a full delegation to be established in Kathmandu , in order to try to help these traumatised people to heal their wounds .
The Commission is dismayed by the dramatic events that are shaking Nepal .
It understands the state of shock of the Nepalese people at the deaths of a beloved monarch , symbol of unity and continuity , and of many members of the royal family .
As of today the situation remains volatile .
It is still too early to assess the impact of the palace killings on the stability of the country and to predict whether events will take a disastrous turn or endanger democracy .
This development took place against an already turbulent situation in Nepal in recent months , as a consequence of political paralysis and the constant threat from the Maoist insurgents .
The European messages of condolence therefore particularly emphasise the need to preserve democracy - a democracy that has been a remarkable achievement of the Kingdom of Nepal and of the late King Birendra .
The Commission will monitor future developments with the utmost attention to make sure that all parties act in respect for democratic principles and human rights , in conformity with the basic provisions of Article 1 of the EC-Nepal Cooperation Agreement .
In this context the Commission deplores the arrest of three Nepalese editors of the Kantipur newspaper .
As you know , the Commission has consistently supported Nepal in its quest for social and economic development .
The EC has granted EUR 160 million in cooperation assistance since 1977 , and the current rate is around EUR 50 million a year .
Our commitment stands firm .
We are also ready to bring to our cooperation a new dimension , taking into specific account aspects of governance .
However , in the present circumstances we believe it is necessary for the dust to settle before proceeding with any further concrete action .
In answer to the issue raised by a number of you whether the Commission will set up a delegation in Kathmandu , I am happy to tell you that there is in preparation a Commission communication on the external service , which will cover the situation of new delegations and which will deal with this particular issue .
It should be published before the summer break .
The joint debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6.30 p.m.
Situation in Angola
The next item is the joint debate on the following motions for resolutions :
B5-0432 / 2001 by Nelly Maes and others , on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group , on Angola ;
B5-0444 / 2001 by Joaquim Miranda and others , on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group , on the situation in Angola ;
B5-0445 / 2001 by José Ribeiro e Castro , on behalf of the UEN Group , on the situation in Angola - civil society building peace ;
B5-0453 / 2001 by Bob van den Bos , on behalf of the ELDR Group , on the situation in Angola ;
B5-0461 / 2001 by Carlos Coelho and Arlindo Cunha , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , on the situation in Angola ;
B5-0470 / 2001 by Mário Soares and others , on behalf of the PSE Group , on the situation in Angola .
Mr President , this is the umpteenth time we have discussed Angola .
The war has been going on for twenty-five years ; and again we are about to vote on a resolution .
Surely we must ask ourselves the question whether sufficient efforts are being made for peace .
I welcome the fact that the Swedish Presidency has applied itself to this question and provided a declaration .
I wonder , however , whether the two sides - and I mean both the government of Mr dos Santos and UNITA - are not actually doing their level best to prolong the war .
This is a war that is fed by a stream of smuggled diamonds and oil : sufficient to buy vast quantities of arms and hold the civilian population hostage .
I consider this war to be making a mockery of our civilisation .
I should therefore also like to ask that the recommendations again recorded in this resolution , be followed up both by the Commission and by the Council , so that it can be monitored whether the will for peace is really increasing .
Of course we welcome the fact that statements have recently been made both by President dos Santos and by the leadership of UNITA expressing the intention to start a dialogue .
However , we see that the civilian population is being harassed time and time again .
There are the kidnappings by a new movement , again calling itself a rebel movement . There are the new minefields .
There are the attacks on towns and the constant attacks on the civilian population ; and those who live in those parts know that meanwhile in the bars on the borders the soldiers are trading with each other .
What cynicism !
Mr President , the complex situation occurring in Angola deserves constant , careful attention , and therefore I believe the inclusion of the matter yet again on this Parliament ' s agenda is justified , since the search for peace and the encouragement of all those who effectively seek it must be a central objective of our institution .
Because of the consistency required of it , however , this House cannot wipe out its earlier resolutions or the more or less recent positions of the other Community institutions and international bodies , especially the Council , which has particular competences in this matter .
Just as it cannot or must not ignore or paper over important events that have happened recently which mark the way the situation in the country is evolving and clarify , if that were necessary , the real intentions of certain forces acting in the territory , especially UNITA under Jonas Savimbi .
Having said that , I must also emphasise right now that I regard it as positive that the proposed resolution on a compromise , as it has been presented to us , has essentially put an end to the attempts to cloud the real situation in Angola and whitewash UNITA that underlay the initial proposal by the UEN ...
It is , however , equally true that even after the positive changes that have been added to this compromise at our suggestion , particularly the statement of agreement with the position adopted by the Swedish Presidency on behalf of the Union , it still suffers from unacceptable positionings and serious gaps .
This is the case with the obvious attempt to place the responsibilities of the legitimate government of Angola and those of UNITA on the same level , in clear contradiction to successive United Nations resolutions , which are symptomatically and for this very reason forgotten .
The same happens with the unacceptable omission of the recent condemnable attack by UNITA in Cachito , which resulted in the death of a great many defenceless , innocent people and the dreadful kidnapping of dozens of children and young people .
For that very reason I believe it to be very important and timely for the Commission to reaffirm the positions that it and the Council have adopted on behalf of the European Union .
Indeed , as I understand it , nothing can justify the fact that the above-mentioned positions and omissions can remain in a resolution by this Parliament , and they are in fact the essential reason why we have not subscribed to the compromise .
Furthermore , we are amazed at the blatant gulf between what was approved and reiterated recently by the Council and what is now proposed , even more so when some of the principal supporters of the current compromise originate from the same political force that shapes a government which so recently defined and adopted the position taken up by the Council .
That is also why we tabled some draft amendments with the aim of enabling this Parliament to realign itself with the positions of the Council and the international community and to ensure a line of continuity and consistency with what we have always approved here .
Our final vote will of course depend on the direction this vote takes .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , we have just heard the discourse of war , the discourse that has led to war , the discourse that has led to the continued failure of international mediation .
That was not our intention .
Our intention is to contribute to peace , because at last consistent signs are coming from Angola that some lasting change may happen in that country .
That is the major piece of news of the last few months .
Amid the news of the terrible ongoing war , it is these signs of peace that are strongly emerging from the civil society of Angola and which make our vote today so urgent .
It is these signs that we are turning to , to point them out , embrace them and encourage them .
We do not want just to cry over more deaths or lament further destruction .
We want to welcome those people who , with courage , generosity and independence , coming from the churches and the many sections of Angolan society , are carving out a new path that can lead to national reconciliation and lasting peace .
Let us listen to the Angolans .
They know more and better than we do .
The AMC , the broad movement of citizens , a civic platform recently launched in Luanda , speaks to us of inclusive national reconciliation .
Inclusive in the sense of not excluding anyone , because it is the poisonous spirit of exclusion that spreads war , misery and ruin throughout Angola .
Inclusive because the spirit of including everybody is a precondition for reconciliation , and because without true reconciliation to restore confidence there will be no peace .
The Angolans want peace .
Let us listen to the Angolans , let us trust that internal mediation and the energy of the civil movements can succeed where international mediation has failed .
Let us follow the voice of the Angolans , good people , not just those of the AMC but those of so many movements that fervently hope for peace : the Inter-Church Committee for Peace in Angola , the Angolan Reflection for Peace Group , the ' Peace and Development ' Women , who today are holding an international conference in Luanda , the Martin Luther King Association , the Justice , Peace and Democracy movements , the Village of Peace , the Messengers of Peace , the Mosaic , and still more , like the Forum on the multiple consequences of war a few months ago , from which there sprang an appeal for an immediate cease-fire .
These are the voices we must listen to .
We must recognise their features , learn their names , publicise their faces , shake their hands .
Because the tragic recent history of Angola teaches us one thing : we must only trust those who talk of peace without arms in their hands , with gestures and instruments of peace .
We have to stop this monopoly of the bipolarisation of war .
I therefore ask you to join in an invitation that I have already asked the President to make so that we here can listen to the vision of Angola and the future of peace that people aspire to , people like Dom Zacarias Kamuenho , Vieira Lopes , Rafael Marques , Justino Pinto de Andrade , William Tonnet , Chivukuvuku , Marcolino Moco , Cesinanda Xavier , and others , who have joined this civil movement for peace .
These are the ones who can teach us a lot .
Angola is still suffering , but it does not have to be like that .
This Angola of peace hopes that we will be able to send out new , different signs to the new signs with which it is challenging us .
Mr President , everyone - in Finland at least - has probably played a game called Star of Africa .
Each time we discuss Sierra Leone or Angola , I think with dismay of this game that was , indeed , regarded as just a game but which , at the same time , showed in a bloody way - one moment in Angola , the next in Sierra Leone - that what could actually be a country ' s blessing can also be a curse upon it .
My friends , I truly believe that we are beginning to see signs of a more intelligent policy in respect of the monitoring of resources .
We have seen many proposals for peace - the Lusaka Protocol , peace proposals in Sierra Leone and such like - but so long as war pays better than peace we will not get especially far .
I therefore strongly support what Mrs Maes has stated , namely that it is this way we must choose in order to move forward .
I also think that Canada , which has started work on sanctions , deserves our support and forms a reference point for our activities in respect of sanctions and our work in opposition to landmines and child soldiers .
We need to introduce similar work that is just as ambitious .
It is interesting to note that many who speak Angola ' s language are speaking today .
I also believe that there are many amongst us who have a bad conscience concerning what we said about Angola in the past .
We have all in our own way contributed to the tragedy .
Now it is a matter of putting a stop to this , of looking at what is singled out in the UN ' s reports - including the reports requested by the parliaments of the Member States - and also of pointing the finger at the presidents : those holding power in Togo or Burkina Faso who have , in their own way , contributed to the buying of diamonds or oil .
When it comes to the World Bank , which was mentioned in the debate , I actually believe it can be a very positive player in Africa , for example by monitoring , as it does at present , the income that the Angolan government acquires through the oil trade .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Angola is still suffering from war , destruction and the senseless , shocking loss of human lives .
Angola has everything it takes to be a great , rich , developed country and a factor for stability and progress in south-western Africa , but it has been squandering its resources and energies in a conflict which seems to go on forever .
We condemn the use of war , and we condemn most especially inhuman attacks on defenceless civilians , women and children , attacks that nothing can justify .
Several times over the years this Parliament has pronounced on Angola and has criticised attitudes and behaviour .
We recall these deliberations , which we uphold and support and which the compromise resolution upholds , recalls and supports . Just as we remember the United Nations deliberations on the conflict and we do not deny that the various sides have different responsibilities .
In our view , however , at this precise moment when a little window of hope is opened with declarations from the main players responsible and initiatives in civil society for peace , our role is to encourage this movement .
We must tell the people of Angola and the political leaders that the international community is willing to collaborate in the search for peace .
There is no military solution to this conflict .
The General Affairs Council said so at its meeting on 11 June in Luxembourg .
Today it is the European Parliament ' s turn to affirm it on behalf of the peoples of Europe .
We are pleased with the compromise text that it has been possible to draw up and we shall vote against the proposals that may disfigure it , not because we disagree with the content of several of them , but because what is expected of us today are words of encouragement and not of recrimination .
Mr President , my fellow Members of Parliament , representatives of the Commission , I too approve of the draft resolution on Angola , which has resulted from a compromise and in my view is a moderate and well balanced draft .
Basically it is an appeal for peace , which at this time , as has been stressed by José Ribeiro e Castro and just now by Carlos Coelho , needs to be supported by the international community and especially our Parliament .
The situation of Angola is a tragic situation .
Angola is a devastated country , which has experienced twenty-six long years of civil war without a break .
That is , since independence on 11 November 1975 there has been a civil war in Angola , and it is still going on .
As has just been pointed out , this civil war does not have a military solution ; and the theory that it is possible to reach a solution by crushing the enemy , even if the assassination or death of Savimbi were to occur , would not be a solution because the war would carry on .
The war can only end through negotiation among those that wage it and through pressure from Angolan civil society , which is at last emerging .
There are independent voices of civil society that are appealing for peace , especially those supported by the Angolan Catholic Church , which has played an extremely important role in this , and by all the other churches , which are exerting great pressure for peace , that is , for negotiations for peace .
This is the pressure that we must support , both the European Union as a whole and this part of it which is the European Parliament .
Mention has been made of a proposal by some of our left-wing friends - the Greens and the Communist Party - who would like us to make a special condemnation of the Cachito massacre .
We do not agree and we have proposed an oral amendment which might be a compromise .
This oral amendment would condemn all massacres from whatever source , because there is not just the Cachito massacre but also the massacres that have happened recently , for example , in Cabinda .
Therefore if we only mention one kind of massacre we shall be turning a blind eye to a reality which , as has been said , is a complex reality , and therefore what is an apparently humanitarian act is essentially a political act with which we cannot agree .
For that reason we are going to vote on this proposal for a resolution as it has been drawn up and not with the amendments that have been suggested .
By doing this we think we can contribute to peace in Angola , and I should like to second José Ribeiro e Castro ' s proposal for Parliament to listen to independent voices from Angola who are today courageously fighting for peace , such as the journalist Rafael Marques , such as Archbishop Zacarias Kamuenho , such as the former Prime Minister of Angola Marcolino Moco , and many other Angolans who are able and have the courage to come to this Parliament and say truthfully that it is necessary to get rid of the warlords .
Because while it is true that there are warlords on both sides and that both should be condemned , whether on the side of the MPLA or on the side of UNITA ( and we must condemn them both ) , the truth is that there are interested parties that gain with the war , and those that gain with the war are the oil and diamond interests . What we need to do is help civil society and the churches to emerge so that this ravaged people may finally achieve peace .
Mr President , honourable Members , the Commission is very concerned at the continuation of war in Angola , especially given the recent upsurge in attacks on civilians as well as the continued suffering of the 3-4 million citizens affected by the renewed war since 1998 .
As established in the common position adopted on 11-12 June 2001 by the European Union , the Commission remains committed to supporting initiatives contributing to a political solution to the Angolan conflict .
It seeks to promote the strengthening of democratic institutions and the improvement of human rights , the rule of law and justice , and a more transparent management of public finances .
The Commission encourages political dialogue within the terms of the Lusaka accords to overcome the conflict and expresses the hope that the recent declarations by President Dos Santos , inviting Mr Savimbi to set a date for his movement to end the war , will result in a dialogue for peace and national reconciliation .
The Commission expresses its grave concern at the lack of safe access for relief agencies to people in need .
The Commission 's strategy of assistance is delivery of a flexible package of emergency and rehabilitation assistance according to the changing requirements , as well as the creation of conditions which enable structural development actions to be undertaken .
I should inform Parliament that the level of eco-interventions in 2001 is expected to rise to a similar level as in the year 2000 , which is in fact EUR 52 million .
The joint debate is closed and that concludes the debate on topical and urgent subjects of major importance .
The vote will be taken at 6.30 p.m.
Civil emergency protection
The next item is the report ( A5-0180 / 2001 ) by Laura González Álvarez , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the proposal for a Council decision establishing a Community mechanism for the coordination of civil protection intervention in the event of emergencies ( COM ( 2000 ) 593 - C5-0543 / 2000 - 2000 / 0248 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Community cooperation in the field of civil protection began in 1985 and included two programmes , one which lasted two years - 1998-1999 - and another which will be in force until 2004 .
In recent years , disasters that have often been wrongly termed ' natural ' have had serious consequences for people , for the environment , and for both natural and cultural heritage .
Supporting the Member States in risk prevention , improving the training of those who intervene in the event of disasters , contributing to educating citizens about self protection and raising their awareness of the issue : these are some of the objectives of these programmes . Today , however , we are debating the Council proposal for the setting up of a mechanism for the coordination of civil protection intervention in emergency situations .
I think it is worth remembering that , according to the United Nations intergovernmental panel on climate change , there is already evidence that if the current trends of increasing greenhouse gas emissions are not corrected , such disasters - floods , droughts , storms and so on - will become ever more normal .
This mechanism therefore has to be very welcome .
Determining the resources available for intervention , the training of assessment and coordination teams to intervene in emergencies , and a common rapid communication system are aspects on which this proposal is based in order to meet the objectives of protecting citizens , the environment and natural and cultural resources .
The four priority types of action under this mechanism are : prevention of accidents , rapid reaction capability , response in emergency situations , and recovery measures in the event of a disaster .
The most important factors for achieving these objectives are : creating a management , coordination and information operations centre ; identifying available resources in the Member States ; training programmes for intervention teams and for experts in the assessment of needs and the coordination of transport , resources and teams and establishing a joint emergency communications system linking all available civil protection teams .
It is obvious that the current situation differs in each of the Member States : in Germany and Spain there is a clear delimitation of Autonomous Communities - regions - which have their own civil protection mechanisms , and also in the towns and municipalities .
In the other countries the civil protection service is more centralised .
In any case , I think it is obvious that this mechanism will prove very useful in that it can effectively coordinate and mobilise all the resources we have available in Europe for clear emergencies , as have occurred in recent years . I remember very well what happened in the Doñana National Park , when a pond of toxic waste burst its banks , flooded a river and a vast area of water meadows and destroyed the livelihoods of 5000 farmers .
Therefore it is vital that there should be a rapid , effective mechanism of this kind .
What perhaps is just as vital as this need for rapid communication and coordination is for citizens to be trained and educated to protect themselves .
In Europe there are about five million volunteers - I was surprised at the number - who for no payment provide their services at any given moment when there is a disaster .
Giving these people the slightest amount of training would be of great help in tackling these disasters .
We just have to remember what happened with the Erika on the French coast and other disasters of this kind .
I think the proposals put forward by Parliament are acceptable and improve this mechanism , and in future it will be very important that there should be a clear , practical mechanism , with a centre for the coordination of communications and resources for civil protection .
Mr President , honourable Members , allow me to start by thanking Parliament and , more particularly , you Madam rapporteur and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy and the Committee on Budgets for your excellent and constructive work on this proposal .
There is no need , I think , to enumerate yet again the numerous natural , technological and environmental disasters which have occurred over recent years .
The honourable Member has just mentioned one which caused very serious damage in several Member States and neighbouring countries .
The citizens of Europe have expressed their concern and made clear that they expect the Community to take specific action to guarantee efficient civil protection in an emergency .
Parliament too has called on the Commission to take initiatives in this area in a series of resolutions .
The Commission proposal of 27 September last year makes provision for a Community procedure for civil protection intervention in the event of natural , technological or environmental disaster inside or outside the European Union .
The aim is to improve and coordinate action taken by Member States in the event both of this sort of serious disaster and in the event of nuclear or ecological disaster and to create the facility for immediate aid if a country does not have the necessary capacity .
May I say , as regards the results of Parliament 's work , that the Commission agrees wholeheartedly with many of the proposed amendments because they improve the Commission 's proposal considerably .
The most important improvements are : the creation of a monitoring and information centre as an operational tool for implementing the decision to set up a database on the Member States ' production and storage capacities for serum and vaccines and other emergency medical resources , the importance attached to aid for isolated and outermost regions of the Union , the use of new technologies , including in notification systems , warning systems and systems for exchanging information and the use of satellite technologies for the purpose of the procedure and the references to the cultural heritage .
We are therefore able to accept 35 of the 46 proposed amendments in full , in principle or in part .
As far as the remaining proposed amendments are concerned , we still have a number of queries , mainly on the following aspects : first , the reference to the humanitarian aid component contained in Amendment No 12 .
This proposed amendment could give rise to a certain amount of confusion and the risk of duplicating the ECHO programme .
The Commission would like to avoid this and has therefore rejected this amendment .
Then there is the need for immediate action at Community level in the event of deliberate marine pollution .
I refer here to Amendments Nos 1 and 13 .
The concept of ' deliberate marine pollution ' is not , I think , the correct or a suitable concept here , because deliberate marine pollution does not trigger fast action and whether or not fast action is needed depends on the type of pollution or the type of disaster .
Then there is the question of the exact definition of the role and remit of the operational monitoring and information centre .
I refer here to parts of Amendments Nos 5 , 14 and 16 .
The Commission rejects Amendment No 17 .
The references to the monitoring and information centre are a constructive contribution .
However , some of the wording is misleading and therefore needs to be revised or deleted .
The centre should be a tool for the Commission and the Member States , not an operator .
So , to summarise , the Commission supports Amendments Nos 3 , 6 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 15 , 18 , 23 , 25 , 27 , 31 , 35 , 36 and 38 to 41 .
It supports eleven proposed amendments in principle , which are Amendments Nos 4 , 7 , 19 , 22 , 24 , 26 , 30 , 32 to 34 and 37 , but which need editing .
The Commission supports Amendments Nos 5 , 8 , 13 , 14 , 16 , 21 and 45 in part and rejects Amendments Nos 1 , 2 , 12 , 17 , 20 , 28 , 29 , 42 to 44 and 46 .
Finally , I must emphasise that our proposal is much improved thanks to Parliament 's contribution and support .
I am sure that these improvements will help to save more human lives in future and to reduce the damage caused by natural and technological disasters or by nuclear and ecological disasters .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken at 6.30 p.m.
Classical swine fever
The next item is the report ( A5-0143 / 2001 ) by Encarnación Redondo Jiménez , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , on the proposal for a Council directive on Community measures for the control of classical swine fever ( COM ( 2000 ) 462 - C5-0493 / 2000 - 2000 / 0214 ( CNS ) ) .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the report unanimously approved in the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development on 25 April on Community measures for the control of classical swine fever proposes an early diagnosis system and maintenance of the Community method for controlling the disease and slaughter , since not enough progress has yet been made on marker vaccines .
The reason for applying a policy of non-vaccination is based on the fact that in the event of infection vaccinated pigs may become carriers of the virus , especially pregnant sows , which may not show signs of the disease but may transmit it horizontally to the other pigs on the farm and vertically to their progeny , which may include persistently infected piglets .
In addition , as regards the differentiation of animals that have been vaccinated or have had the disease and generated antibodies , this differentiation between vaccinated and infected animals is not yet reliable .
Research will have to continue into this until these marker vaccines are effectively reliable and we are able to use differential methods that indicate whether the animals have been vaccinated or have had the disease .
This legislation improves certain prophylactic rules , clarifies definitions and proposes the inclusion of the ' Diagnostic Manual ' as an annex to the Directive .
In addition , the amendments introduced refer to animal welfare standards on the farm and during transport , and emergency solutions are proposed for cases of serious health crises which prevent animal movements for long periods , such as buying-in schemes , which the Commission has certainly never done before .
It is also proposed that this health legislation should extend to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and that they should be included in the plans to control classical swine fever .
Several amendments to this document have been tabled which your rapporteur feels deserve some comment .
There is one amendment , No 34 , tabled by Mr Mulder on behalf of the ELDR Group , which seems logical , but given that the health control authorities are national , trying to divide up the European Union into regions that belong to different countries and do not coincide with national borders seems unfeasible .
I would ask Mr Mulder , who is present , whether the Dutch will be able to control German farms or whether the Germans will control Dutch farms .
I do not think either side will agree to this .
Amendment No 35 , tabled by Mr Mulder , goes against both my feelings and the spirit of the report .
If the animal is not eliminated , vaccination will not eliminate the virus and the marketing of meat from vaccinated animals in the European Union would mean less safety for our consumers than for those of third countries .
We would in principle be unable to export , and anyway this news in the press would ruin the industry .
Fresh meat from vaccinated animals carries the virus and may infect healthy animals that feed on swill containing it .
I therefore cannot accept Amendment No 35 .
As for Amendment No 36 , also tabled by Mr Mulder , we again come up against the subject of co-financing , and I am also against it .
There are two other amendments : Nos 33 , tabled by Mr Böge on behalf of the PPE-DE Group , and 37 , tabled by Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group .
These two amendments go a little beyond what I could have imagined , since in my country the use of swill has been banned for more than twenty years .
Nevertheless , in this very House , Amendment No 102 in the Paulsen report , reviewed in this very part-session , was approved and I do not want to go against the feelings of this House .
I therefore understand that both Amendment No 33 and Amendment No 37 are acceptable because they may lead us to a more realistic solution to the animal feed control problem .
Mr President , this is a comprehensive report and I congratulate Mrs Redondo for the great deal of work that she has put into it .
The House might be interested to know that Mrs Redondo very kindly accepted my invitation to come to London during the formulation of this report to take evidence from representatives of the UK pig industry and senior officials from the National Farmers Union and the Ministry of Agriculture .
We happened to be in one of those meetings on Tuesday 20 February this year , the very day the first outbreak of foot-and-mouth disease in the UK was reported .
As you can well imagine , this brought our meeting to an abrupt halt .
Indeed , it is partly because of foot-and-mouth disease that I wish to direct my remarks to the question of feeding catering waste or pigswill to pigs .
I know that my colleagues from Germany and Austria have serious reservations about the proposal to ban such material from being fed to pigs throughout the EU .
As Mrs Redondo has just said , Amendment No 33 seeks to permit controlled swill feeding , subject to stringent exceptional arrangements , if it can be guaranteed that the pathogens which cause epizootic diseases have been destroyed by treatment .
Amendment No 37 seeks to achieve a similar objective .
I would ask the House to reject both these amendments this evening .
In the UK we had stringent controls of swill feeding in place .
We ensured that pig farmers only used the most appropriate and up-to-date equipment for boiling catering waste to the correct temperature to destroy all pathogens and we ensured that regular inspections of the farms using such equipment were carried out .
Of course you cannot legislate for human behaviour , however .
It now seems almost certain that infected catering waste was delivered to a farm in the north-east of England , which for whatever reason , was not properly treated , or perhaps was not treated at all .
This simple error , whether deliberate or just a mistake , has led to the destruction of over six million animals in the United Kingdom and tens of thousands of animals in Ireland , the Netherlands and France .
We have now banned swill in the UK entirely .
I urge the House to do the same across the whole of the EU .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I should like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Redondo , for her work , which is unexpectedly topical following the most recent outbreak of foot-and-mouth .
The parallels between swine fever and foot-and-mouth are obvious ; in the case both of foot-and-mouth and swine fever , the Community decided in the past to pursue a policy of non-vaccination .
However , the scale of the foot-and-mouth crisis has demonstrated that an unreserved policy of non-vaccination belongs on the test bench .
I do not mean that we should resort to blanket vaccination in future .
Killing infected stock , stamping out , must continue to be the mainstay of the strategy to combat these diseases .
However , greater importance should be attached to vaccination .
We should not , in my view , stand still on the question of vaccination ; instead we should develop a strategy of comprehensive zoonosis prevention mainly for use during disease-free periods .
This could include stricter controls on third country imports , controls at airports and quarantining new additions to livestock .
Another important point is the principle of regionalisation .
The Commission must act very quickly here and negotiate with EU trading partners in order to implement this principle .
We cannot expect all the Member States of the EU to put up with import restrictions in third countries every time a disease breaks out in one or a few Member States .
The European Union already applies this principle to third country imports .
Now third countries must return the favour .
Marker vaccines are very important here , as the rapporteur has clearly highlighted .
More must be invested in these vaccines and in developing discriminatory diagnostic techniques , so that it will soon be possible to distinguish between vaccinated and infected animals and then make economic use of vaccinated animals .
I should also like to comment on one more very specific issue , namely swill feeding , that is , using leftovers from canteens etc .
These leftovers have been used as animal fodder for years and we must still be able to use them in future .
As with meat and bonemeal , I support a conditional ban here , as formulated in Amendment No 37 by the Group of the Greens , that is , it should only be possible to use leftovers if a suitable sterilisation process is used .
I think that if proper controls are carried out then , as we have seen in the past in numerous Member States , we will still be able to use this valuable source of protein .
We should support the proposed amendment by the Greens which still allows leftovers to be used but subject to stricter conditions .
Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur , because I learned something from her report , which is always very pleasant .
In addition the report points out the necessary modification of the guidelines .
Of course we must bring swine fever under control , but extermination methods that require mass slaughter are no longer really accepted by public opinion .
That is a problem .
I myself come from Flanders . It is a densely populated region and there are even more pigs than people .
That means that we ourselves are dramatically confronted with that problem .
Therefore I agree that the combating of swine fever is important but should like at the same time to point out that this animal disease , unlike others , presents no danger to human beings .
I would say that culling because of the disease is one thing , but it is difficult to distinguish from culling for economic reasons , for example because sties become overfull or because animals become too heavy for sale .
That is why it is always rather hypocritical when mass slaughter is being considered , since it is not very clear whether the culling is taking place to prevent disease or for economic reasons .
I must honestly admit that in that respect I do not trust the industry .
The report has nevertheless convinced me that there has been a remarkable development in marker vaccine .
Therefore in my view it can easily be declared ready for use so that it could be used on a much wider scale than solely in emergencies .
If it is not reliable , for example because the disease can still be transmitted via the placenta , then it would seem sensible to me that it cannot be used with sows but that it can still be of use in other cases .
If it transpires , as is argued in the report , that the diagnostic method is still not reliable , then I believe that we must do our utmost to develop good diagnostic methods , so that a distinction can be made between vaccinated animals on the one hand and animals that have developed antibodies because they have had the disease or have had contact with the disease in some other way .
This is why I believe that culling must be rejected as a method of combating this animal disease and that we must concentrate our attention on the development not only of marker vaccine , since that already exists - but of good diagnostic methods and the refinement of the vaccine so that it can also be used for sows .
In any case the guidelines should provide regulation that makes mass culls unnecessary .
I agree with the conclusions of the Commission , namely that mass culls cast a slur on the agricultural policy and the health policy that we wish to pursue as a European Community .
Mr President , Commissioner , a lot of attention is being paid to pigs this week .
Unfortunately the discussion of the Redondo Jiménez report is ending in an anticlimax .
On Monday the Swedish Minister spoke on animal welfare , including tightening welfare regulations for animal transport .
This morning we voted on the Busk report , in which we are trying to improve the living conditions of pigs in great detail .
We now have a report before us in which we are supposed to simply agree to the destruction of thousands of healthy pigs if there is an outbreak of swine fever .
This Parliament speaks with two voices !
One for the consumer and his feeling for animal welfare and one for the economy and trade , which must not be allowed to suffer from the outbreak of a disease .
I have requested a roll-call vote on this report and on Mr Mulder ' s amendment , so that the public can see from Members ' voting behaviour the double tongue of this Parliament on animal welfare .
It is astonishing that Mrs Redondo Jiménez has learned nothing from the combating of foot-and-mouth disease as it has developed in recent months , particularly in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands .
As part of the preparation of this report I should have like to see Mrs Redondo driving around the Oene region , the foot-and-mouth triangle in the Netherlands .
It would have struck her that almost every field carries a poster reading : ' EU , vaccinate now ! '
I have argued more than once in this Parliament that animals are more than production units .
They are creatures made by God , for whom we have responsibility .
Norms and values apply not only in church but in the sty too .
Until 1980 , vaccination was commonplace in the European Union .
In order to meet the trade , the non-vaccination policy was implemented .
In the 1997 outbreak of swine fever in the Netherlands , thousands of healthy pigs had to be destroyed and then too there was a call for vaccination .
When will this Parliament start listening to its citizens ?
There is a vaccine available that makes it possible to distinguish vaccination from infection .
There are still some drawbacks associated with those vaccines , but are there none associated with the mass destruction of animals ?
No one less than the International Bureau for Infectious Livestock Diseases ( Office international des épizooties ) recommends that in serious outbreaks of swine fever , countries that previously did not vaccinate should consider emergency use of a marker vaccine .
Infectious animal diseases , like swine fever , show the weaknesses of current agricultural policy .
It is wrong that organic farming and extensive animal husbandry should be proposed as the solution .
These forms of agriculture are not less susceptible to livestock disease , on the contrary .
Because of the high level of enclosure in intensive livestock farming , these businesses are precisely less susceptible to infection .
That is not to say that organic farming does not have desirable aspects - its small-scale nature has many advantages .
A combination of the small-scale structure of organic farming and the enclosure of intensive livestock keeping is a key for the future .
For production we must abandon large-scale mobility and switch to more enclosed operations , no longer with international , but with regional circuits .
Mr President , may I add my congratulations to the rapporteur for a very welcome report .
Swine fever , like foot-and-mouth , does re-emerge from time to time in different Member States throughout the European Union .
Unfortunately , the only way of controlling it , at the moment , is by large-scale slaughter of animals , many of which are free from disease .
To date , we have not been able , as has already been said , to develop a marker vaccine capable of controlling the disease .
I find it very hard in this modern day and age to understand why we have not made greater progress .
You need only look at everything we have at our disposal , and at the costs incurred in this senseless slaughter of thousands of innocent animals .
We heard this week that in the United Kingdom for every one proven case of foot-and-mouth , animals have been slaughtered on five or six farms around that case .
The cost , not only to the Exchequer and to the European Union , but the real cost of the loss of these animals , is enormous .
The agriculture industry certainly does not need anymore bad publicity and I support Mr Stevenson 's position on the amendments put forward by Mr Mulder .
It is all very well to speak of stringent controls , but you cannot guard against human failure .
You cannot prevent a failure by a single individual and it only takes one person not to follow those controls and the feeding of swill creates a real problem as seems to have been the case in the United Kingdom with foot-and-mouth .
I understand that it will be very difficult and take time to secure agreement between all the parties involved - our trade partners and everyone else .
But we must begin and we must put down a marker now .
We must never again go through what we have just witnessed , be it with swine fever or with foot-and-mouth .
There has to be a better way .
The people of the European Union are demanding this .
Many farmers demand that there has to be a better method of control .
It is incumbent upon us to find a better way rather than witness the senseless slaughter we have recently seen .
No one can convince me that we have got it right at present .
I do not believe we have .
We have made mistakes and we should recognise those mistakes and put those mistakes right sooner , rather than later .
Thank you , honourable Members .
I wish to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Redondo Jiménez and the Agriculture Committee for the report on the proposal for a Council directive on Community measures for the control of classical swine fever .
The main purpose of the Commission proposal is to update the existing control provisions on swine fever , so as to take into account the most recent knowledge and experience acquired in controlling its agent .
The proposal also takes account of the development of new diagnostic tools and vaccines , and of the opinions given by the Scientific Committee on these issues .
This House is well aware that in 1997 / 1998 , a major outbreak of classical swine fever occurred in several Member States .
This crisis led the Commission to review Community legislation on this issue and to look at the possibility of introducing provisions on the use of the so-called marker vaccines as an additional tool against the disease in case of emergency .
The urgency for this review has been added to by the worrying outbreak in the United Kingdom last year , and today there is confirmation of an outbreak in the region of Lérida in Catalonia , Spain .
The Commission has immediately taken a decision , in full consultation with the Spanish authorities , to impose restrictions on exports from this region .
This decision will be reviewed at a meeting of the Standing Veterinary Committee , scheduled for this week .
The decision taken today has immediate effect until 30 June and will be reviewed in the meantime .
Before standing up in this debate , I had a brief telephone conversation on this matter with the Spanish Minister for Agriculture .
A single farm is concerned , and I am happy to say that he informed me that all of the animals moved from that farm before confirmation had been slaughtered .
However , we must remain particularly vigilant in relation to this issue .
The situation will need to be followed up very closely , and I will be happy to keep Parliament informed of developments .
Returning to the current proposal , and marker vaccination in particular , the Commission financed specific trials and research projects .
By means of this research very valuable information was obtained .
It has been essential for the Commission in drawing up its proposal and cautiously paving the way for the potential use of these vaccines .
Clearly , their use can only be envisaged in an emergency situation and once laboratory tests are available to discriminate between vaccinated and infected animals .
Here I must emphasise the importance of the efficacy of the tests , as distinct from the marker vaccinations themselves .
Encouragingly , Parliament 's Agriculture Committee , the Economic and Social Committee , the Committee of the Regions and the Member States , largely support the Commission 's approach to this sensitive issue .
This contrasts with the situation a few years ago , when quite different opinions were expressed by the experts themselves .
This reminds us of the importance of scientific investigation , so that informed answers can be given to technically complex matters such as this .
Indeed , I am aware that in preparing her report , Mrs Redondo organised an interesting and important hearing in the Agricultural Committee attended by swine fever experts from different Member States to better understand the progress made on this issue after the outbreak from 1997 / 1998 .
The report of Madame Redondo largely supports the main aspects of the Commission proposal and of course , I am obviously very pleased about this .
However , allow me to address in detail the amendments , which have been proposed .
I will begin with the amendments the Commission cannot accept .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 2 to 5 , 26 , 28 and 30 , as they go beyond the scope of this directive .
I understand that the recent FMD crisis has prompted Parliament to raise some horizontal problems related to animal health , which certainly need to be addressed .
The report deals for example with the implementation of controls on imports of live animals and products , traceability , financing of costs related to animal diseases and future animal health problems , which may emerge in relation to enlargement .
I share the concern of the Parliament .
But these complex issues cannot be addressed in this directive .
I have already informed this Assembly that the Commission will address those issues before the end of the year in a separate legal framework .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 6 to 8 , 12 , 16 to 18 , 22 , 24 , 25 and 29 , which contain certain technical details of relatively minor importance , for which the Commission considers the text of its proposal more suitable .
Amendment No 15 concerns the establishment of Community financed market support measures , in case of prolonged standstill of pigs in holdings kept under movement restrictions due to an outbreak of swine fever .
The Commission cannot accept this amendment , as such decisions must be taken on a case-by-case basis .
The legal basis for doing so already exists in the framework of the common market organisation for pig meat .
This mechanism demonstrated its efficiency and there is no need for further legal provisions in this regard .
Amendments Nos 20 and 21 concern the role of different authorities in the control of classical swine fever in wild boar .
The Commission cannot accept these amendments , as it is for the Member States to ensure that all authorities potentially involved in the control of the disease are given a proper role .
Their co-ordination must be guaranteed to ensure proper eradication .
Amendment No 23 concerns the introduction of an article on the potential use of marker vaccines .
As I have already said , the Commission and Parliament agree on this important issue .
The Commission however cannot accept this amendment , as its proposal already includes comprehensive provisions on marker vaccines .
However , we will take into account Parliament 's remarks in a new recital .
Amendments Nos 20 and 29 concern the legal status of the classical swine fever diagnostic manual , which the Commission intends to adopt .
After the adoption of this directive , following the opinion of the Standing Veterinary Committee , the report suggests including this manual as part of the directive itself .
The Commission feels that this could create confusion from a legal point of view and thus cannot accept these amendments .
However , some modifications will be introduced in the text to reinforce the concept but the manual must be an essential part of Community legislation on swine fever .
Amendments Nos 24 and 25 note the need for some transitional provisions on contingency plans , which are indeed already in Article 28 of the proposal .
While the Commission shares the views of the Parliament , it cannot accept these amendments .
On the other hand , the Commission can accept entirely or partially , a number of amendments .
In these cases , drafting changes are also needed .
These concern not only some technical aspects of the directive , like disinfection of holdings , or other contaminated materials and sampling of suspected pigs , but also some more substantial and sensitive issues , like marker vaccination and the introduction of a ban on feeding pigs with catering waste .
On this last issue , I can only add to what I have already said in this Chamber last Tuesday , during the debate on the regulation of animal by-products , that the Commission is committed to ensure consistency between this directive and that regulation .
In summary , the Commission can accept the following amendments in full or in part and subject to necessary drafting changes : Amendments Nos 1 , 9-11 , 14 , 19 , 27 , 31 and 32 .
The Commission cannot accept Amendments Nos 2-8 , 12 , 13 , 15-18 , 20-26 , 28-30 and 33-37 .
To conclude , ladies and gentlemen , I wish once again to thank Madam Redondo and the Agriculture Committee for the excellent report and their support .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 6.30 p.m.
EEC / Comoros fisheries agreement
The next item is the report ( A5-0192 / 2001 ) by Mr Pérez Royo , on behalf of the Committee on Fisheries , on the proposal for a Council regulation on the conclusion of the Protocol setting out the fishing opportunities and financial contribution provided for in the Agreement between the European Economic Community and the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros on fishing off the Comoros for the period from 28 February 2001 to 27 February 2004 [ COM ( 2001 ) 173 - C5 ­ 0144 / 2001 - 2001 / 0088 ( CNS ) ] .
Mr President , the Protocol that is today submitted for our approval , between the European Union and the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros originates in the initial 1988 agreement and refers to the fifth period of this agreement ; in other words , this is the fourth time the initial agreement has been renewed .
The agreement we are going to vote on today retains a line of continuity from the previous one , while the philosophy behind it also bears similarities to most of the agreements of this kind that the European Union has signed .
The present agreement , which as I have said retains a line of continuity from the previous one , introduces only some slight quantitative changes to the number of vessels authorised to fish and to the volume of catches , and also some changes - slight as to the amount involved but appreciable in structural terms - to the financial contribution made by the Union and the companies that will benefit from the agreement .
The authorised catch volume is set at 4 600 tonnes , slightly above the previous agreement ' s 4 500 tonnes but quite a long way below the historical levels of 1988 to 1994 of 6 000 tonnes .
The number of vessels authorised to fish is set at 65 : 40 tuna seiners and 25 surface longliners .
There is an increase in the overall number of vessels , which goes up from 60 to 65 .
Of these , the tuna seiners correspond to the following countries : France , 21 ; Spain , 18 ; Italy , 1 .
As for the surface longliners , most are Spanish with a few from Portugal .
It should be noted that although the total number of vessels has risen , the number of tuna seiners , which are the ones that catch the greatest tonnage , has gone down from 44 to 40 and the number of longliners has risen from 16 to 25 .
These figures in fact reflect the utilisation levels achieved in practice during the time the previous agreement was in force , which were 75 to 80 % for tuna seiners and over 90 % for longliners , which are precisely those that have now been increased in number .
Turning now to the financial contribution , this is set at just over EUR one million : EUR 1 050 750 , to be precise , or the equivalent of EUR 350 000 for each year the agreement lasts .
The main change in this section concerns the structure of this financial contribution .
Whereas in the previous agreement it was split 50-50 between funds allocated for compensation and those intended for targeted measures ; that is , support measures for development of the local fishing sector , technical programmes , etc . Under the new agreement , however , the funds allocated to these targeted measures make up 60 % of the financial contribution .
That means there is greater effort , so to say , in the development contribution to the detriment of the purely commercial aspects .
The cost distribution of the agreement is also changed .
The Community budget appropriation is cut by 2.7 % and in exchange the shipowners ' contributions are raised by 35 % .
In real terms , the rate per tonne of catch goes up from EUR 20 to EUR 25 .
This is a fair and balanced agreement , which brings together the various interests , and the various elements that are inevitably involved in this type of agreement . That means first of all the interests of the Islamic Federal Republic of the Comoros , the interests of the European Union , the interests of the companies that will benefit from the agreement , and last but , of course , not least the resource conservation aspect .
It is , as I say , a fair and balanced agreement , which has been passed by a very large majority in the committee and which I now ask this House to vote for .
Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Pérez Royo for his report and the efficient conduct of business in committee .
He had our full support .
But we have some reservations .
In this policy of buying , on behalf of Community fleets , fish from third countries , I often ask myself whether it might not be better to spend the money in another way , in the interests of the regions which we set out to help .
I have no difficulty whatsoever with the need to develop the fishing ports that are , in many ways , hard-pressed through restructuring and depleted stocks .
I have no difficulty with the original political decision of the European Union to help the regions , particularly those of Spain and Portugal , that are highly or partly dependent on fishing .
But I have a serious problem about dealing with countries like the Comoros , which has a population of half-a-million people , and a GDP per capita of USD 700 .
I cannot believe that these people have any capacity whatsoever to police their waters or in any way manage their stocks .
We are obviously sending - as the rapporteur pointed out - something like 65 vessels ( mostly Spanish and French ) into these waters .
These vessels catch 40 000 tonnes of fish .
How can anybody have any control over what they do or what they bring back ?
I tend to believe that , to put it bluntly , this is a licence to plunder .
First of all , I would like a proper evaluation , as Mr Pérez Royo requested , an economic evaluation and a cost-benefit analysis on behalf of the Union .
I would like to take it further and have a social evaluation of the money we spend , to find out whether or not we contribute to the improvement of the economic and social situation of certain regions in Spain or France , where this money is supposed to go , or whether in fact we just give a licence to a small number of people , who control quite a lot of capital , to exploit the waters of a country which is in no position to control its own resources .
That is my main concern .
I would prefer to take this money and spend it in the regions concerned , in Spain , Portugal or France , and spend it in such a way that we have direct control over the development we promote and in a way that we could be sure would be sustainable - for fish farming or alternative industries , perhaps .
Nevertheless I support the report .
Mr Pérez Royo represents the view of the committee on this .
Mr President , honourable Members .
I should like to start by thanking the rapporteur , Mr Pérez Royo , for his report on the new fisheries protocol with the Comoros .
I am delighted , Mr Pérez Royo , that you have given this proposal your full and firm support .
The new protocol refers solely to tuna and makes provision - as already mentioned - for fishing opportunities for a total of 65 ships .
The financial contribution paid in return will be EUR 350 000 per annum .
What is so gratifying is that 60 % of this sum is to be used for targeted measures to develop the local fisheries sector in the Comoros , taking special account of small-scale fishing .
A brief word on the proposed amendments .
The Commission has no problem with the content of Amendments Nos 1 , 3 and 4 but considers them to be superfluous because it already complies with these requirements within the framework of the Interinstitutional Agreements , especially the Framework Agreement between the European Parliament and the Commission of 5 July last year .
Unfortunately , I cannot agree to Amendment No 5 .
The principle which applies here is that no new mandate is required for new protocols negotiated because they are annexed to existing agreements .
I can accept Amendment No 2 in full but , here too , we feel that this is not necessary because the principles set out in it coincide with the Community 's basic position on sustainable , responsible fisheries as contained , for example , in our communication on fisheries and poverty reduction and the Green Paper presented recently on the future of the common fisheries policy .
As far as Amendment No 6 is concerned , the Commission shares Parliament 's concern as regards protecting the habitat of Coelacanth in the Comoros .
Rather than refer to this in the text of the Council regulation , I would suggest that we proceed as follows : the Commission is prepared to write to the government of Comoros in order to convince it of the importance of this species and the problems connected with it .
We shall then send a copy of this letter to the chairman of the Committee on Fisheries , Mr Varela .
Finally , I cannot accept Amendment No 7 .
It is an integral part of our agreement policy and all negotiating guidelines state that financial compensation for fishing opportunities must be paid partly from the EU budget and partly by the shipowners .
What happens in practice is that the Community pays the financial consideration to the third country in question and the shipowners obviously pay the licence fees themselves .
Mr President , I am sure that you will now be able to confirm with considerable relief that a large number of cases pending before the Legal Affairs Committee about the immunity of Members will now lapse .
I shall let you be the judge of your remark , Mr MacCormick .
VOTE
We shall now proceed to the vote on the topical and urgent debate .
Before the vote on Chad :
Mr President , I have a few minor changes that are required by the changed situation in Chad and an addition on which all groups agree and that are also very simple and short .
In item i ) the words must endorse are changed to did endorse ( past tense ) .
In item 3 of the regulatory section the following must be added to the first line : notes that the election of President Idriss Deby on 20th May 2001 was confirmed by the Chadian Constitutional Court on the 13th of June .
This is because of the changed situation : it has already happened .
We can therefore no longer do anything to change it .
Then there is agreement on the addition of item 10 b : calls on the Commission to examine the possibility of using the consultation procedure under the terms of Article 96 of the Cotonou Convention .
Thank you , both your explanations are , therefore , technical amendments which are based on proven facts .
Mr President , the purpose of my speech was not to express my opposition . I just wanted to say that I found that the amendments tabled by Mrs Maes were in the right direction but that , nonetheless , the debate we had did not fully correspond to the text we have to vote on .
So , personally , I will not be taking part in this vote because I believe that the dimension of the responsibility of Western countries , especially France , in relation to Chad was not adequately developed in the text .
I accept the amendments tabled by Mrs Maes , but personally I will not be taking part in the vote on Chad because I think it does not go far enough .
That is your prerogative , Mr Sylla .
It will be noted in the Minutes .
So the first two technical amendments tabled by Mrs Maes have been incorporated .
As to the phrase she read out , that is an oral amendment .
Are there any objections to taking this oral amendment into consideration ?
As there are none , it shall also be integrated .
During the vote on Afghanistan :
Mr President , we thought that there should still be a vote on one section of item 6 , namely the last one .
No , Mrs Maes , we isolated the phrase . We voted in two parts and both parts were approved by the House .
Before the vote on Angola :
Mr President , this is not exactly an oral amendment but rather a point of fact , and if there is no objection I would like to ask that it be corrected in the text of the joint resolution .
In the sixth paragraph there is mention of the existence of three million displaced persons as a consequence of the war in Angola .
The latest statistics and information gathered from international organisations and NGOs point at four million .
Therefore , if there is no objection , I should like to ask that the number be corrected : four million persons and not three million .
In any case , we are not going to start voting on the joint resolution .
First of all , there are two group resolutions which do not cover the entire text .
I suggest that you reflect on Mr Ribeiro ' s proposal whilst we vote on the other proposals .
We will see if the House will accept the technical amendment tabled by the honourable Member .
On the vote on Angola :
Mr President , in order to obtain as broad a consensus and as broad an agreement as possible , I would suggest that we introduce an oral addendum to replace Amendments Nos 2 , 3 and 4 as a new No 5