Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday 26 October 2006 .
Approval of Minutes of previous sitting
The Minutes of the sitting of 26 October 2006 have been distributed .
Does anyone wish to comment on them ?
( FR ) Mr President , I would just like to point out that on Thursday I forgot to sign the attendance sheet However , I participated in all the roll-call votes at noon on Thursday and on Thursday evening .
Appropriate steps will be taken to make the necessary correction .
( The Minutes of the previous sitting were approved )
Transfers of appropriations : see Minutes
Petitions : see Minutes
Texts of agreements forwarded by the Council : see Minutes
Written statements ( Rule 116 ) : see Minutes
Written statements and Oral Questions ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Documents received : see Minutes
Decisions concerning certain documents : see Minutes
Membership of Parliament
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should just like to make an observation to be included in the Minutes .
Since the decisions of the Italian authorities in relation to changing the representatives of Members elected in Italy refer to the 2004 elections , I do not believe it is appropriate for it all to take effect from 8 November .
It is likely that the change should be backdated and I believe that this should be examined by the competent committee of this House .
We take note of your observation .
I do not know what its legal implications are , but the Secretariat will look into it and , if necessary , pass it on to the most appropriate committee to examine how well-founded your observation is .
Membership of committees and delegations : see Minutes
Signature of acts adopted under codecision : see Minutes
Draft general budget for the 2007 financial year ( deadline for tabling draft amendments ) : see Minutes
Order of business
The final version of the draft agenda as drawn up by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of 9 November 2006 pursuant to Rules 130 and 131 of the Rules of Procedure has been distributed .
The following amendments have been proposed .
Monday :
I have received a request from the Socialist Group in the European Parliament to postpone the debate on the report by Mrs Bachelot-Narquin on the proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund .
Who would like to move this request on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament ?
( FR ) Mr President , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament requests that the debate and the vote on Mrs Bachelot 's report on the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund be postponed .
In fact , because COREPER and the Finnish Presidency only finalised their version of the regulation on Friday 10 November , the document did not reach us until the end of the afternoon .
As a result , although we worked with the rapporteur all last week in informal meetings with the Council and the Commission , we were not able to have an initial discussion amongst ourselves between Friday evening and today .
We therefore ask that both the debate and the votes be postponed to the second November session in order to enable us to carry out our examination of the proposals made to us by the Council .

Mr President , I also take the floor with the agreement of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats to support the position of my fellow Member , Mr Cottigny , and to request that the vote and the debate be postponed .
In fact , as my fellow Member has just said , the latest information concerning the Council 's positions reached us only a few hours ago .
Our discussions thus far indicate that the positions of the Council and Parliament , expressed by the two competent committees , the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs and the Committee on Budgets , have come much closer together .
It is not guaranteed , but on this basis we could perhaps reach an agreement at first reading , which would enable us to make this fund operational from the beginning of next year , as hoped for , I believe , by almost all the Members of this House .
That is why I support Mr Cottigny 's position .
( Parliament accepted the proposal )
( The order of business was adopted )
Mr President , the proposed Constitution was approved by 500 votes to 137 , and confirmed by 382 to 125 votes ; so the opponents now have one in four votes in this House , but when we are represented at meetings abroad with the national parliaments , it is only 1 to 14 .
The ' no ' side was not allowed to be present at Berlin , London or Paris .
Parliament has now sent a total of 58 representatives , 54 from the ' yes ' side , only 4 from the ' no ' side .
In 7 of the 11 meetings the ' no ' side was not present .
Last Thursday the Conference of Presidents approved this discrimination against those of us who oppose the Constitution .
That is a very good example of how badly our D 'Hondt system works in relation to minorities in the big groups .
Some of us have established a Fair Chair reform programme .
We call for a Fair Chair instead of a coronation , and fair representation instead of discrimination against small groups and minorities .
We will present our platform at a press conference tomorrow at 2 p.m. in the press room .
Mr President , you are welcome to come .
Mr Bonde , as you are aware , the Conference of Presidents has already taken your position into consideration and has confirmed that the composition of each committee 's delegations is the responsibility of the committee members , and therefore it is the committee that must decide on what representation is appropriate .
You made your speech today - and all Members need to be aware of this - after the Conference of Presidents had already examined your concern and reached a decision on it .
One-minute speeches on matters of political importance
The next item is the one-minute speeches on matters of political importance .
( HU ) Mr President , while we were gathered here on Monday for our last plenary session , events were taking place in Budapest that merit the attention of all Europe .
That is , the 50th anniversary of the 1956 uprising was being celebrated in Hungary . That celebration , however , took quite an odd turn because the people were not allowed to participate .
One of the high-ranking guests present , an Italian deputy prime minister , said that these celebrations left the people out .
Meanwhile the people on the street who wanted to celebrate peacefully were brutally attacked and beaten up .
The police caused serious injuries by shooting rubber bullets at head level , and they pushed people off the streets .
Peaceable passers-by , who wanted to celebrate 1956 peacefully , were not allowed to do so .
What a shame , what a shame this was in the middle of Europe .
I call upon everyone who strives for human and civic liberties not to support this policy .
( FR ) Mr President , I would take the liberty of speaking once again on the subject of the Bulgarian nurses and the Palestinian doctor .
They are still in Tripoli , in the prisons of the Libyan State .
You know , as I do , that they are imprisoned under false accusations .
The review of their trial was supposed to conclude at the end of October .
However , in October , the court again postponed its decision , this time until 19 December .
The court says that it is beginning to take into consideration the opinion of international experts , who tirelessly bring evidence of the innocence of the accused .
Mr President , could we not demonstrate again the great interest that we take in the fate of these prisoners who have been tortured and have been absent from their homes for eight years for having treated young Libyans ?
This situation cannot be tolerated , as , month after month , they are promised a trial .
This new trial , the third , is inequitable and unjust and leaves them in the throes of a death sentence .
( HU ) Mr President , it is sad enough that the countries of Europe are witnessing ever more frequent acts of violence and destruction , events that signal turmoil and inner tensions .
Stones being hurled , cars set on fire elicit a forceful response from the police forces , and these events show up on the newspaper headlines and television screens .
All this causes damage to Europe , to the protesters , to the forces of law and order , in a word : to democracy .
It is even more detrimental , however , when certain politicians , certain political parties feel justified in pronouncing judgment prior to the inquiry undertaken by the appointed independent judicial body .
The Hungarian socialist delegation read with profound shock the statement by the President of the European People 's Party about the events surrounding the 50th anniversary .
What József Szájer said does not surprise us .
The grave allegations by the European People 's Party made prior to the conclusion of the inquiry are to be qualified as prejudicial , and as such , on behalf of the Hungarian socialist delegation , we reject them most emphatically .
- ( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it has already been sixteen years since Lithuania regained its independence from the Soviet Union .
The same time has passed since Lithuania failed to get back its embassy building in Rome , known as Villa Lituania , which was owned by Lithuania until 1937 .
Today , the Russian flag continues to fly on this building .
After Russia occupied and annexed Lithuania in 1940 , the then Lithuanian ambassador Stasys Lozoraitis presented a note to the Italian Government emphasising the illegitimate nature of the incorporation of Lithuania into the Soviet Union and the fact that Lithuanian diplomatic missions in foreign countries should not change their status .
Despite this , Soviet officials occupied Villa Lituania in the presence of the representatives of the Italian Ministry of Foreign Affairs and the police .
After the restoration of Lithuania 's independence , Italy avoided any responsibility and suggested negotiating with Russia concerning the building .
Even though the Italian Government appears to have changed its position now , this matter remains unresolved .
Why would the Italian Government make no attempt to reconsider its past history ?
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , despite the reassuring messages and replies from the Central European Bank and the Commission on the cases of forgery of the euro , this phenomenon continues to preoccupy the administrative authorities and Europol .
Just last week we had two particularly worrying cases .
The first concerns the gang of Colombian counterfeiters brought down .
A total of EUR 6 million was seized in forged 50 and 100 euro notes destined for Spain and other countries of the European Union .
The same week in Germany , hundreds of thousands of 5 and 20 euro notes were dissolved in water , with the result that the German authorities were questioned as to the causes , while the citizens of this country hanker after the strong and independent Deutschmark .
What is going on with the euro ?
How secure are citizens when they themselves are at risk - even though victims - of being referred for investigation , as we have seen in several countries , on suspicion of counterfeiting or moving forged notes ?
How long will the Central European Bank turn a blind eye ?
Or is it only interested in when interest rates will rise again and start throttling consumers ?
Mr President , I rise to ask you and others in this House to use their best offices to intervene in the case of ten Iranian Ahwazi Arab rights activists who , according to the Iranian media , face the death penalty this week .
The men stand accused of bombing oil installations , but the evidence is unconvincing .
All ten men made confessions under torture .
According to Amnesty International and Human Rights Watch none of them had a fair trial .
Their lawyers were not allowed to see them before their trial and were only briefed on the prosecution case a few hours before the start of court proceedings , which were held in secret .
The lawyers for the condemned men have themselves been arrested for complaining about the illegal and unjust nature of these trials , and have been charged with threatening national security .
I therefore hope that many Members will make contact with the Iranian authorities to make clear their views on these tragic cases .
( PL ) Mr President , one week has passed since the introduction of new baggage restrictions on airline passengers .
However , I am still constantly asked what the matter is , if just days after Great Britain has eased these restrictions they have been implemented Europe-wide ?
I still have not received an explanation for this situation even though I am a representative of the Committee for Transport and Tourism .
Another issue is the lack of clarity over the new regulations , which are totally confusing to passengers .
It appears that they have a different interpretation in just about every airport .
At Wrocław Airport , for example , which is the one I use , I was told to throw away a stick deodorant , even though it was not in liquid form , as a penalty for not having declared it .
In such a simple matter , would it not be possible to harmonise these rules so that they are interpreted in a uniform way , and that it is not up to the goodwill or otherwise of individual officials ?
I hope to receive a reply to these questions .
( HU ) Mr President , in 1989-90 Hungary created the foundations for democracy and the rule of law without any violence .
Now , 16 years later , the spirit of coercion has nevertheless been unleashed , because the current government unfortunately saw fit to use intimidation in order to attain its goals , thereby suppressing democratic opposition .
The use of force is to be condemned , let there be no mistake .
Rioting by violent groups is unacceptable , but even in problematic situations respect for the tools of the rule of law is indispensable .
Defenders of Hungarian democracy must seize every legal means to ensure that the violent events of 23 October will never be repeated , when the police violently broke up the crowds and failed to observe the most basic demands of human rights , precisely when people were commemorating the 50th anniversary of the 1956 Revolution .
We Hungarians believe in democratic freedom , which we have struggled so hard to achieve , and wish to make use of our human rights .
Mr President , I would like to raise the issue of incitement to racial and religious hatred in Europe .
Over the past two weeks in the United Kingdom we have had two trials .
One concerned a young Muslim who , during a demonstration regarding , I believe , the infamous Danish cartoons , called for the beheading of those who insult Islam .
He was rightly convicted and imprisoned .
Yet , in contrast , Nick Griffin , the leader of Britain 's neo-fascist British National Party , who was caught by the BBC declaring Islam a vile and wicked religion , was found not guilty of the same .
I would ask that the relevant Commissioner considers whether or not at European level we need new and stronger legislation in this area .
This is not an issue of freedom of speech , but freedom from fear .
Comments like those of the BNP leader put the Muslim and minority communities at risk .
The evidence is that , when BNP councillors are elected , racist violence in the relevant area doubles or triples , leading to problems for the whole area .
Mr President , I rise to ask for your support for efforts at EU level to counter discrimination in the workplace , and in particular for the EU-funded ' Work It Out ' Programme , which is a project that produces tools to help people with intellectual disabilities , those who support them and European legal experts in this area .
This programme provides information on the framework Employment Directive , which seeks to combat discrimination and unequal treatment at work .
That directive has recently been transposed by Member States and provides vital protection to people with intellectual disabilities who face discrimination at work .
Mr President , I would ask you to ensure that the definition of ' worker ' in this directive includes people in sheltered employment .
We must be watchful and ensure that the directive is being implemented correctly in each Member State .
Intellectual disability covers a large range of people with very different capabilities : some people with intellectual disabilities work and live independently in the community , while others have complex or profound needs and require constant support .
However , it is important not to make assumptions about what intellectual disability means , since with appropriate support and preparation many people with intellectual disabilities can be a valuable part of the workforce .
Mr President , I would ask that you devote personal attention to this matter .
( ES ) Mr President , to begin with , I should like to thank you in your own language for what you said to President Putin , that we will not trade human rights for energy .
( PL ) I would also like to see the ban imposed by Russia on the import of meat from Poland discussed at this meeting .
Russia 's accusations are groundless , and the matter has become too long and drawn-out .
I believe that it is not just a matter between Poland and Russia , but between Russia and the entire European Union .
I would like this house to put some pressure on the European Commission to take steps to resolve this abnormal situation .
( FR ) Mr President , an unprecedented power cut hit Western Europe on the night of 4 / 5 November .
It revealed the fragility of the European energy system and the inadequate capacity for producing and transporting electricity , the result of a poor investment policy .
Despite the risk of blackouts , for the last six years European operators have been reducing the level of their investments , which has fallen from 16 % to 10 % of their turnover .
At the same time , electricity consumption has continued to rise by 1.8 % per year .
This fall in investments is the direct consequence of liberalising the energy market .
Rather than investing in the development of new production capacity , operators are concentrating their efforts on profits and on buying out their competitors .
On the one hand , the public has seen electricity prices soar while , on the other hand , security has decreased .
Only a European energy policy could guarantee successful cooperation between Member States and the implementation of necessary investments to the tune of EUR 700 billion between now and 2030 .
Electricity is a public good : this should be reflected in the European Union 's political initiatives .
( PL ) Mr President , despite numerous interventions , discussions and measures by Poland to comply with Russia 's conditions , Russia continues to maintain its embargo on Polish foodstuffs , including meat .
Poland has not , and will not be able to resolve this situation until the European Union applies equal market protection rules for all Member States .
It is intolerable that Poland should be facing problems selling its products both on the external market and on the internal European market due to the impact of goods from third countries being dumped on its market .
Poland , like the other Member States , cannot deal with Russia on her own .
The partner that Russia should be dealing with is the European Union as a whole .
For this reason I am raising the fundamental question of whether at the European Union-Russia summit planned for 24 November this year , Poland 's problems will be treated as problems which affect the European Union as a whole .
This is certainly an important issue .
I cannot give you an answer because , as you know , we have not been invited to take part in this summit , but I am sure that both the Commission and the Council will bear Poland 's problems in mind when dealing with EU-Russian relations .
( PL ) Mr President , I would also like to raise the matter of the European Commission 's hand luggage regulations .
I do not know whether the President and the Commission are aware of the fact that the food and cosmetics industry is unable to keep up with these regulations , and the majority of cosmetics do not come in 100 ml packaging .
This means that shampoos , lotions and other cosmetics in liquid form have to be poured down the sink and the remainder poured into 100 ml containers because 200 ml containers are not allowed on board the aircraft .
Of course , you can have your baggage checked in , although 5 million pieces of baggage go missing each year worldwide .
Often total chaos and confusion prevails at airports , and the officials responsible are unable to cope .
So it appears that the terrorists are one step ahead of us again , and have got us in a corner .
The way things are going , it will not be long before they have us all flying in strait-jackets and disposable hospital slippers .
( PL ) Mr President , ' JEREMY ' , a joint and extremely valuable initiative of DG REGI and the European Investment Bank for 2007- 2013 , is currently being negotiated with individual Member States .
The aim of the initiative is to facilitate access to European Regional Development Fund cash for small and medium-sized enterprises .
The aim of JEREMY is to help regional business start-ups and development through all kinds of non-grant based instruments such as microcredits or guarantees .
Unfortunately there is resistance on the part of some Member States - for the decision depends on them - to re-allocating part of their structural funds towards this new initiative .
Some refuse outright to include them in their programmes , even though it is clear that they will be unable to utilise all of their funds and will have problems with uptake .
This means running the risk that JEREMY , a superb instrument capable of supporting business initiative in the regions , will remain unused .
We as the European Parliament have the obligation to encourage Member States to make use of the opportunities offered by JEREMY , because in addition to major investments from the structural funds , it is the development of small business and the generation of business activity that are the powerhouse of regional development , and therefore they deserve particular support .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this year , and for the tenth time , the Europa Centre in Graz organised a European youth meeting with participants drawn from all over Europe , devoted to the theme of ' European future objectives ' and with the participants giving their attention to the future development of the European Union .
Following an information session on the European Union and its institutions , the participants - over sixty of them - moved to a role-play exercise in which they imagined themselves as representatives of these institutions and worked through a large number of items , producing a twenty-point resolution to the effect that , inter alia , the powers of the Union should be extended , that the budget should be topped up and that there should be no further enlargement before the treaty on a constitution for Europe has entered into force .

Young people are Europe 's future , and we should be very strong advocates for their education and further education , for that , too , is where our future lies .
( EL ) Mr President , one of the achievements of democracy is university asylum which , of course , does not develop in the same way in every country .
In Greece , suddenly , university asylum means the anarchists , the pockets of terrorism which we pursue hotly in this Chamber , are creating cells and using universities as sites to manufacture Molotov cocktails and attack shops and neighbours .
It is a terrible problem faced by my country , which is unable to find a solution .
It is unable to take them on and that is where the main problem lies .
Can we legislate uniformly in all the countries of Europe for equal respect for asylum , because this situation is spiralling out of control , and not just in Greece ?
In other capitals of countries of Europe we have the same problem : the anarchists in asylum are a state within a state .
There should be respect for asylum , but this should not become cells , pockets of anarchy , of all those going around in hoods violating , extorting and plundering the life of the citizens .
Let us at long last legislate for the good of universities , for the good of students , and not for the good of the extremists or certain extremists fighting against the state .
( HU ) Mr President , it might become one of the signs of discrimination against the new Member States if administrative costs for 2007 were to be reduced at their expense .
Paring down bureaucracy is a worthy aim , but it puts at risk the filling of eight hundred positions for the new Member States .
These civil servants ought already to have been hired in the first half of 2006 .
I call upon the Commission to fulfil its obligations and to continue hiring new civil servants at the agreed pace .
I hope that the European Commission will not listen to the Fidesz party .
I would not wish to see the new Member States suffer from the smear campaign that party has launched , claiming that the new Member States do not deserve to be treated as equals because they are run by post-communists who trample human rights underfoot .
Whatever Kinga Gál and József Szájer may say in this Chamber , to my mind , it is the interview given today by Elmar Brok , chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , which holds true : Hungarian democracy and the rule of law are not in danger .
( HU ) Mr President , a few days ago , as a result of an energy network breakdown , millions of Europeans were left without power , if only for an hour .
This blackout , unprecedented since the 1970 's , has once again shed light on the fact that it is increasingly difficult to bring energy regulation , which is largely within national jurisdictions , into line with the demands of energy security in the 21st century .
At the same time , the dangers with regard to gas supply are becoming increasingly evident .
The conflict over gas prices that has been developing in recent weeks between Russia and Georgia makes it clear that Russia is prepared , in a completely overt fashion , to use its energy resources for political purposes .
This is the reason - one that is all the more frightening for the EU - why Russia , which plays a key role in our gas supply , does not wish to sign the European Energy Charter .
Having thus experienced our dependency on two occasions in recent days , our response can only be a common EU energy policy based on solidarity that speaks with one voice at the international level .
The Energy Green Paper currently being debated in Parliament should serve as a suitable starting point for formulating such a policy .

Mr President , a study carried out by the highly renowned Johns Hopkins Hospital Medical School in the USA in collaboration with the Baghdad Medical School , published last month in the internationally prestigious medical journal The Lancet , showed that approximately 655 000 civilians have died as a result of the violent hostilities in Iraq between March 2003 and July 2006 .
Of these , many thousands have been children whose deaths were deemed by vicious criminal terrorists in Iraq and seemingly heartless politicians in Washington and London to be acceptable collateral damage .
Mr Bush 's and Mr Blair 's invasion and occupation of Iraq has turned into a bloodbath of innocent people , worse than during satanic Saddam 's rule of terror .
We can no longer look on passively .
I call upon you to recommend to the Conference of Presidents an urgent debate on the carnage involving civilians in Iraq , in the hope that we might help convert the madness of war into the logic of peace .
Kyoto was and is a blueprint for sane and sensible environmental policies , by way of the reduction of damaging greenhouse gas emissions .
Unfortunately , the reasonable targets set and agreed by Member States have been , and continue to be , ignored in many cases .
In the case of Ireland , for example , we have a tradition of signing up to international agreements and protocols and then walking away from them .
The big offender , however , is the United States of America .
I welcome the results of the United States congressional elections .
The fact that the American people have turned their backs on George Bush because of Iraq may also be an indication that his stubborn refusal to embrace Kyoto is not shared by the vast majority of the American population .
Could it be that the tornadoes and the hurricanes and the natural disasters in the United States caused by global warming are a result of the reckless dependence on and usage of fossil fuels ?
As a former British chief economist with the World Bank , Dr Nicholas Stern , put it very succinctly : good environmental practice does not simply make environmental sense , it also makes good economic sense .
Mr President , last week a group of Irish MEPs met in Brussels with a group of mercy sisters who are working very closely with poor and marginalised members of the asylum and refugee communities .
The stories we heard from those religious sisters were very alarming , especially as they came from a country that says it is civilised and treats people properly , though I dare say Ireland is not the only country not to treat refugee and asylum seekers correctly and humanely .
We intend , as a group , to pursue this issue within Ireland .
It would appear that the Dublin II Regulation - evaluation of which we currently await - is not working .
Very often we hear from people working in this area that the theory and the practice do not match .
We need to do something about that .
Of particular concern , however , is the phenomenon of children lost to the system .
Such children are in Ireland but nobody knows where exactly or who can account for them .
That is an appalling prospect in a Member State of the European Union .
We need to look very carefully at how we treat the poor and marginalised in our Community .
We need an independent evaluation of the process and a long-term solution to the issue of why those people should need our support .
( EL ) Mr President , I think that developments in universities in connection with the basic issue of education are a cause for concern for millions of workers and students in the Member States .
We therefore need to be extremely careful when we refer to university asylum , which is a fundamental achievement of the student movement in our country .
The student uprising at the Polytechnic is - thirty-three years on - a shining example of the right of the peoples for democracy within universities and of the need for radical changes to be made at this level .
These opinions being voiced in the European Parliament on restricting these basic democratic freedoms are dangerous .
( PL ) Mr President , I am shocked by the latest session of the diplomatic heads of the Member States , where the majority of foreign ministers asked for a European Union mandate to negotiate a new agreement between the EU and Russia before Russia lifts the trade restrictions it is imposing on Poland in the form of an embargo on Polish meat and agricultural produce .
In other words , instead of European solidarity , what we have is an agreement with Moscow made over Poland 's head , leaving my country to fend for itself .
However , Warsaw is rightly demanding that the negotiating mandate include a ban on trade barriers in relations between Russia and individual EU Member states .
Instead of a few words of support from Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner , relations between the European Union and Russia should be based on the slogan of the Three Musketeers , ' one for all and all for one ' .
Failure to do this would make European solidarity nothing more than a meaningless phrase , and I say this forcefully in the country of the Three Musketeers .
( ES ) Mr President , last week Volkswagen unfortunately announced job cuts at its European factories , which may affect the plants at Pamplona in Spain , Brussels in Belgium and Palmela in Portugal .
In Germany too , 20 000 of the 100 000 workers at the plant may be laid off .
That will mean the loss of one in five workers , and 2 400 jobs may go at the other plants .
If we add to that the problems that we have had with Opel and General Motors in Portugal , it is quite clear that we are facing a very serious problem , an industrial crisis that demands a response .
In my view , we can no longer put off establishing a framework agreement with the entire European car industry and a code of conduct with the multinational companies , basically so as to guarantee jobs .
I think the time has come for the Commission and Europe 's institutions to take a very strong stand on this .
( EL ) Mr President , the former leader of Iraq , Saddam Hussein , has been sentenced to death by hanging for crimes against humanity , because he was found guilty of the death of 148 Shiites following an assassination attempt against him in 1982 .
I believe that , as repulsive as the crime is , the death penalty is not a solution and is not in keeping with the European acquis .
However , I noted with regret that the British Foreign Secretary , Margaret Becket , expressed her satisfaction with this verdict and stated that those accused of crimes against the Iraqis should be brought to justice .
I therefore ask you , as the death penalty has been abolished in all the countries of the European Union - because it is an insult to human dignity and simply encourages violence , while doing absolutely nothing to prevent crime - how can a Member State of the Union welcome such a verdict ?
How can the death penalty uphold the justice cited by Mrs Becket ?
( PL ) Mr President , the 16th October saw yet another German violation of Poland 's territorial sovereignty .
On that day a German vessel was bound for the Polish port of Świnoujście .
On entering Polish territorial waters she was boarded by Polish customs officials who discovered contraband alcohol .
When the vessel was a few metres from shore , she suddenly turned about and headed for the German side .
Despite orders from the harbourmaster for the vessel to remain in port , and despite being pursued and ordered to stop by two pursuit vessels of the Polish Border Guard , the Germen vessel left Polish waters with the Polish customs officials aboard .
They were then arrested in Germany on charges of unlawful activity .
The whole affair is an outrage !
I would also like to point out that in August the German Navy conducted manoeuvres in Polish waters without informing the Polish authorities , and causing problems to passenger ferries trying to get to Polish ports .
This is the latest German provocation which ignores the Polish-German border .
It is in breach of international law and jeopardises internal relations within the European Union .
I call upon German politicians to come to their senses and finally acknowledge their country 's borders with their neighbours .
( PL ) Mr President , we as MEPs have been receiving correspondence from individuals and organisations about the problem of the savage treatment of stray dogs in Romania .
The reason I draw attention to this is that in the European Union we have adopted certain standards : recently , when debating an action plan for animal protection , we accepted the principle that the protection and humane treatment of animals is a challenge for European culture and civilisation in the 21st century .
Romania is about to join the European Union in a few weeks ' time and we cannot accept standards that are at odds with European standards .
It is an issue I would like to draw your attention to , and I ask the European Commission also to address this issue and to intervene appropriately .
( EL ) Mr President , I should like to draw the Members ' attention to the abuse of and negative references made to periods of history , especially the Middle Ages .
We often hear talk of ' mediaeval employment ' which is , apparently , being imposed in the resolution on the directive on services or with the promotion of the revised directive on working times .
The Middle Ages were a long period in history during which the foundations were laid in Europe of its present form and work was carried out to combine the Greco-Roman civilisation with Christianity .
Of course , during the Middle Ages , employment relations were typified by an uninterrupted connection with the ' master ' , the employer , and the place of work , and were organised in the form of professional guilds , which were impenetrable regimes which safeguarded monopolies .
Today , liberal united Europe , on the contrary , has safeguarded free movement and mobility and is proceeding to liberalise services and abolish the practices which plagued the inhabitants of Europe during various periods in history , such as the Middle Ages .
That concludes this item .
2006 annual report on the Euro Area ( debate )
The next item is the report by José Manuel García-Margallo y Marfil , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on the 2006 annual report on the euro area ( 2006 / 2239 ( INI ) ) .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , this is the first time that Parliament has debated a report on the economic situation in the euro zone and I therefore regard this report as being of unique importance , particularly as this debate - this analysis that we are conducting jointly for the first time - is taking place at a time when the situation is both politically complex and economically uncertain .
I say it is politically complex because , as we are dealing with institutional issues here , I cannot ignore the fact that the debate on what to do with the Constitutional Treaty is still ongoing .
Another point that I cannot ignore , either , is that this report is being debated within a ' new era ' in terms of monetary policy - with interest rates that have been rising for some time and threaten to keep on rising - and at a stage when we are embarking on the new Stability and Growth Pact as revised by the Commission , and when the Member States are for the first time coming before the European institutions to account for what they have done regarding the Lisbon Strategy in their national reform plans .
I say that the situation is economically confused because , while I agree with the Commission 's view that the economic situation is good , or at least much better than it was previously , I must emphasise that our potential 2 % growth is not enough to absorb Europe 's unemployed , to keep pace with our competitors or to maintain our standard of living .
As is customary in this House , this report is divided into several sections : macroeconomic policy ; reforms , with special emphasis on the internal market ; and institutional issues , focusing on economic policy coordination and external representation .
In the area of macroeconomic policy , there is nothing really new other than what we said in the debate on the broad economic guidelines .
What the doctor prescribes for our macroeconomic policy is more stability , more stability and more stability .
On monetary policy , the point that we highlight - and I repeat that we are highlighting institutional issues - is that we would like to see greater transparency and openness in the European Central Bank .
We would like to know why it does what it does , and how it manages and takes into account the two pillars on which it bases its decisions .
That is why we are asking for short minutes to be published showing the arguments for and against a particular decision .
On the subject of budgetary policy , this report 's first finding is that monetary policy may be losing the momentum that it has shown so far , and budgetary policy must take up the torch .
That , as I have highlighted before , leads us to call on the Commission to adhere to a strict interpretation of the Stability and Growth Pact , and on the Member States to work harder at cutting their deficits , especially in good times .
Something new that we are calling for is greater coordination of Member States ' fiscal calendars and of the economic forecasts that they use in making their budgetary projections .
It does not make sense for countries taking part in the European Economic Union to use different forecasts of oil prices or of interest or exchange rate trends ; in our dialogue with the national parliaments , we should like everyone to know what we are talking about .
On the matter of public debt , we also call on the Member States , as usual , to make a greater effort to cut public debt in order to free up resources and to address the Lisbon Strategy and the budgetary challenges that will result from the ageing of our population .
The last point - which has been repeated already - is to review our fiscal systems in order to enhance the competitiveness of Europe 's economy .
With regard to reforms , we prescribe Lisbon and more Lisbon .
We want the public to see how well each Member State is performing .
We therefore call for a code of conduct that will enable us to put greater pressure on the slowest countries and , through the dissemination of good practice , enable them to see how countries at the top of the class operate .
Regarding the internal market , we need freedom and more freedom , in contrast to the protectionist temptations that we have seen in recent years , as well as development of the services market .
In short , we want consolidation of fundamental freedoms .
As regards institutional issues - I want to focus on improving the way the Union operates - we call for a trialogue between the Council , the Commission and Parliament to take place quarterly , in parallel with the dialogue that we have with the European Central Bank , although I am aware that the Commissioner is not enamoured with the idea .
To facilitate this trialogue , we ask that the Eurogroup draw up a roadmap showing which way the euro zone will be heading in the next two years .
We call on the Commission to provide us , in subsequent reports , with a more specific toolbox in order to promote such talks , and we invite the Commissioner and the Council to meet with us every three months .
On the matter of external representation , we find that it is not consistent with the international weight of the euro .
We are pleased that the Member States spoke with one voice at the meetings of the international institutions in Singapore , and we call for greater coordination and imagination to ensure that the Member States are represented as a single entity in the International Monetary Fund , the World Bank and other international bodies .
I am grateful to all the shadow rapporteurs and all my fellow Members for the efforts that they have made .
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to thank Mr García-Margallo and the European Parliament Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs for the interest that it has shown in analysing this first Commission Annual Report on the Euro Area , whose main objective is to promote dialogue and debate between our two institutions with a view to identifying the priority measures that will improve the way that the whole area operates .
Since I had the opportunity to present this report to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs in July , the predictions for growth in the euro zone for this year and the following two years have significantly improved .
Last week I presented our autumn predictions , which can be summarised by saying that all of the economic indicators are pointing in the right direction : rising economic growth , which is the highest in the euro zone since the start of the decade , falling unemployment , stable inflation and clear reduction in public deficits .
The factors that have contributed to this positive picture include external factors , such as the sustained strength of the global economy , but also internal factors , which contradict the image of stagnation and paralysis that has been used to portray European economies , and in particular the economy of the euro zone .
Among these internal factors are the reforms in several countries in the euro zone in recent years , the budgetary consolidation efforts and the response of European economies to the significant increase in oil prices , which is more efficient than many expected .
The existence of the euro zone has also significantly contributed to this favourable climate , thanks to the good finance conditions for families and businesses provided by the current level of interest rates and also thanks to the protection the euro has provided against the turbulence of the financial markets , as occurred in the spring .
However , all of these positive factors do not invalidate the main conclusions of the Commission report on measures that should enable us to improve the operation of the area , which the majority of you agree with , according to Mr García-Margallo 's report .
I am talking about the need to go further with structural reforms , to consolidate the single market and to ensure more effective and integrated external representation of the euro zone than there has been so far .
These three priorities , which are set out in the report , will also be included in the Annual Economic Report that I will present to the Commission on 22 November , which this year focuses on the operation of Economic and Monetary Union and , in particular , of the euro zone , in the light of the eight years of experience that have been accumulated .
Having examined these three priorities and in relation to economic reforms I agree with the statement made in the report regarding the importance of carrying out the reforms promised by the Member States in the national reform plans as part of the Lisbon Strategy .
Once monetary policy has been unified and budgetary policy has been made part of the Stability and Growth Pact , the economic policies of each of the national governments should make the necessary adjustments in terms of productivity , competitiveness and the operation of markets in order to ensure a high degree of convergence within the area .
In December , based on the reports submitted by the Member States , the Commission will adopt the report on the first year of application of the national reform plans .
Our report will include an explicit evaluation of the degree to which each of the Member States has put these reforms into practice and , if we consider it to be necessary , we will give recommendations for each of the countries .
We will also include an evaluation in the report of what we the European institutions have done in application of the reforms required for the Lisbon Community programme .
We agree , as I said before , on the need to go further with the internal market , which , along with the single currency , is one of the two essential instruments for promoting more efficient allocation of resources and offering greater opportunities to businesses and more choice to consumers .
The integration of the financial system is also a top priority for the proper functioning of Economic and Monetary Union .
In this sector , the roadmap is set out in the Commission White Paper on financial services covering the 2005-2010 period .
With regard to external representation of the euro zone , I can confirm that the European Parliament agrees on the need for coherent external representation .
As I had the opportunity to explain in one of my recent speeches to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , the European Union spoke with once voice in Singapore , as Mr García-Margallo has just reiterated .
In October , after this meeting , both in the Eurogroup and in Ecofin , we debated this matter again and arrived at some additional agreements that are moving in the right direction .
Mr García-Margallo 's report also contains comments on monetary policy and on the application of the Treaty criteria for expanding the euro zone .
The European Central Bank is one of the most transparent central banks in the world and this perception is highly valued by the markets , which appreciate the Bank 's communication policy .
With regard to the application of the inflation criteria for the enlargement of the euro zone , which we have debated many times in this House recently , I refer to what has been said so far .
Finally , I do not know what doubts Mr García-Margallo has perceived .
I am entirely in favour of dialogue with this House on the operation of the euro zone .
The Chair of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs is well aware of this , as just a few days ago I had the opportunity to discuss with her how we can put it into practice .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats welcomes this report ; not only is there no dispute about that , but we also say ' yes ' to its demands , its analysis and its substance .
By way of elaboration , I would like to say something about six fundamentals .
The first is that the euro is the EU 's most potent response to globalisation .
The second is that it may be the most important instrument for a successful internal market , but it is not the only one ; it must go hand-in-hand with the accelerated implementation of the four freedoms in the internal market by means of pro-active innovation , the removal of structural weaknesses and the stabilisation of the social security , pensions and health systems .
Thirdly , all EU Member States need to join the euro zone .
Any EU Member State that resists the euro and sets itself in opposition to the euro zone , that fails to make every effort to become part of the European currency area , weakens the internal market and lessens the European Union 's resistance to the effects of globalisation .
Fourthly , the Maastricht criteria are the entry ticket , and I am glad that the Commission , in its decisions over recent months , has held fast to them .
Fifthly , the Stability and Growth Pact is the necessary framework for budget policy .
We demand that cyclical increases in revenue be used to reduce deficits and states ' debts .
Sixthly , according to today 's newspapers , the French interior minister , Mr Sarkozy , is calling for the euro zone to be under European economic government .
Those who want to strengthen the European economy need to ratify the constitution and endow the Commission with the necessary powers ; that is why we favour a strong euro on world markets and a single voice in the IMF , along with a European foreign minister to enable the European Union to carry some global clout .
Mr President , Commissioner , I welcome the opportunity presented to us by this debate in plenary to review together the operation of the euro zone at a time when , as you have said , the outlook in certain areas is improving , yet when all agree that the potential for growth is not fully realised and when our economies are handicapped by an exchange rate that makes euro zone exports difficult and leads some of our businesses to contemplate relocation in order to produce their goods in the dollar zone .
This report presents an opportunity for review at a time when the Stability Pact has been revised and all agree that the commitments made by the Member States of the euro zone perhaps need to be better differentiated from the commitments made outside of the zone .
From this point of view , the report is valuable , and I believe that we must also congratulate our fellow Member Mr García-Margallo on the spirit in which he approached it .
We need to go further than reforming the Stability Pact in order to better coordinate timeframes and data and to ensure that , essentially , the Commission and the Central Bank do not evaluate the performances of the Member States of the euro zone solely from the point of view of their deficits , but also in the light of their strengths and weaknesses in a wider context .
You mentioned this in your speech , Commissioner , and I am grateful for your having done so .
I invite you , moreover , to continue along these lines .
There is also a need to link macro-economic analysis more closely with developments on the financial markets .
Furthermore , the way in which rating agencies have been able to be involved in the Italian question and to assess that country 's debt must prompt us to be more vigilant , since , if rating agencies had to take a high-level role in the assessment of the debts of the Member States , there would be a very serious risk with regard to the leadership of the euro zone .
One final word , Commissioner , to reinforce what has been said by several others on the subject of exchange rates : we need more economic policies and economic leadership in this area .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Economic and Monetary Union , with a common currency , is the highest level of economic integration the European Union has thus far reached .
The euro zone has already been operating for six years , and its first enlargement revealed that the Maastricht criteria established more than a decade ago no longer correspond to the reality of the enlarging EU and the developing global economy .
The euro zone countries are unable to implement the indicators that are important for the operation of the euro zone , especially the requirement for price stability .
The European Commission ( according to the EC Treaty ) and the European Central Bank are both applying different criteria of price stability to the euro zone .
According to the European Central Bank , price stability ensures lower inflation , which is still close to 2 % .
Based on the methods of the European Commission , the stability of prices in the euro zone is established by considering more than just the rate of inflation of the euro zone countries and , therefore , it is impossible to eliminate uncharacteristic inflation factors .
I call on the Commission and the European Central Bank to work together on improvement of the concept of euro zone price stability and methods for its establishment in order to avoid misapprehensions in the process of euro zone enlargement and implementation of indicators in the euro zone itself .
I invite euro zone Member States to properly implement the euro zone membership criteria that were adopted by the Member States themselves for better economic integration .
Furthermore , I would like to emphasise that structural reforms are necessary for the successful competition of both the European Union and the euro zone in the global economy , and especially in further implementation of a domestic market with free movement of services , which has contributed to the competitiveness of the European Union .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , Commission , fellow Members , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to begin by thanking Mr García-Margallo y Marfil for this report on the situation in the euro zone .
The rapporteur observes that the prognoses for the euro zone look better than they have done for a long time .
That depends , of course , on what economic policy it is intended to conduct .
The policy pursued so far has not exactly been a success .
Large parts of Europe are in social and economic crisis .
According to the latest statistics , seven million people are living in poverty in Europe 's largest economy , Germany .
One of the causes of this is , specifically , economic and monetary union . EMU is presided over by the world 's most conservative central bank when it comes to inflation , and its Stability Pact stymies economic policy .
As the European Trade Union Confederation ( ETUC ) recently observed in a report , it is not more of this inflexible policy that we need .
Instead , the peoples of Europe need an active financial policy and a reorganisation of EMU .
As you know , my own country , Sweden , is not a member of EMU .
In 2003 , a clear majority voted against participating in it .
That is why I am rather disturbed to read the report , which notes that , as from 2007 , the euro zone will comprise 13 Member States but that - and I quote - ' macro-economic policy coordination and the internal market will involve all 27 Member States ' .
What does that mean ?
Does it mean that Sweden , which has voted against EMU , will have to participate in it sooner or later ?
I should be grateful for an answer from the Commission and also from the rapporteur , if he is given the floor at the end of the debate .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , in our discussion of the 2006 annual report on the situation in the euro zone there are two points I would like to make .
The first is the much lower economic growth rate and higher unemployment in the countries of the European Union , and in the euro zone in particular , than in the USA and in the emerging markets such as China and India .
Economic growth in the euro zone will in 2005-2007 be almost half of that of the USA , while unemployment will be almost twice as high .
The second point is the higher economic growth rate and the lower unemployment rates in three of the fifteen countries which did not join the euro zone compared with countries inside the zone .
No wonder that those countries are not rushing to join the single currency .
The new Member States now have even greater reservations about joining the euro zone , even though they are continuing to work hard to meet the Maastricht convergence criteria .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , growth in the euro zone has been the lowest in the world for many years , as it was in 2006 as well .
But instead of looking for the causes at home , in the monetary policy of the European Central Bank , attempts are being made to impose the so-called harmonisation of budgetary and tax policies in the Member States .
This is an attempt to hobble the initiative of Member States , a kind of diktat imposed by the stronger on the weaker .
If the point of creating a common currency was firstly , to simplify the system and thereby to reduce costs , secondly to attract foreign investment , and thirdly , to make use of the privilege of issuing currency and creating a new world currency , then in the latter two cases the desired effect has not been achieved .
Foreign investment continues to focus on the United States and Asia .
Demand for the euro as a world currency is comparatively weak .
The opposite effect has been achieved : keeping interest rates high and artificially bolstering the euro has undermined the competitiveness of European manufacturers and reduced export earnings .
The common currency and the policy of the ECB appear to be serving the interests of finance capital at the cost of businessmen , consumers and the Member States ' national budgets .
The single currency has had an indirect impact on the exports of the new Member States by slowing their development and holding them back .
We therefore take the view that there needs to be a radical review of EU monetary doctrine towards restoring authority over currency issue and interest rates to the monetary authorities of the Member States .
( DE ) Mr President , we can all , in fact , take pride in the euro .
Much of what was predicted before its introduction has not come to pass , but there are three things that need constant emphasis .
One is that the tax revenues that are now coming in must actually be used to reduce deficits , and we demand this in paragraph 5 of the report .
Another is the urgent demand that the Maastricht criteria be rigorously applied .
Relaxing them again , in the way they have been in the past , will surely get us nowhere .
Thirdly , there is transparency .
The ECB lags a long way behind global standards .
The ongoing failure to produce anything like adequate minutes of decisions - or indeed any at all - defies comprehension , and this state of affairs is in urgent need of improvement .
Mr President , firstly I should like to thank the rapporteur for his report .
It underlines the need for cooperation in strengthening the European economy .
It is fair to say that the euro has provided Europe with stability that we have never seen before .
When I listened earlier to my Swedish colleague , it sounded as though it was a problem for the European economy to have low interest rates .
However , the truth is that we have lower interest rates than ever before .
Does anyone think that the European economy would have been better if we had the interest rates of the 1970s or 1980s , or if we had the budget deficits of those years when Europe was losing out in the European economy ?
Let us stop dreaming and look at the reality .
Today we have a common currency that places the emphasis on and encourages competition , trade and investment and focuses on the need for structural reforms , as well as the need for fiscal discipline .
That is good .
That provides us with opportunities , because the problem of the European economy is not the interest rates , it is the lack of deregulation , it is the lack of more trade and of more of the internal market .
We can see that we are more efficient and more successful since we opened up the markets .
I believe that the euro will never be stronger than the European economy and the discipline of the countries participating in the euro .
That also underlines the need for the European Central Bank to be independent , as underlined in the report .
That is very important , because otherwise we will lose credibility .
From a Swedish perspective , we will soon have the euro in a number of new countries around the Baltic Sea .
I hope we will have a debate in my country that will make it possible for us to join them and other euro countries in the years to come .

( DE ) Mr President , I am glad that the Commission has produced this report and that it is committed to observing what happens to the euro zone , but equally glad to be able to say that Mr Juncker 's presence here today means that there will be a contribution to our debate from the person who has the responsibility of speaking on behalf of the euro zone 's members .

So , then , where do we stand ?
For the first time , we have got closer to the growth target that we set ourselves in Lisbon ; growth in the euro zone now stands at 2.8 % , which is almost the 3 % that we took as a base figure at Lisbon .
In this situation , what is the challenge for the euro zone ?
What is the essential thing that is at stake ?
Will we be content with this being nothing more than a little gust of air , no more than an upturn in the cycle that will be gone by tomorrow , or do we want to put something structural in place to ensure that we can draw a deep breath and get the chance to generate a long-term upturn that will last and will - since it is not merely data that make the economy , but people - foster popular confidence ?
That is why I believe that we have to make the effort to do what is now needed , namely to make smart investments in the euro zone .
Yes , consolidating budgets is a good thing to do , but we cannot simply chant that as a mantra when what we need to be doing is making use of the upturn we are experiencing now in order to embark on a policy of intelligent modernisation that gives us a chance of seriously reducing unemployment , and that , too , is in the report .
Finally , I would like to thank our co-rapporteur and shadow rapporteur Mr Rosati , who contributed to our discussions on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , and I do not want to omit Mr García-Margallo y Marfil , to whom thanks are due for having - and not for the first time - made an essential and seminal contribution to macro-economic debate in this House .
Mr President , events seem to have overtaken this report .
In spite of Commissioner Almunia 's comments , its upbeat projections for growth in the euro zone contrast sharply with the economic data released at the end of last week , which put growth in the French economy at zero .
There are also signs of faltering growth across the euro zone , which will not be helped by the austere taxation regimes being introduced in Germany and Italy next year to meet the euro zone 's stability requirements .
What this report does not tell us is that the Government of Italy is on the brink of collapse because of Mr Prodi 's determination to introduce tax increases and budget cuts demanded by the European Commissioner for Economic Affairs to bring Italy into line with the Maastricht Treaty .
It also does not mention the riots in Hungary following the Hungarian Prime Minister 's revelations that he had lied morning , noon and night about the tax increases and public spending that he had secretly promised that same Commissioner .
Forcing many of our new members of the EU to abide by deflationary policies designed for the more developed economies of the euro zone is generating weak demand , weak growth and mass unemployment .
This report also fails to mention that the Maastricht Treaty has turned the Eastern Europeans into second-class citizens : they have no chance of joining the euro zone in the foreseeable future , while having to manage their economies in line with its requirements .
Sooner or later the people of Europe are going to get restless with a system that keeps them permanently in the economic slow lane , while denying them any democratic say in how it should be run .
( SK ) I would like to welcome and support the proposal by the opposition in the European Parliament concerning the 2006 declaration on the anniversary of the euro zone .
In particular , I would like to highlight the passage calling for a thorough examination of the mechanism of the three Member States that are the best performers in terms of price stability , and the methods for calculating the reference inflation rates .
The point is that the varying rates of inflation among the euro zone Member States do not reflect different approaches to macroeconomic policy , but are rather the result of structural factors .
This premise , I believe , applies especially to the new Member States of the European Union .
The relative share of energy-intensive and raw material-intensive output in many of these countries is greater than in the euro zone .
A major portion of this output is then transported to the euro zone either directly or as part of finished products , for instance in respect of the sheet metal used to manufacture car bodies .
Because of these structural reasons , the new Member States are more susceptible to fluctuations in the price of energy and raw materials ; by the same token , they serve as a buffer that absorbs the impact of price changes on the euro zone .
This problem particularly affects the Slovak Republic .
The current approach to assessing inflation criteria is , therefore , inappropriate and may in the long run diminish the chances of new Member States gaining entry to the euro zone , even if they comply with all other requirements .
( HU ) Mr President , first of all , I congratulate the Commission and the rapporteur for their consideration of this difficult subject .
I am particularly pleased with the remarks concerning the flexibility of the labour market and the goal-oriented approach to education .
I believe that our conclusions point in a single direction .
As someone from one of the eastern European countries waiting to join the euro zone , I would like to make only four brief remarks :
First : with respect to the enlargement of the euro zone , no other standard for admission should be applied than the political standard that applies to those who are already inside .
Second : it is important that the new Member States join as soon as possible , and therefore there can be no interpretation , above all in the matter of inflation , sustainability and the reference level , which would in practice postpone for a long time the accession of the new Member States , which are still lagging behind the EU economic average , and are thus still in the process of catching up in terms of wage and price levels .
This is a point on which Mr Kozlík has given a very good explanation .
Third : I agree that the statistics of the Member States have to be closely monitored , and that the Commission must respond with political tools , if nothing else , such as informing a European Summit , if a Member State is particularly undisciplined and heading in the wrong direction .
In the long run , turning a blind eye is unacceptable .
The Commission has a political responsibility as well in this regard .
Fourth : deepening the internal market is essential , and it is important that everyone observes the criteria .
The new Member States are doing this .
However , there is a contradiction : on the one hand , the labour market , the Schengen zone , remains closed to the new Member States , and the Labour-Intensive Services and the Posting of Workers directives are very restrictive .
On the other hand , however , we are obliged to open up the market in financial services to everyone .
This imbalance does not make the integration of Member States any easier from the perspective of deepening the internal market .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , this report contains several interesting and welcome recommendations for which I would like to thank the rapporteur .
Thus , instead of simply calling for public spending cuts , the report recommends freeing up resources to make what are presumably necessary public investments in education , training , infrastructure and research .
Furthermore , instead of recommending wage cuts , the European Parliament admits - that is in fact the term that is used - that , in the long term , real wages and productivity should grow simultaneously .
I would thank the rapporteur for his efforts at moderation and conciliation .
However , the subject of this debate is the economic performance of the euro zone .
In fact , I believe that , despite the recent and even unexpected improvement of growth indicators , the economic situation remains fragile and unsatisfactory .
After all , the Commission 's macroeconomic policy affects the daily lives of millions of Europeans whose purchasing power , I would point out , is threatened by stagnating salaries and by an increase in the cost of living and whose working conditions continue to decline , while social protection is also dwindling .
The practical response offered by the Commission and the European Central Bank is always the same : to fight inflation through budgetary austerity and wage cuts , while increasing competition in the services , capital , products and labour markets .
Perhaps the time has come to evaluate the results of this policy and to consider whether dismantling public services , deregulating the labour market and cutting public expenditure really is a sustainable way of driving growth in the euro zone and in the European Union .
Unfortunately , no period of reflection is on the agenda .
In two days , we shall have to give our opinion on a ' services ' directive that is admittedly improved , but that remains true to Fritz Bolkestein 's deregulatory model .
In a few months ' time , we will have on our agenda a directive proposing the end of the public postal service .
As for energy , despite the chronic instability of the oil-producing zones , despite the gas blackmail exercised by a neighbouring country , despite global warming and despite power cuts extending across half of Europe , it is all to no avail and the response remains the same : to complete the liberalised and deregulated internal energy market in Europe .
The euro zone 's economic report is perhaps a little better this year , but its social and political performance remains , in my eyes , as bad as ever .
( EL ) Mr President , I have been listening to the speakers all this time , especially the competent Commissioner , Mr Almunia , arguing in favour of the canonisation of the euro .
But is that really the case ?
Perhaps , what we are tying to canonise , here in this Chamber , is the bad demon of the citizens of Europe which we represent ?
The value of the euro rises and we are all delighted .
However , at the same time , the number of citizens living below the poverty line also rises .
Of the 500 million people in Europe of 27 , 100 million people are living below the poverty line .
In other words , people who can only afford meat once a fortnight , who cannot buy clothes for their children , who cannot change their car until they have had it for 15 years .
What does the euro mean to these people ?
I would remind you that it started with an imperium .
We do not want one and two euro notes and yet 75 % of daily transactions are below the 5 euro line .
We are delighted that the euro is rising .
It has risen from 0.87 cents to the dollar to 1.30 .
What does that mean ?
No country which does not have proprietary products can sell to the United States of America or other countries .
Of course Germany can sell Mercedes because it is a Mercedes , but how can my country , which has no proprietary products , sell to America - the big market - when it can find the same product in a neighbouring country outside EMU for a third of the price ?
How will tourists come to Greece or , Mr Almunia , how will American tourists go to Spain when it is impossible to monitor the value of the euro .
Can we not look at all this ?
Can we not address all this ?
It is a huge problem and you have a huge responsibility in the Commission , especially you personally , Mr Almunia .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , while we who live in the euro zone must , of course , make it our concern to leave our children in as little debt as possible , not under any circumstances must we , in our striving for a more vigorous economy , dispense with social standards .
Whenever we are invited to compare our growth rate with that of the USA , the lack of virtually any kind of social system in the United States must not be left out of the equation .
I do not think that we are going to catch them up by forcing masses of public sector workers into retirement and privatising their jobs , or by means of jobs paying EUR 1 an hour combined with the forcing of more and more staff into what appears to be self-employment .
We have , in the past , seen more and more of the family silver being sold off in order to gain membership of the euro club , and that must come to an end ; we must instead make the effort to get on top of the explosive growth of black-market work , to cut down the bureaucratic hurdles that face small and medium-sized businesses , some of which are becoming harder to surmount , and make it easier for such businesses to get access to grants .
Only then will the euro zone have a future characterised by growth .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , it gives me great satisfaction to announce my support for the European Commission 's presentation of the first annual report on the situation in the euro zone .
The report provides a good basis for discussing the main challenges facing the euro zone now and in the coming years .
There is plenty to discuss .
The average growth rate in the euro zone in 2001-2005 was a mere 1.9 % .
Unemployment rose to 13 million , and the situation with public finances got worse , rather than improving .
Last year did bring a slight improvement in the situation , as you were kind enough to confirm , but this does not change the fact that Europe is falling further behind not just the United States and Japan , but also the Asian boom countries .
Unresolved structural problems lie at the root of European stagnation .
The high cost of setting up and running a business , high overheads on labour costs , reluctance to innovate , and the maintenance of harmful barriers to the labour market and the services market all reduce the competitiveness of European firms , holding back growth and increasing pressure on public finances .
It prevents us from making full use of the opportunities offered by a common currency and a uniform monetary policy .
I therefore call upon the European Commission to put pressure on the Member States to speed up implementation of the necessary reforms .
The need for this has been demonstrated in numerous reports and studies , including the Shapiro report and the high-level report made under the chairmanship of Wim Kok .
Macroeconomic policy in the euro zone needs to be improved .
What is missing above all is proper coordination of fiscal policy among the Member States .
At the same time , the common currency requires fiscal discipline which needs to be observed jointly by all Member States .
This will make it possible to balance macroeconomic policy and to restore a proper policy mix .
Monetary policy needs to be based on clear , transparent rules , and must be more forward-looking in character .
Excessive secrecy in decision-making , lack of clear regulations on the role played by the ' two pillars ' of monetary policy , particularly the M3 monetary supply , which create serious doubts regarding the rules for appointing members of the board of the European Central Bank , all restrict the effectiveness and transparency of the common monetary policy , and may undermine the position of the common currency .
A substantial element in strengthening the euro zone is expanding it and taking on new members .
In this process we must observe the rule that candidates are bound by the treaty , the whole treaty and nothing but the treaty .
This means that they must meet the criteria set out in the treaty , but also that additional requirements cannot be imposed upon them .
I am convinced that the accession of new euro zone members , whose deficit and public debt levels are often much lower than those of the other Member States , will help to strengthen the euro zone .
In conclusion , I would like to thank Mr Juncker , the president of the Euro Group , for taking part in our debate , and hope that it will inspire him and help him to manage the Euro Group even better .
I would also like to thank Mr García-Margallo y Marfil for preparing this excellent report , and give my full agreement to the majority of the proposals made in it .
Member of the Commission .
( ES ) Mr President , thank you very much to all of the Members for their contributions .
I think that the debate shows that it is useful to have a report like this every year on the operation of the euro zone and its results , this being the first time that it has been adopted by the Commission and is being debated in Parliament .
As a conclusion to today 's debate , I can make an optimistic observation : the euro zone is growing again , despite the fact that some said that it was a zone of very low growth .
The euro zone is growing by 2.6 % this year , perhaps even more at the end of the financial year .
The euro zone is creating jobs and reducing unemployment .
According to our predictions , between now and 2008 , five million jobs are going to be created in the euro zone .
It is not said very often , but it is true that since the beginning of this decade , despite low growth , in the euro zone and of course also in the whole of the European Union , significantly more jobs have been created than in the United States , which always establish themselves as the reference point to be imitated in policies and strategies for job creation .
I therefore think that , if we analyse the operation of the area and the results that we are achieving through monetary integration , there are elements that could justify a moderately optimistic assessment .
However , it is also true that there are elements that should continue to attract our attention , as there is still a great deal to do .
There is still a great deal to do , as many of you have said , in order to increase potential growth and continue to reduce unemployment , so that greater growth and a higher level of employment can improve the lives of our citizens , reduce inequalities and offer more solid bases for our social protection systems and for our social services system .
This firstly requires , as many of you have said , that we continue to comply and comply better with the stability and budgetary discipline criteria laid down in the Treaty and implemented through the application of the Stability and Growth Pact , which is being applied in a reasonably positive way on which there is a consensus .
We also need to continue with the reforms and go further with the Lisbon Strategy , because this plan of eliminating barriers and facilitating the four freedoms has proven to be a solid basis for creating better conditions in which to face the future .
It also requires , according to the analysis and many of its conclusions , better governance in the euro zone .
I think that the efficiency of the operation of the Eurogroup , since it has had a stable presidency , led by Mr Juncker , who is with us today , has improved .
It is enabling us to make better progress in analysis , mutual understanding and coordinating decisions that affect the Member States , but which cannot be imposed on them from above , and need to be adopted by consensus , with their full conviction , and in accordance with their competences .
We also need to strengthen dialogue .
If any of you still have any doubts , ladies and gentlemen , in the opinion of the Commission , and in my opinion , as the Commissioner for Economic and Monetary Affairs , we need to enhance bilateral dialogue between the Commission and Parliament on these matters .
I think that we need to move forward in a tripartite dialogue between the Presidency of the Eurogroup , the Commission and Parliament , on the following matters : the operation of the Eurogroup , on any subjects that draw our attention and , if you agree , I also think that we need to move forward with a dialogue including , while fully respecting its independence , the European Central Bank and why not ? which has a monetary dialogue with you but also has a monthly dialogue with us .
I think that Parliament can and should , every now and again , be part of this exchange of views between all of the institutions , whose common goal is for the euro zone to operate correctly and for the euro , our common currency , to produce the best possible results for all the citizens of Europe .
President of Eurogroup . ( FR ) Mr President , I should like first of all to apologise for being late .
The Luxembourg-Strasbourg route is terribly congested at the entrance to Strasbourg , and traffic jams prevented me from arriving on time .
Being conscious not to disturb the peace and quiet of the people of Strasbourg , I did not want to ' go all out ' ; I scrupulously adhered to the highway code , and I was the first to suffer , since I have arrived late for this debate .
Nevertheless , I should like to tell you that I attach importance to this debate because Parliament 's thoughts are not only important in themselves , but they also sustain the debates within Eurogroup , which I chair , assisted , inspired , driven and spurred on by the Commissioner for Monetary Affairs , my friend , Mr Almunia .
I should like to begin by saying , Mr President , that I believe that we have strong growth : it is expanding and it is not under threat , despite the attempts to dampen it down , particularly on the part of France .
The employment rate is rising and unemployment is going down , although it has not attained acceptable levels .
As regards growth , if we look at it in perspective , it is probably stronger than we think at present and is , at any rate , stronger than we thought six months ago .
In 2007 , we shall have to see to what extent the cyclical slowdown in the United States affects the economic performance of the euro zone .
At Eurogroup , we believe that the impact of the US slowdown on the euro zone economies will be less marked than in 2000-2001 .
We see that the US cyclical slowdown is primarily hitting the building sector and that it is not going to spread to other sectors of the US economy .
Thus the impact on growth in the euro zone will be less marked than before , even though the country-by-country results will reveal some big differences .
Why have we attained a level of growth that seems more acceptable to us today than it did a few years ago ?
Firstly , because the euro has protected us to a huge extent over the past few years .
It is never said enough , when the introduction of the euro is reviewed : the euro has protected us , is protecting us and will continue to protect us !
Imagine the state of the European economy and the state of the European monetary systems if the euro had not existed during times of crisis !
During this period , when preliminary work was being done on the euro , we witnessed the Latin American , Russian and South East Asian financial crises .
Imagine how out of control our system would have let things get before the European system was implemented , at the time of the war in Iraq and of 11 September 2001 !
Imagine what the performance of the European currencies would be if they still existed , while the geostrategic dramas being played out are a constant cause for concern !
Imagine how certain national currencies would have performed after the French and Dutch ' No ' votes !
The euro has protected us , and it has even protected countries that expressed some misgivings about Europe when it came to their approving the Constitutional Treaty .
The budgetary situation improved when , in all wisdom and with the agreement and often even the active support of Parliament , we amended and reformed the Stability and Growth Pact .
Some people felt they were entitled to express their grave concerns following the adoption of the reformed pact .
We see today that the mechanisms of the reformed pact are holding up well and that all the governments are making every effort to implement the main rules and guiding principles contained therein .
The budget deficits are decreasing , and a general consensus is emerging , which is aimed at all of the Member States taking the prevention aspect of the Stability and Growth Pact seriously : they have all decided to allocate as a priority the fiscal surpluses resulting from the cyclical upturn to the reduction in the deficit and to the reduction in the level of public debt .
I welcome that decision .
We , at Eurogroup , are giving more thought to stepping up budgetary controls and we are doing so together with the Commission , whose cordial manner of assisting Eurogroup 's presidency is proving to be very effective .
We will see during our next meeting - which will be held towards the end of November , and thus after my visit to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , which you , Mrs Berès , expertly chair - how we can step up these budgetary controls .
We will do so , from now on , on the basis of a Commission horizontal report , which will not fail to emphasise the real political problems that exist , including the political-economic ones , or to draft specific recommendations - the form of which we have yet to decide on - to the various Member States , and even to the entire euro zone .
With regard to the currency area as a whole , I should like us to take what is , by now , a long-standing invitation from the Commission seriously this year , and that is to devote a specific chapter of the European Council 's conclusions - when it examines the progress made by the Lisbon Strategy - to the euro zone , a chapter that includes the structural reforms that we will have to implement within the various member states of the euro zone .
As regards the structural reform problem , I would quite simply say , Mr President , that we underestimate the value that these structural reforms have already added to the coherence of the euro zone .
I do not agree with all - or in general , some - of the structural reforms that have been implemented within all the Member States , but the fact is that , contrary to the idea , to the image that we very often present of the euro zone , an important raft of structural reforms is underway , and we are now already reaping the rewards of this far-reaching structural reform that we have implemented with regard to the euro zone .
When you look closely at the national reform programmes that the various Member States have introduced , you will see that there are many structural solutions , that they are generally in line with each other and that we must proceed further with this raft of reforms , without for all that lapsing into unsavoury neoliberalism and into a boundless , shameless form of frenetic deregulation , to which I am opposed because I still believe that the euro and the euro zone and the consistency of the policies that we will be implementing would gain in credibility if we supplemented our work on structural reforms with the implementation of a set of minimum social rights .
This would guarantee all workers , throughout the euro zone , a number of minimum rights , which the Member States , in trying to enhance their national fighting spirits , could not undermine .
Workers in Europe have a right to know where they stand .
We must stop giving the impression that the monetary Union is a business that is run by the ministers of finance , the bankers and the big investors and big businesses and that it actually works against the most basic rights of workers , who do , after all , make up the majority of the population in Europe .
I should like to say a word about the enlargement of the euro zone .
I disagree with all those who imply that we , in the euro zone , have become stricter than before towards the new Member States which want to join the zone .
The criteria that we are applying are those laid down in the Treaty of Maastricht .
There has been no demand to change the criteria that we adopted when the Treaty was signed in Maastricht , on 7 February 1992 .
There is no question of abandoning the nominal convergence policy so as to replace it with a criterion that would omit the application of certain criteria , which the first members of the euro zone had to meet .
As for those who call into question the nominal convergence criteria , in non-theoretical terms , I would guard them against the genuine risks of seeing the nominal convergence criteria replaced by real convergence criteria .
The application of real convergence criteria would make the new Member States ' accession to the euro zone a very distant prospect .
I therefore think that we would be wise to confine ourselves to the criteria that are currently ours , and this policy will enhance the credibility of the euro zone .
The way in which the euro zone is represented outside Europe does , in fact , warrant a lengthy explanation , but a brief explanation may suffice .
The euro zone must be represented by a man , by a voice and by a seat within every international institution , and particularly within the international financial organisations .
I am convinced that we will not have reached that stage when my term in office comes to an end on 1 January 2009 .
Nevertheless , I firmly believe that the day will come when even the most reticent of Europeans will realise that we are constantly making fools of ourselves in aspiring to co-manage the world 's monetary affairs if we continue to appear in international forums without a common plan of action .
There you have a few comments that I felt it my right to make , while I apologise for not having been able to reply to all of the speakers , as I usually do ; I had to reply briefly because I was not present when the speakers , with the commitment that characterises this Parliament , took the floor .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place on Tuesday at 11.30 .
Written statement ( Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
( FR ) Even though the report by my excellent colleague , Mr Garcia-Margallo y Marfil , puts forward some very interesting analyses and proposals on the euro zone , I regret the fact that it does not raise the issue straightaway of the development of the euro from a technical currency to a political tool benefiting growth and employment .
The monetary policy conducted by the European Central Bank ( ECB ) seems to be at odds with reality : the exchange rate should normally be strong when there is strong economic growth and should depreciate when there is weak growth .
The fact is that , in Europe , the opposite has been true since the start of the 1990s .
While the Member States are undergoing reforms , the quest for zero inflation through an inappropriate monetary policy is leading Europe to record mediocre results in terms of economic growth .
If this state of affairs continues , at a time when the price of raw materials and of energy is rocketing worldwide , we will have zero inflation and zero growth , and manufacturers will end up setting up their businesses in the dollar zone .
With everything that is happening , it is as though the ECB is disregarding economic policy , while its US counterpart is thinking of nothing else .
Community action in the field of marine environmental policy - Thematic strategy on the marine environment ( debate )
The next items on the agenda are
the joint debate on the report by Marie-Noëlle Lienemann on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on the proposed Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on community action in the field of marine environmental policy - Thematic strategy on the marine environment ( Marine Strategy Directive ) - C6 - 0346 / 2005 -
the report by Aldis Kušķis on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety on the thematic strategy for protection and preservation of the marine environment
Member of the Commission .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to be able to launch this joint debate on the thematic strategy for protecting and preserving the marine environment and on the proposed Marine Strategy Directive .
I should like to thank both rapporteurs - Mrs Lienemann for the proposed Marine Strategy Directive and Mr Kuskis for the thematic strategy .
I also wish to thank the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for their efforts .
Furthermore I should like to thank the Committee on Fisheries and in particular Mr Gklavakis for his highly constructive approach to this important issue .
Seas and oceans cover 71 % of the Earth 's surface and contain 90 % of the biosphere .
Europe 's marine waters extend across 3 million square kilometres , the same area as mainland Europe ; in other words , 50 % of Europe 's territory is covered by sea .
Marine ecosystems play a key role in climate and weather patterns .
The status of Europe 's marine environment is rapidly deteriorating , however .
In some areas , we may have gone past the point of no return .
Nutrient supply has a major influence on the Baltic Sea 's marine environment .
Fish populations are in a poor state throughout Europe .
The Northeast Atlantic has one of the highest shipping levels in the world , with all of the risks and consequences that that implies .
The Mediterranean is under serious threat from uncontrolled development of its coastline .
If we are to reverse these trends , however , the existing measures and efforts - be they at international , national or EU level - are clearly inadequate .
Most measures drawn up at EU level were not geared towards protecting the marine environment as such and they therefore have a limited impact .
It has been demonstrated that measures adopted at international level are very difficult to implement or promote because they are not binding .
A healthy marine environment is crucially important both for life as a whole , and for the quality of our lives .
It is also an essential prerequisite for fulfilling the economic potential of the oceans and seas .
A dynamic marine economy can flourish only where there is a healthy marine environment .
The Marine Strategy will therefore make a significant contribution to the growth and employment goals enshrined in the Lisbon Strategy .
For the reasons outlined above , it is clear that the protection of the marine environment cannot and must not simply be a by-product of other policies .
At EU level what is needed is an integrated strategy that takes into account all of the pressures and influences on the marine environment .
This is precisely what the thematic strategy on the marine environment seeks to achieve .
It consists of the proposed Marine Strategy Directive and a report detailing the current state of affairs .
On a broader level , it covers the EU 's environmental record on the marine environment and explains why the EU needs to take action .
Marine strategy must be viewed within the broader context of a new marine policy for the EU .
According to the Commission 's Green Paper drawn up in June , the objective of the new policy is a dynamic European marine economy , operating in harmony with the marine environment .
The marine strategy is , within the area of the environment , one of the pillars of the future marine policy .
It will be based on the specific activities needed to protect marine ecosystems , which provide the sustainable wealth , productivity and employment opportunities and , from a broader perspective , people 's livelihood from the oceans and seas .
The purpose of this Marine Strategy Directive is to achieve ' good environmental status ' in the EU marine environment by 2021 , in other words to restore the environmental health of our seas over the next 15 years .
This date will coincide with the first review of River Basin Management Plans under the EU Water Framework Directive , allowing for synergies on the further implementation of both directives .
The joint implementation of the EU Water Framework Directive and the Marine Strategy Directive thus brings together the protection of both marine and freshwater environments .
The directive establishes European Marine Regions on the basis of geographical and environmental criteria , and defines sub-regions as management units for implementation .
At an EU level no management-related measures will be adopted .
In the first phase , the Member States will be tasked with developing a marine strategy for the seas in each of their regions , and proposing practical solutions to address the specific needs of those seas .
Marine strategy should firstly include taking stock of the marine environment and the threats and pressures it faces , setting further environmental goals and indicators , and establishing monitoring programmes .
In the second phase , the Member States will be required to draw up and implement measures aimed at achieving good environmental status .
Cooperation is of vital importance between Member States and with the third countries with which Member States share saltwater bodies .
In order to achieve this objective , Member States will need to work within the framework of the regional marine conventions .
Regional conventions are invaluable partners when it comes to strategy implementation , as is evidenced by their long track record of scientific and technical competence , and the fact that they are able to work effectively at a regional level .
To conclude , I should like to stress the importance and sensitivity of marine ecosystems .
A high level of protection for the marine environment is a vital prerequisite for deriving the maximum economic benefit from the oceans and seas .
The marine environment is clearly the foundation of our marine economy .
The marine environment is under threat .
Consequently the EU must act effectively proactive .
I hope that the proposed strategy will contribute towards achieving that aim .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me first of all , as rapporteur , to thank my fellow shadow rapporteurs from the various groups and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety for supporting a joint piece of work aimed at enhancing the Commission proposal .
As you said , Commissioner , the seas and oceans of our planet are in a worrying state : a crisis point has been reached .
Moreover , a recent study published in the Science review sounded the alarm bell by highlighting the risks of fishery resources disappearing from our seas and oceans .
The quality of the marine ecosystem plays a fundamental role in the planet 's global environment and , in particular , plays a very important role in regulating the climate .
Our seas also play a decisive role in people 's lives in every part of the globe .
As you pointed out , they play a major economic role when it comes to fishing , transport , tourism , sources of raw materials or even activities carried out along the coastlines that border them .
Yet , our seas and oceans are subjected to growing pressure and worrying pollution .
Let us first address this figure : 80 % of maritime pollution comes from the land , and , as you said , Commissioner , there is clearly a direct link between the framework directive on water and the directive that you have presented and that our Parliament wishes to enhance .
However , if pollution comes from the earth via water , then it also comes via the atmosphere .
Recent studies show a significant interaction between atmospheric movements , air pollution and the sea and oceans , such that urbanisation and human activities taking place far away from the coasts may have a direct impact on the quality of water .
Pollution is also caused by activities linked to the exploitation of the oceans and seas , such as transport and aquaculture .
A few years ago , waste produced by fishing and oil industry activity reached altogether excessive and dangerous levels in certain sectors .
We are also at a time when we can see new threats looming , which the directive must anticipate .
In particular , we are seeing a large increase in the number of projects aimed at desalinating seawater .
We have to be certain that these activities are not going to affect the quality of water in the future .
Major international debates are taking place on the storage of carbon dioxide .
Thus , we can see that the threats are , indeed , real .
The aim of the directive has been to implement a structure enabling us finally to have access to a strategy that goes beyond international agreements , the results of which have mostly not lived up to our hopes thus far .
Our directive is based on a fundamental point : restoring the good ecological status of seas .
Parliament would like , Commissioner , the requirement for results to be far more present and far stronger than the text in its current state provides for .
Secondly , our Parliament would like the good ecological status of seas and oceans to be defined with a great deal more precision so that this is not some sort of pious hope and so that we come closer to doing what can be done to restore the life and balance of the ecosystem .
Thirdly , our Parliament would like the deadlines to be shorter and , at any rate , we would like there to be a good balance between the deadlines , the level of the demands regarding good ecological status and the requirement for results .
Finally , we advocate the creation of marine protected areas , because the experiences of the Americans and the New Zealanders have shown that these protected areas - indeed , in some cases , these genuine marine reserves - were such as to enable fish stocks to be built up again .
Finally , we would like territorial cohesion to be enhanced by an effective piece of work carried out at marine and submarine regional level , without , however , the Member States being exempted from their responsibilities in view of the objectives set by the management plans and the plans for measures aimed at restoring good ecological status .
We are anxious to include the Black Sea in the document .
We would like to sound the alarm bell concerning the Arctic : we need to think about the future of this part of the world .
It is directly linked to us and its development has a considerable impact on the future of the planet , which may be endangered as a result .
We would like the outermost regions of the Union , which do not yet feature in the document , gradually to become at least the subject of an appropriate strategy .
I shall conclude by mentioning the democratic issues .
We see everyday , whether we are talking about fishing or transport , that sea users , ecologists and scientists feel the need to exchange their points of view so that the decisions that are taken are taken on the basis of a shared diagnosis and of a rational analysis of the problems .
In any case , that is the spirit of the amendments that we have tabled .
rapporteur . - ( LV ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to take this opportunity to thank you all for your cooperation so far and the valuable proposals that you have submitted , so that together we may improve the Commission 's proposal on the thematic strategy for the protection and preservation of the marine environment .
I very much hope that this report will foster real changes that will preserve and improve the marine ecological environment .
I am happy that the report also touches on as sensitive an issue as the problems of the Baltic sea environment .
In the Baltic sea , which is also known as Europe 's internal lake , it is particularly important to preserve the balance of the ecosystem , by not allowing it to be further threatened , and by taking special account of the specific low water exchange indicator .
I would like to emphasise , on this point , that the European Parliament ought also to scrupulously assess and join in monitoring the design and construction of a gas pipeline which is hazardous for the Baltic sea environment .
In my view , it is important for the people of Europe , and particularly those whose countries border the sea , to be able to personally see positive changes - the fact that water quality and cleanness is increasing , that a renewal of biological diversity is taking place in the seas and , finally , that there is considered , balanced and sustainable administration and development of the marine region following the adoption of this legislation and similar pieces of legislation .
I would like to stress that this report is the product of collaboration with non-governmental organisations and representatives of this field in industry , with whom wide-ranging debates took place even before the expiry of the deadline for submitting proposals , and that many of their ideas were included in the report .
Finally , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to urge the European Commission and also ourselves to talk less but to work more and achieve concrete results , so that we may all live without fear beside our seas .
From this point I shall switch to English and , speaking also for my colleague Mrs Korhola , who cannot be here today for this debate , share some comments and messages .
The thematic strategy is decided on under the Sixth Environmental Action Programme .
That is very necessary .
As the Commissioner has rightly said , for some time we have needed a strong , integrated EU policy on marine protection .
The EU marine strategy directive will be an important new instrument in integrating the existing approaches .
Great things have already been achieved with the various policies - legislation , programmes , action plans and various international conventions - but still the state of the marine environment has been deteriorating at an alarming pace .
We need more overall joint action .
There are big challenges , such as the role of third countries , which might raise some questions .
But if third countries turn out to be the biggest polluters and if they think of this as only a European Union matter , how do we ensure that actions and efforts put in place by the Member States produce good results when , for one reason or another , third countries do not cooperate ?
We have tried to address the issues in committee , but we shall only find out later how this actually works .
The rapporteur , Mrs Lienemann , has done some excellent work , influenced strongly by the NGOs , and she has been very environmentally ambitious .
She has made some radical changes and integrated ideas into the report that were widely requested by the stakeholders .
In general , the rapporteur has made the directive stronger and more concrete , more ambitious and effective .
She has added the much needed guidelines and criteria and has tightened up the time limits .
Building on the rapporteur 's approach , we have a solid chance to make this a real environmental pillar for marine policy as planned .
Here are a few key elements of the draft report .
The time limits and schedules for achieving good environmental status have been tightened up , from 2021 to 2017 .
General definitions of measures which Member States are to take in order to achieve good environmental status are added and a detailed list of GES criteria is provided .
There is no clear definition of European marine waters .
The Black Sea has been added as one marine region in the directive .
Preparation timetables are tighter , as are programmes of measures .
Marine-protected areas are added , something that was not mentioned before .
More emphasis is given to cooperation by Member States in the same marine region in monitoring programmes , etc .
More emphasis is laid on third countries in broadening responsibilities and deciding who should be involved .
All in all , this report is making a strong point , from the European Parliament side , that we need effective measures to tackle this important issue .
Mr President , the main objective of the proposed directive is to achieve a good marine environmental status .
This strategy is more urgent today than at any other time , because the marine ecosystem has deteriorated significantly .
However , in order for this strategy to be effective , we must pay attention to two or three things .
First , we have a saying in my country , that you cannot make an omelette without breaking eggs .
The money budgeted for this action is very , very little .
Provision has been made , for administrative expenses alone , for approximately EUR 90 million per annum for the first two years and for EUR 70 million per annum thereafter .
I think this sum is inadequate .
Saving our seas is such a serious issue that it merits our spending more money .
Secondly , we need coordinated actions .
First of all , we must make fishermen our partners in this endeavour .
We must come to an agreement with them ; they must be persuaded that , first of all , they need to protect the environment , but that is not all ; all of us involved in transport , tourism , industry , health , nutrition , agriculture and , above all , fisheries , must sit at the same table , so that we can agree and proceed .
The third thing I wanted to say was touched on by Commissioners Borg and Dimas and that is that we must agree on certain common indicators so that we can measure the environmental status at the moment , so that - and this is very important - when we speak of a good marine environmental status , we are referring to the same thing .
In other words , we must agree on common measurements .
To close , I wish to say and to emphasise that the directive on the marine strategy must give fisheries its proper place and must be at the heart of the endeavour .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , first I would like to thank the rapporteur for her work , and at the same time I want to thank the Commission , which has embarked on this important project .
The Commissioner with responsibility for Fisheries and Maritime Affairs , Mr Borg , himself in fact organised a conference on maritime transport safety in July in my home town of Turku , at which these important matters were discussed .
This is just the sort of proper work which we in the EU should be doing together .
I would in particular like to raise the matter of the Baltic Sea , as the Baltic is an important EU sea , though at present it is a blot on the landscape .
The Baltic Sea is seriously ill .
Let me give you an example of this .
Last summer , blue-green algae took over the entire sea , aided by the warm weather .
It is hard to explain to your little children , who want to go and swim , that they cannot go in the sea because not only is it dirty , it is actually toxic .
There are toxic algae in the sea , and that can cause various diseases in children if they go and swim in the sea in warm weather .
Now the Commission and all of us are being urged to take swift and determined action and provide the resources needed to rescue the Baltic Sea .
That will of course mean that much action will have to be taken .
One excellent project now under way is the financing of the St Petersburg sewage plant .
This is one of the most important examples .
We also need dialogue with Russia , for example , in the area of safety regulations for shipping .
We will not succeed if we do not work closely with Russia .
Saving the Baltic Sea is no longer just an environmental issue .
It is above all a political one .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , it is no exaggeration to say that Europe 's marine regions are in a crisis and there is an urgent need to take action to protect the seas .
Over the next 50 years , for example , fish stocks are threatened with collapse .
The Commission proposal for a directive in the field of Marine Environmental Policy and a Marine Strategy is a way to seek a pan-European integrated approach to saving marine ecosystems .
Although all our seas are in a poor state , it is only reasonable to examine the question of their protection from a regional perspective .
Marine regions vary in terms of their characteristics , and at least some of the problems are essentially local .
What they all have in common , however , is that they should all be capable of achieving good ecological status within a specific period of time .
Hopefully that will be before the year 2021 .
The Socialist Group in the European Parliament supports the rapporteur 's endeavour to define what we mean by good environmental status in the marine environment .
To achieve good status , as defined , we need to establish sufficiently stringent conservation objectives to prevent deterioration and for measures for the recovery of the seas and restoring them to a sustainable level .
These measures may be quite tough , but I hope that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats will support them in the vote .
It is important that the measures are properly binding and not merely recommendations .
The protection of the seas is about cooperation , not just among the Member States of the EU , but also with third countries with links to marine regions .
For example , effective protection of the Baltic Sea region cannot succeed without Russia 's commitment to cooperation .
For years now , there has been cooperation in the context of HELCOM , or the Helsinki Commission .
HELCOM is presently overseeing a Baltic Sea Action Plan .
Conservation action under the strategy should start within the framework of the HELCOM Action Plan so that practical measures can be taken as swiftly as possible in the Baltic Sea region .
I would like to thank both the rapporteurs for having adopted this view within the context both of the strategy and of the directive .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , having a marine strategy that does not concentrate on fish is like filling a goldfish bowl with clean water after the cat has already taken and eaten the goldfish !
Having said that , there is strong support in this House for the principles behind this strategy and for the legislation , and that is hardly surprising given the catastrophic picture the Commission has painted of the state of our seas .
We need to introduce protective measures that are enforceable through the courts in order to ensure that Member States apply them .
The Commissioner used strong words , which we welcome , but the proposals originally submitted to Parliament highlighted some of the weaknesses and divisions within the Commission itself .
One thing we are most pleased about is the fact that the whole idea of good environmental status has been reinserted into the proposals and given a clear definition , and we are united on there being powers to create marine protected zones .
However , why were those ideas not in the Commission 's original document ?
When it came out of DG Environment they were , but by the time it emerged from the College some of these crucial matters had been deleted .
The time has come for the Commission to back up its fine words on sustainability with some united action from the Commissioners of each department .
We hear that there are divergent views in the Council - so be it .
But the message to the Commission and the Council from this Parliament should be that there is strong cross-party support for a significant improvement and strengthening of the measures being proposed .
The Commission was right to draft these proposals , but let us now ensure that the warm sentiments can be transformed into practical action .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , I wish to thank the rapporteurs for their exemplary work and their excellent reports .
They improve the Commission 's proposal by demanding that good environmental status be achieved by 2017 instead of 2021 .
Moreover , the targets are made binding , and the importance of marine reserves is emphasised .
Climate change , waste , unsustainable fishing , noise , eutrophication and the extraction of raw materials threaten our seas .
If the mass destruction and the natural disaster taking place in the depths of the oceans were instead to be taking place - visibly - on land , the debate on the protection of the marine environment would dominate everyday discourse .
Species of fish , birds and mammals are threatened by extinction .
The Marine Strategy can , in fact , be a small step in trying to get to grips with the problems , but only if it is as ambitious as the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety proposes .
The Member States must assume their responsibility for setting up significantly more marine reserves .
We have national parks in all the Member States , but marine reserves are conspicuous by their absence where they are most needed .
There is overwhelming statistical evidence that marine reserves provide protection that increases both the fish population and biological diversity in the immediate surroundings of the reserves .
When fish are protected and are thus able to increase in numbers , the older fish disperse and make for better catches .
The Baltic Sea , in particular , is an extremely sensitive sea with brackish water .
The countries around the Baltic Sea must always be entitled to introduce more stringent water protection requirements if they think it necessary to do so without , as a consequence , being constantly threatened by protracted legal proceedings because the internal market has to take precedence over protection of our seas .
I wish to point out the importance of the committee 's call for no support to be given to agricultural activity involving large-scale nutrient leakage into the seas .
My Amendments 81 and 82 are designed to introduce responsible regulation of discharges from waste disposal sites .
The original proposal is too weak on this point .
I am opposed to Amendment 90 about removing the reference to radioactive substances , because doing so would be contrary to the original objective from 2002 .
Finally , the Maritime Strategy 's call for utilisation of the seas must be adjusted and altered so that it falls within the framework of the Marine Strategy .
Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to congratulate Mrs Lienemann on the excellent work she has done in the report and to stress that she has managed , with a great deal of success , to include in her report the views of all the members and of non-governmental organisations , and as a result she has improved the Commission 's original paper significantly .
The marine environment , which is a basic and valuable source of life , is under daily threat .
Maritime pollution , climate change , shipping and coastal developments continue to threaten the marine environment and to have an adverse impact on human health .
The directive in question , which is designed to plug the gaps in environmental policy , is an important step towards improving health and restoring the seas .
It is important for us to support amendments requiring the Member States to achieve a good environmental status , amendments which recognise the threats to the marine environment and which aim for the shortest possible timeframe for the implementation of the directive .
I refer to Amendments 24 , 27 , 73 and 78 , which I urge you to support .
Furthermore , actions by the Member States must be based on the principle of prevention , on an approach based on the ecosystem while , at the same time , account must be taken of accurate evaluations carried out on the basis of current European legislation , as referred to in Amendments 23 , 49 , 45 , 51 and 60 .
Finally , I call on you to support Amendments 81 and 82 banning any systematic or deliberate dumping of any liquid , gaseous or solid body in the water or on the sea bed , in keeping with the provisions laid down for carbon dioxide , except where the relevant approval is granted in accordance with international law and a prior environmental impact study is carried out in accordance with the directive .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the two reports under discussion could not have come at a better time , since they examine the notorious construction of the Baltic pipeline , a project that , in the absence of a serious environmental impact assessment , risks causing an ecological disaster in a sea already suffering , moreover , from a worrying level of pollution .
Not only that : the northern and southern shores of the Mediterranean , where fish stocks are becoming ever more scarce , also suffer in some areas from a high level of pollution , caused , among other things , by oil extraction and , above all , by oil refining .
I refer , in particular , to the industrial triangle of Syracuse in Sicily , which is the largest petrochemical complex in Europe .
In this industrial zone , not only is there an extremely high level of air pollution , causing the tragedy of birth defects and the indefensible death rate due to tumours - over 57 % higher , in fact , than the Italian average - but there is also the problem of marine pollution .
The consequences are obvious : the poor-quality fish stocks are down to critical levels ; fishermen , often small operators , either cover more miles to find better fishing waters , or are forced to give up their traditional livelihoods .
As if that were not enough , plans are underway to construct a regasifier in this industrial zone , a project I have condemned several times before this House .
The proposal for a Marine Strategy Directive and the appropriate amendments that , in our opinion , improve it , are therefore very welcome , Mr President .
Above all , I hope that it will shorten the timescale for achieving the objectives of a healthy ecology and environment .
We need to make up for the severe delays that Europe has accumulated in this sector , and , as we all know , political timing does not always coincide with the needs of the environment .
From this evening , we can afford to be a little more optimistic .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the marine environment has faced various threats for a long time now , which is why a far-reaching marine strategy is a necessity .
The European Union has territorial waters greater than its entire territory , with 1 200 ports , and 90 % of its exports are transported by sea .
We consider it crucial to emphasise the interdependence of a common fisheries policy and the proposed marine environment strategy .
It is logical and advisable to allow a hazardous vessel that has been penalised to sail to the nearest shelter , and then to the nearest available shipyard provided that it does not pose a health or environmental threat .
Another proposal worthy of attention is that of declaring the Arctic a nature reserve dedicated to peace and science .
I have the privilege of representing Scotland in this Parliament and that means I also represent a large share of the EU 's indigenous resources of oil and gas .
As I understand it , we are committed to maximising the potential of our indigenous energy resources .
Surely this is only sensible for economic and logistical reasons and for security of supply .
It is also the case that the extraction of hydrocarbons in the North Sea is already well regulated in all its environmental and ecological aspects .
Yet certain amendments adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety will effectively stop exploitation of these resources .
That is just plain absurd .
Indeed these amendments will even , I understand , cause suspension of a major offshore wind project in the Moray Firth .
Much of the research funding for this came from the European Union .
Do we want to look ridiculous ?
Do we want to hobble our few indigenous energy resources and become even more dependent on one or two dominant , and often domineering , external suppliers ?
The North Sea 's ecology must be considered holistically in North Sea terms .
The North Sea is not the Mediterranean .
I appeal to the rapporteur and other sensible groups to support the PPE-DE amendments , which will make this proposal ambitious - yes - but also responsible and practical .

( SV ) Mr President , I wish to thank Mrs Lienemann and Mr Kušķis who , I think , have done a very good job indeed on these directives .
I myself live by the Baltic Sea and have therefore , unfortunately , been able to see at extremely close quarters the significance , not only for individual people but also for employment and growth , of the seas ' ecosystems being out of balance .
I also know that people expect us in this House to make a vigorous effort and do something about the problems they experience every day .
I therefore hope that , tomorrow , Parliament will not listen to the previous speakers but will instead give broad support to the changes backed by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
Firstly , it should support a considerably accelerated process , whereby the measures are implemented earlier , together with a timetable significantly more ambitious than the one proposed by the Commission , specifying precisely when the objective of good environmental status in our seas is to be achieved .
Secondly , it should support more clearly defined objectives that , just as Mrs Lienemann said , are a guarantee of our in actual fact achieving something and are not , in the end , just so much empty talk .
Thirdly , it should support making what is perhaps the sea in the worst situation , namely the Baltic , into a pilot area for this strategy - an area in which the measures are implemented particularly early and are preferably based on the Helsinki Convention .
These measures are needed if the Baltic Sea is to be saved .
( SV ) Mr President , two weeks ago , Nicholas Stern , a former World Bank employee , published , on behalf of the British Government , a shocking report on the consequences of climate change .
The message was plain .
We must no longer think of nature as being something without value as , if we do so , the consequences may be incalculable .
The same also applies to the state of the sea .
We in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe have prepared a number of amendments in the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
They are all aimed at increasing the level of ambition , bringing stricter timetables about , strengthening cooperation with third countries such as Russia and plugging loopholes in the legislation .
One serious loophole , for example , is in relation to the international waters that begin 12 nautical miles off the coast .
In the vulnerable Baltic Sea , mainly cargo ships - but also passenger vessels - continue to dump latrine waste straight into the sea .
That is something that they are able to do legally in international waters .
Out in the Baltic , 1 800 vessels are dumping in more ways than one all the time .
The mind boggles .
We are pleased that the rapporteur and shadow rapporteurs with whom we have worked are taking on board our amendment about plugging this loophole in the law .
The amendment needs to be implemented quickly , without the decision getting caught up for years in the International Maritime Organisation 's decision-making machinery .
We must have a high level of ambition .
The EU must support Russia in its efforts to cleanse St Petersburg of all waste water .
It will be expensive , but not to take action would be still more expensive .
Drilling for oil and the laying of gas pipelines must not , out of economic considerations , take precedence over the environmental risks presented by such activities .
The harmful effects of traffic too must be reduced .
I believe that our populations wish to see the EU genuinely able to take action on these issues pertaining to the fate of humanity .
Only in that way can we increase confidence in the EU .
The objective must be to protect Europe 's seas and restore them to their former state and to ensure that human activities are conducted in a sustainable way .
Mr President , the European Union has 68 000 kilometres of coastline ; Scotland has 11 000 kilometres .
Almost 50 % of the EU population live within 50 kilometres of the sea ; in Scotland 70 % live within 10 kilometres of the sea .
Clearly it is in Scotland 's long-term interests to protect the marine environment and to conserve its wealth of marine resources for the long term .
Scotland has oil and gas reserves for at least another 30 years .
I will be supporting various amendments that will ensure that oil and gas extraction can continue to benefit the Scottish and EU economies .
I cannot support committee Amendment 8 in the Lienemann report , as drafted , because it seeks to link the marine strategy to ' the principles of the common fisheries policy ' .
The CFP has been a miserable failure and the last thing I want to see is a new marine strategy linked to such a flawed set of principles .
The idea that Member States should determine what good environmental status is in waters under their jurisdiction , and work with their neighbours in logical marine regions , makes a lot of sense .
Fisheries management should be brought into that common sense situation , and jurisdiction should be returned to the Member States so that , for example , countries around the North Sea can work together with those who have most to gain from conservation being encouraged , giving the incentive to make a marine strategy succeed .
( EL ) Mr President , systems to protect the marine environment are covered in a fragmentary manner by various sectoral policies of the European Union , with the result , however , that there is a compilation of policies , legislative acts , programmes and action plans , without any overall integrated policy for protecting the marine environment .
The aim pursued in the two combined legislative arrangements on the thematic strategy on the protection and conservation of the environment and the marine strategy directive is to achieve a good environmental status of the marine environment in the European Union by 2021 .
However , if we take account , firstly , of the more general nature of the two arrangements and , secondly , of the pillars on which they are based , it is certain that in 2021 , not only will there not be a good marine environmental status , but there will hardly have been any improvement to the present poor status , which is directly acknowledged in the explanatory statement to the proposal for a directive , which points out that overall there has been a fundamental deterioration in the marine environment over recent decades .
The substantiated scientific data of the United Nations Organisation concerning the causes of the deterioration and pollution of the marine environment are incontrovertible : they are shore industries and shipping and the non-existent or under-developed infrastructures for storing and processing residues .
More importantly , the pillars on which both the thematic strategy and the proposal for a directive are based are the common fisheries policy and the Green Paper on the European Union 's shipping policy , all - of course - within the framework of the 6th Environment Action Programme for the period from 2002-2012 , which we have acutely condemned .
In our opinion , these are in essence numerous , insubstantial interventions on the same wavelength as the Commission proposal , the most daring and ambitious aim of which is to bring the deadline forward from 2021 to 2017 .
( The President cut off the speaker )
( ES ) Mr President , I would like warmly to congratulate Mrs Lienemann , and I am not doing so in a superficial way or because protocol requires it .
I think that this Directive has achieved something important .
Thanks to her extensive experience , she has an extraordinary knowledge of philosophy and of European legislative formulas and has achieved a succinct , short Directive .
Despite the number of amendments , it does not have too much in it and her own amendments are very generic ideas that are typical of a framework directive .
I know for a fact that she worked with experts and was open to many suggestions ; amendments were not even needed in order for some of them to be incorporated .
I would like to say that it is an extraordinary and wonderful thing that finally Europe is discussing the sea .
Its time has come .
I would , however , also like to say that this Directive should be the start of a subsequent development of legislation , as precisely because it is a framework directive , there are still many aspects that need to be developed in the future , which is what I want to talk about .
For example , Amendment 27 , which is practically the same as Amendment 86 tabled by my group , suggests several aspects that should be developed : among other things , activities at sea , many industrial activities , many of which are new , such as desalination , which I am not against , but it has not yet been studied , and the methodologies for studying the marine environmental impact , which are practically in their infancy , that is , they have not yet been done .
I also think that the indicators should be developed more and that digital marine charts should be drawn up , which should also be used for cultural purposes .
I think that one of the great treasures of world and European history are archaeological charts .
This is something that needs to be developed in order to preserve our heritage and I think that it will be one of the most stimulating discoveries for all of us .
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , allow me to congratulate my honourable friend Mrs Lienemann on her complete and detailed work .
It is now essential that the European Union acquire an integrated policy for the protection of the marine environment , because the fragmentary legislation which has applied to date has not managed to reverse the reduction in biodiversity and the loss of habitats .
It is our duty , therefore , towards future generations to achieve a very high level of protection of the marine environment , so that our strategy on sustainable development can be combined with the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy , not forgetting that , in many countries in Europe and for a substantial section of the populace , the sea is a large pole of economic development .
At the same time , this directive offers the Member States an historic opportunity to collaborate in a field which , until recently , was a field of conflict and antagonism , such as sea fishing areas and fishing quotas .
The basic objective must be to clearly define the term good environmental status of marine ecosystems , so as to achieve a cohesive and effective marine policy at European Union level .
I believe that adopting protected marine areas , as a tool for protecting ecosystems and combating the reduction in biodiversity , will also help considerably in achieving this objective .
At the same time , we are calling for the deadlines for attaining the targets of the proposed directive to be brought forward to 2017 .

Mr President , I wish to congratulate Mrs Lienemann and Mr Kušķis on their excellent reports which , despite the view of some Scottish colleagues , have been wisely strengthened by the Committee on The Environment , Public Health and Food Safety .
European marine waters , as indeed international waters , have often become the dustbin for waste of varying quantities and levels of toxicity .
This practice has been carried out for many years by individuals , companies and governments , who have shown little knowledge of or regard for the enormous diversity and importance of marine ecosystems .
In many instances that has resulted in unprecedented environmental damage .
In other cases , the survival of certain species is now balanced on a knife edge .
It is high time for the EU to intervene decisively in order to protect our marine environment .
Therefore , we should all fully support these two welcome reports in the hope that the implementation of the necessary strategies and directives will be forthcoming unhindered , as well as extended to third countries , and that further , complementary measures will be introduced in the near future .
After all , the protection of our marine environment is an essential element in safeguarding our own survival on this planet .

( NL ) Mr President , first of all , my heartfelt compliments to Mrs Lienemann , who really has written an excellent report .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is not easy for fish to survive in the seas and oceans surrounding the European Union ; overfishing and pollution have taken their toll , and when the fish are gone , they are gone , so we must take drastic measures now in order to prevent the situation arising around 2040 of there being no fish left .
Let this prediction by scientists serve as an important warning .

Whilst the marine strategy is a sound initiative , the directive is not specific enough for my liking .
First of all , fish reserves need to be set up .
By setting up reserves at spawning locations , fish are given the opportunity of reproducing at their leisure .
This has proved effective in New Zealand and Australia .
If , alongside reserves , sustainable fishing methods are introduced , then we can safeguard the future of fish in the waters surrounding the European Union .
In addition , something needs to be done about exotic species and the problem of ballast water .
The Japanese oyster has found a pleasant living climate in the North Sea without natural enemies , but this oyster is actually thriving too well .
The purification of ballast water is a simple procedure that must be undertaken across the board .
The marine directive requires Member States to think about how the marine environment can be improved and how we can cooperate better , which is in the interest of us all .
I warmly support Mrs Lienemann 's report , and I hope you will all do the same .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , it feels good to be back again , and I have been able to begin work by reading two constructive reports .
We are all of us responsible for ensuring that our seas can survive the stresses to which the marine environment is exposed .
An additionally large responsibility lies with this Assembly and the European Union to find the right forms of coordinated and vigorous cross-border cooperation .
As many speakers have pointed out , time is extremely short .
In my own part of Europe , the Baltic is the most important sea and the one that has been , and still is , exposed to the greatest threats .
That is why we view the planned gas pipeline from Russia to Germany with great concern .
Tomorrow , more detailed plans are to be presented .
A gas pipeline in the sensitive Baltic Sea constitutes a considerable threat to the environment .
The gas pipeline may be damaged by ships or old unrecovered mines and be exposed to terrorist attack .
The gas pipeline would constitute a threat to the environment and to fishing , both when it was being constructed and during the period that it was in operation .
In my opinion , the risks are manifestly greater than the advantages .
Certainly , Europe needs energy supplies , but this natural gas pipeline must not be laid on the bed of the Baltic Sea .
If the pipeline is to be constructed , it must be so on land - for the sake of the marine environment and of the Baltic .
Member of the Commission .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , I have followed your debate with interest and I am pleased to note that in principle you have endorsed the holistic approach favoured by the Commission .
On the other hand , it is clear that this issue is a complex one , requiring urgent action in many areas .
It is also clear that a range of different opinions has emerged and that further analysis and clarification are required .
I should like to refer to some of the main amendments in more detail .
In the timetable for implementation ( Amendments 20 , 24 , 31 , 32 , 35 and 69 ) , the Commission chose the year 2021 as the date by which the Member States have to achieve ' good environmental status ' of their marine environments .
The Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety proposed an earlier date .
Although the Commission would like ' good environmental status ' to be achieved quickly , the committee 's date is not in my view a realistic one .
The Commission 's proposal addresses firstly the need to improve our understanding of the marine environment and the threats it faces , and secondly the need for action .
In order that we may find the most appropriate , and cost-effective , measures to protect the marine environment , we must equip ourselves with the essential knowledge and skills .
Under these conditions , to bring the deadlines forward would be counter-productive .
This is clear , especially in view of the parallels with the current Water Framework Directive , to which this directive is closely related .
In the Water Framework Directive , successfully adopted in 2000 due to the fact that Mrs Lienemann was the rapporteur , ' good environmental status ' is called for by 2015 , that is to say , 15 years after the adoption of the directive .
The Marine Directive should operate in the same way .
In view of the extent of the sea area addressed by the Marine Strategy Directive , and in view of the size of the task , no one should be in any doubt that our proposed timetable is highly ambitious .
The date proposed by the Commission in the directive , 2021 , will moreover coincide with the first review of the River Basin Management Plans under the EU Water Framework Directive , allowing synergies on the further implementation of both directives .
Apart from this , the Commission believes that it would not be practical to call on the Member States to ' achieve good environmental status by 2021 ' as the Committee on the Environment is proposing in the Directive .
Nor would it be realistic .
The measures that must be taken as part of the Marine Strategy will be up and running by 2018 according to the proposed timetable .
Some measures will not deliver immediate results because it will take time for some of the ecosystems to react to the measures .
Overall progress towards good environmental status must be shown , however , which is why the Commission has proposed the idea of ' achieving good environmental status ' .
The Commission is prepared to support the insertion of an article stressing the importance of marine protected areas ( Amendments 27 , 39 , 62 and 72 ) .
Such an article should ideally be based on Article 6 of the Water Framework Directive on protected areas .
The Commission is also prepared to back the idea that in order to meet the objectives of the Directive it may be necessary to create further protected areas or even closed nature reserves .
It cannot accept , however , the proposal from the Committee on the Environment for the mandatory creation of marine protected areas as part of the implementation of the proposed Directive .
Protected marine areas should be created only when they can contribute directly towards achieving a ' good environmental status ' .
They should not simply be created as an end in themselves , but should be viewed as a means rather than an end .
The Commission agrees with the committee 's wish to integrate the fundamental definition of ' good environmental status ' ( Amendment 80 ) directly into the Directive .
The Commission nevertheless has definite problems with the list of definitions proposed by the Committee on the Environment .
Many of these definitions are based on the factors influencing the marine environment and the threats to it , rather than the quality of the ecosystem .
This is a dangerous approach because some potential risks and threats may be omitted or , on the other side of the coin , unduly emphasised .
Even more importantly , if we monitor only the influencing factors , the EU will not be able to move away from the current fragmented approach on managing the marine environment towards a more integrated approach , which would cover all of the factors as well as their mutual impact on the marine environment .
Lastly , with regard to financial matters , ( Amendments 19 and 74 ) , there are a number of EU funding mechanisms from which the Member States can benefit , for example the Structural Funds , LIFE + and the Seventh Framework Programme for Research .
Consequently , it is not necessary to create any special funding mechanisms .
Honourable Members , the debate has touched on the complexity of this whole issue , including the fact that the marine environment receives pollution from the atmosphere , and that the quality of the marine environment depends to a large extent on tackling climate change .
It has also been mentioned that some seas have not been included , as in the case of the Black Sea , and naturally the approach adopted by Romania and Bulgaria will fundamentally change the situation and open up fresh possibilities .
As regards the Arctic Ocean , owing to its geographical situation it is not possible to change the Commission 's position significantly and nor is it possible to create an independent strategy for what is an exceptionally sensitive and important environment here , albeit in no way connected directly to EU territory .
Mr President , honourable Members , I shall pass on the list of Commission opinions on the Amendments to Parliament 's Services .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
( SV ) It is very gratifying that attention is being devoted to issues concerning the marine environment because there is a great need to ensure that our seas do not suffer still more pollution or destruction .
The amendments by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety are , for the most part , positive and will hopefully improve the condition of the marine environment , especially as a result of good environmental status being defined .
The Commission 's proposal does , however , contain an article that gives rise to a certain amount of concern .
Article 13 , on special areas , opens up opportunities for , to some extent , disregarding the environmental objectives if the alterations in a particular area have taken place as a result of actions taken for reasons of great public interest .
One can imagine this article being invoked very extensively .
It is therefore extremely important that the Commission impose significant restrictions if and when this happens , because the future environment we are all to live in is also of great public interest .
( IT ) Europe is surrounded by four seas and two oceans , containing different types of ecosystems and different biogeographical regions .
The European coast extends over 100 000 km , and is where 16 % of Europeans live , many of whom are strongly tied to the sea for their work , leisure , or sport , or because of the natural resources and energy it provides .
In the case of enclosed or partly enclosed seas , such as the Black Sea , the Baltic and the Mediterranean , the risk of pollution is particularly high .
The proposal for a Marine Strategy Directive , which seems desirable and long-awaited , must enable the current political framework for the protection of the marine environment in Europe to be expanded and strengthened .
Its effectiveness will determine the future health of European seas , and has the necessary potential to guarantee the environmental basis needed for the sustainable use of the resources and functions of the sea , both within and outside of Europe .
European electricity network breakdown ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the European electricity network breakdown .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , the serious incident on the continental European electricity network on Saturday , 4 November led to blackouts over most of the system .
We know from E.ON that the fault originated in northern Germany , where switching off an extra high-voltage line in Lower Saxony later led to the switching off of lines across Europe .
E.ON had carried out a planned deactivation of an overhead line and this operation had also been done with a previous line .
The incident led to the splitting of the Union for the Coordination of Transmission of Electricity Network into three zones : west , east and south-east .
The western zone was short of power and the eastern zone had too much power .
To cope with the lack of power in the western zone , automatic devices had to switch customers off in the countries affected .
The worst affected countries were France , where five million customers were reported to have been cut off .
In Germany , millions of customers were affected , as in Belgium , the Netherlands , Italy and Spain , where some hundreds of thousands of customers were without electricity .
Affected countries also included Austria , Slovenia , Portugal and Switzerland .
The incident was resolved after an hour and the power supply was re-established .
The incident could have had much greater consequences but the cooperation between transmission system operators and the size of the network made it possible to supply customers very quickly .
The precise cause of the failure is not yet known .
I have asked the European regulators to provide a report on what actually caused this blackout .
That involves analysing a huge amount of information before the blackout and after the blackout , so at this stage I cannot report to you on what actually triggered it .
The UCTE investigation committee will also provide a report , as will the European transmission system operators , who are investigating the incident .
As soon as we have a full report and a full-scale investigation has been held into this incident , I will report to Parliament in an appropriate form on what actually triggered it ; but as far as I can see three lessons should be learned from it .
In 2003 a huge-scale blackout had already occurred in Italy and it is clear that the measures taken afterwards were not sufficient , in particular in three areas .
One proposal , therefore , is that we should set up a formal European grouping of transmission system operators which will have the task of putting forward common positions on issues identified by the Commission and in particular network security standards .
We should also institute a mechanism to ensure that these standards are formally binding on network operators .
It is also clear that much more investment is needed in transmission system networks to provide for an adequate response when such incidents happen , but most importantly to ensure that lines are not overcharged .
I am very pleased that you put this question on the agenda of this House , as it is a very important issue .
This was not a natural disaster but a system failure , and we should analyse it and draw the necessary lessons from it . As soon as the report is ready , the Commission will not hesitate to draw the necessary conclusions and take the necessary action .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , first of all , many thanks for that level-headed report : the problem lasted an hour , and then it was sorted out .
That , too , is an argument worth mentioning .
Secondly , like you , I take the view that a full report needs to be produced first in order that we do not arrive at premature answers about all the things that might have gone wrong .
Thirdly , we politicians must face up to the question as to whether the approach we take might be somewhat contradictory : on the one hand , we call for more investment in electricity grids , while , on the other , we threaten the grid operators with the unbundling of their property .
Nobody can be expected to invest in networks when they are , at the same time , facing the threat of those same networks being taken off them ; that can hardly be regarded as logical .
Fourthly , at the same time as we call for more and more renewable energy , we know that wind power contributes to the reliability of the grids being a very real problem .
I have nothing against wind power , but nobody should be surprised when problems of this sort occur .
Fifthly , we demand - and rightly too - more connection points , because we want electricity to be transmitted from one country to another .
Right though it is that we should want that , we are , perhaps , paying too little attention to the need to ensure that , at the same time or as a prior requirement , the grids before and after the connection points are adequately prepared .
One consequence I would like to see resulting from this occurrence is our handling energy policy issues in a more realistic and down-to-earth way , without making contradictory demands that can never be met .
Perhaps that is a contribution that we will be able to make ; whether or not we do so , I look forward to a precise evaluation once the facts are before us , and then we will be able to consider what the political consequences must be - if any .
Much of what was said in the days following the power failure was precipitate and resulted not so much from in-depth analysis of the event but rather more from a momentary snapshot of what happened .
I am much obliged to you , Commissioner Piebalgs , for what you are doing .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the blackout in Europe affected 10 million people from Germany to Spain .
The power cut was a salutary reminder of how closely we are connected to each other via the electricity network and how vulnerable we are at the same time .
We still do not know why it happened .
In practice Europe has a common electricity network , but not a common energy policy that would secure supply .
No viable internal market for electricity has been established .
It is paradoxical that the more our networks are connected , the more vulnerable we are to power cuts .
Although connecting up the networks is an attempt to improve the security of supply of electricity everywhere in the Union , an adverse effect is that any problems that arise will affect us all .
That is why we need above all to ensure that our common networks function properly , that there are emergency systems that operate nationally , and that the system is monitored by one authority .
We need security standards , as the Commissioner said .
The likelihood of other energy crises was heightened when the energy production plants were privatised .
The state used to own these companies and invested in the long term .
Now we have reached the quarterly investment stage where cash has to be recouped fast , and that is why there is no long-term perspective .
The Commission has taken prompt action , and we are grateful for that .
The national transmission system operators must in future cooperate more comprehensively and more transparently .
In addition , the strategic review on energy out in January needs to examine the possibility of setting up a common regulatory authority .
Moreover , companies need to take responsibility and invest more than they do now in transmission and emergency capacity .
If that does not happen , governments will have to intervene and do what they had been doing up until the current phase .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Thank you for your communication , Commissioner .
It is imperative that an extensive and rigorous investigation be carried out into the causes of the power cut that affected a number of EU countries .
Should this breakdown be attributed to a lack of information ?
To a failure to comply with procedures ?
To a network fault ?
To a shortage of investment ?
To a fault in the maintenance of the network or to a commercial cause ?
Some Europeans view this breakdown as a disastrous consequence of the liberalisation of energy ; others view it as the product of inadequate interconnections and of an inadequate trans-European energy network .
As you pointed out , one might also take the view that the management of this breakdown demonstrated the Member States ' solidarity towards Germany , deprived as it was of electricity , and that the power cut procedures were implemented in order to prevent far more serious consequences resulting from a European black out .
If the breakdown was a commercial one , the Member States ' regulators must together define and review the applicable rules in order more effectively to control the electricity market .
If the breakdown was due to technical problems , or to a procedural fault , then the power distribution network managers need to be coordinated more effectively , as they are the operational links in the chain of free flowing and secure energy exchanges .
The creation of a European Centre for Energy Networks would enable us to implement a European code of networks aimed at harmonising the standards and procedures of the Member States ' networks .
To conclude , I am delighted that the Commission has launched this investigation and I hope - allow me to emphasise this point - that it communicates the results with all due transparency so that we might make progress in preventing any incidents of this kind .


on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , since Mr Reul , two or three days after the electricity blackout , went on German radio to attack wind energy in much the same way that Mr Glos and E.ON had done , I am glad to hear him , ten days on from the event , declaring that he has nothing against it .
It has since become clear that German wind energy did absolutely nothing to help bring this calamity to pass , since the wind on that day was quite normal .
' Day ahead ' was delivered , and it did indeed turn out that the wind farms in Germany had made a vital contribution to getting the grid up and running again , in other words , in those situations in which it is possible to define a good interface between the grid operators , the regulators and the providers of wind energy , wind energy did in fact , have positive effects on the grid .
In Spain , by contrast , many wind farms were taken out of the grid during a moment of low frequency , which makes no sense whatever , as wind farms are less vulnerable to low frequency than other generation facilities , and they could have helped to stabilise the Spanish network .
What can this breakdown teach us ?
The first thing it can teach us is that we have to prepare the networks for long-term investments in energy ; electricity generation will migrate to the coasts , and I am talking here not just about wind energy , but also about condensing power plants , which will find it impossible to cool themselves down further inland by reason of the warmer climate and warmer rivers .
We will also have to invest much more in decentralised energy provision , in the shape of biomass , biogas , combined heat and power , as well as gas power stations , which can be sited close to the centres of consumption in industry or in towns , which will , to some degree , compensate for this migration and enable us , by means of these decentralised investments , to make more room on the networks for business .
Secondly , what is needed is an EU regulator - not one who will abolish the national regulatory authorities , but an EU regulator with quite specific functions in the sphere of trans-European electricity trading , improving not only transparency but also the interfaces between the national networks .
We need this authority right now , but with a clearly defined and narrower spectrum .
Thirdly , the networks are in need of long-term investment , and that cannot be maintained on the basis of high yields in the short term .
It is precisely because E.ON and RWE want returns of 30 % that we need ownership unbundling , for such high yields are not necessary in a monopoly sector , where no more than a return of between 6 % and 8 % on the investment to be made is needed .
A clear separation of the grid 's interests and the production and trading interests will improve security of supply and also the European network 's capacity to act .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , Commissioner , energy is produced heterogeneously among the Member States .
In some countries , cheap hydro-electric energy is of key importance ; in others , cheap nuclear energy .
In other countries , electricity is produced by burning ever more expensive fossil fuels or by means of expensive wind power .
The picture of the market is further muddled by the EU 's emissions rights trading scheme , and we do not know what the future holds for that in 2008 , let alone 2013 .
Connecting the EU 's electricity networks does not solve all the problems .
Harmonisation of the market will produce winners and losers .
There are many countries that will not agree to invest in interconnecting networks or pay a high price for electricity just so that it might be cheaper in another country .
I am glad that the Commission 's standard answer this time has not been that the harmonisation of markets solves everything , but that instead it is actually trying to find out what this was all about .
( ES ) Mr President , the power cut that was experienced on 4 November once again demonstrated the high level of interdependence between the electrical networks of the Member States .
The fact that ten million citizens and about a dozen countries were affected gives us an idea of the gravity and scope of this incident .
There is undoubtedly a positive side to this , which is the swiftness and efficiency of the reaction by the operators , who , by taking the appropriate measures , managed to solve the problem in just under an hour .
However , although we should be pleased with this , what we should not do is tempt fate .
Commissioner , you said that a detailed investigation is going to be conducted into the causes of this incident and there is no doubt that this needs to be done , because from every crisis like this we learn very valuable lessons .
I am sure that when you have all the necessary information , you will pass it on to this House so that we can also analyse it .
Commissioner , I fully agree with you that there is a need , as you recently mentioned , to create a formal group , at European level , of transmission system operators that can make technical proposals on safety standards for the networks and other issues that are relevant to what we are dealing with .
A few years ago I proposed a similar initiative in relation to the report on security of supply and I must say that , on the part of the regulators and many colleagues in this House , the initiative was not very successful .
I hope that after this latest crisis , this proposal will be re-examined with more realism .
Finally , Mr President , Commissioner , I would like to take this opportunity to make a comment to the Council : it is now time that , in a Europe in which there is free movement of services , goods , capital and people , in which twelve of the Member States have the same monetary policy , in which we all share an international trade policy , we stop pretending that the decisions that we take about energy only affect us .
This latest incident made this very clear .
It is not about taking sovereignty away from any Member State , but about acting together on all those things in which joint action benefits everyone .
( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the blackout of electricity networks on 4 November is a sign that should highlight the urgency with which we must provide common responses to the energy problem .
The episode has shown clearly how closely networks are interconnected , and the lack of appropriate management to support this .
Commissioner , the guidelines presented by the Commission on 9 November to rationalise the cross-border transport of electricity in Europe , which are aimed at improving the management system , are welcome .
However , it is important to enforce greater cooperation among regulators : we must speed up the implementation of a single European regulatory authority , a European centre for energy networks , as proposed by the Commission 's Green Paper .
It is also necessary , in my opinion , to have network administrators that are independent of commercial operators , as well as greater computerisation , enabling transmission networks and distribution networks to communicate .
The internal market is a key aspect of common energy policy . Today , more than ever , this policy is essential and must be regarded as a priority .
We must continue down this road with greater courage . Together with the Member States , we must speed up this process , overcoming national protectionist self-interest that slows down liberalisation and competition on the market , so that episodes like that of 4 November will no longer happen , and , above all , so that Europe , as a single actor , can negotiate the delicate international geopolitical balances , securing for itself a protected , sustainable and unified energy supply .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , what we must first do is ensure that the grid is well divided up between large and smaller suppliers , between strong central units and regional ones that will enable us to build up a strong structure .
For that , of course , trans-European networks are needed , as is a regulator or coordinator to handle these matters , but what is needed above all is the fiscal incentives that will get the profits that will be made used for investment allowances or shorter-term rates of depreciation .
The most important thing , as I see it , is to draw up emergency plans that will give us a chance of shutting down the network quickly and efficiently in the event of a crisis and then restabilising it and restoring the power supply as quickly as possible .
We also have to introduce a qualitative dimension into the security of energy supply , meaning that those who are willing to have themselves removed from the network at short notice should also be able to benefit from price reductions , or , conversely , that those who want to remain on the grid as long as possible and be put back on it with the minimum possible delay , should also pay higher charges .
Where energy is concerned , we must get away from debating it only in terms of quantity ; there is a need , in energy supply , for qualitative factors that will make it possible for the price schedules to demand that a user who wants absolute security of supply would also pay more .
If , though , a user is flexible by reason - for example - of being able to draw on the energy for his warm water requirements either by night or by day , then he should be charged at a correspondingly more favourable rate .
Everyone should be able to choose their own energy supplier , and everyone should be able to get their electricity from the generator of their choice ; if they could do that , it would give us a real chance of reshaping the European market .
Mr President , this was an example of the law of unintended consequences , not a disaster .
We must await the outcome of the inquiry you have launched and avoid kneejerk reactions .
We have learned once again that people 's behaviour is not always predictable .
I submit that it is not possible to legislate against every eventuality .
This was primarily a technical problem and not necessarily one about policy .
I would remind the Commissioner and the House that we already have legislation in place in the shape of the security of electricity supply and infrastructure directive , for which I was Parliament 's rapporteur .
We should wait for that piece of legislation to bed down and be seen to be properly transposed and implemented in Member States before we move on to enact more legislation .
Let us learn from this , but let us also remember that the network operators - the transmission system operators - have a remarkable record of maintaining supply .
As my colleague , Mr Rübig , has said , a 100 % supply is a difficult target to achieve .
I believe they do a pretty good job .
I invite the Commissioner to come and join my colleagues on the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy .
We are going back to our committee meeting after this discussion .
One of the matters we will be discussing is Mrs Morgan 's report on the Green Paper .
It is good to see the Commissioner here and if he does not have to rush away he will be very welcome to join us .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , firstly , I am very grateful for the invitation and I will definitely come , but I shall only listen to the debate and not intervene in the proceedings of the committee .
Secondly , it is important to have all the results of the investigation before we reach a conclusion .
That is why I want to launch all these inquiries , because we really need a factual basis .
It was a planned action and not a natural disaster .
We really need to know why it happened .
Thirdly , today 's debate has been very valuable .
In a way it has been a prelude to the debate to be held in the committee , because it has examined how best to ensure that the necessary investments are made in power and in the energy sector in general , and which are the best ways to guarantee that investments are made and the system functions properly .
I should like to praise the transmission system operators , who really cooperated on a voluntary basis .
Their quick response prevented an even worse blackout .
I should like to inform Parliament that during the summer the European transmission system operators always pay close attention to demand and supply on the electricity market .
As you know , summers are becoming hotter and the consumption of electricity at that time increases tremendously , so every year there is more and more demand for electricity and the networks are overloaded .
It is very important also to mention that network security standards must always be observed .
Therefore , we definitely need a binding standard to which all network operators have to adhere .
We have already seen the example of the Swiss blackout , which caused the blackout in Italy .
It was clear the operator had not complied with the network security requirements and that resulted in a large-scale blackout .
We should ensure that such a situation never occurs again and , at the same time , establish a system that is very reliable , where the size of the European network and the size of the UCTE system help to prevent blackouts , rather than causing blackouts or making them more widespread .
I thank you for the debate .
As I promised , as soon as the results of the inquiry are available , I will be ready to come to Parliament .
The debate is closed .
Milk quotas ( debate )
The next item is the oral question to the Commission on milk quotas by Duarte Freitas , Carmen Fraga Estévez , Salvador Garriga Polledo , Esther Herranz García , Elisabeth Jeggle , Albert Jan Maat , Mairead McGuinness , Francisco José Millán Mon , James Nicholson , Neil Parish and Daniel Varela Suanzes-Carpegna , on behalf of the PPE-DE Group - B6-0444 / 2006 ) .
author . - ( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should first like to thank the political group and the other groups for the interest that they have shown in this subject and that made it possible for this oral question to be put quickly onto the agenda .
This level of interest is indicative of the importance and sensitivity of the issue of milk quotas .
Commissioner , you suggested at the informal Council meeting that the system of milk quotas appears increasingly outdated and that it should be questioned and examined in such a way that farmers can plan their lives over the long term .
On 3 October , at the last meeting of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , Mr Rasmussen , representing the Commission , confirmed that we would see changes following the CAP 2008-2009 health check , most probably a phasing out of the milk quota system before 2015 , when the 2003 Agreement is due to expire .
It was not Parliament that raised this issue now , but it is in Parliament that the issue must be clarified , because our voters are most concerned and are anxious to know what is going on .
The truth of the matter is that the market reacted to these statements immediately , and various organisations and political agents appeared in public to have their say on the future of milk quotas .
Although the CAP health check cannot be viewed as a mid-term review , we are aware of the internal and external pressures to make changes that go beyond merely simplifying the processes .
In the dairy sector , planning is done over the long term .
As regards , on the one hand , quota acquisition and , on the other hand , genetic improvement , environmental obligations and investment in determining the quality of the milk fat and protein content produced by each cow per lactation , analysis is required every six to eight years .
Accordingly , what politicians are saying today will have repercussions until 2014-2015 .
As I come from a region in the Azores which accounts for 30 % of Portuguese milk production , where milk is the main source of income and where there are no medium-term alternatives , I am particularly sensitive to these changes .
It is therefore essential that we know whether or not the agreement must be complied with and whether any stringent mechanisms are to be put in place before or after 2015 .
On the other hand , it is also crucial to state for political purposes that the EU will take into account the social and economic impact that changes of this nature could have on regions that depend on milk and , in particular , on regions in which there are no production alternatives .
What we really need to know now , Commissioner , is whether the milk quota system will be maintained in its current form until 2015 , so that the market and the producers can be kept fully informed .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , for the time being the quota system provides some kind of stability for the European market , allowing successful full implementation of the 2003 reform without undue disturbances .
However , if the milk sector is to meet the challenge of competitiveness in the future and prosper in a more liberal world , the milk quota system will gradually become a less adequate instrument for achieving our goals .
I have therefore decided that a debate on the future of the quota system should take place within the health check process in 2008 .
The most promising long-term scenario for the European dairy sector is one without quotas .
This would allow the more efficient producers to benefit from growing markets while avoiding the huge cost , especially for young farmers , of obtaining production rights .
The value of the quota system varies tremendously between the Member States .
Quota levels per Member State are fixed until 31 March 2015 , as Mr Freitas rightly said .
After that date , in the absence of a proposal from the Commission and a decision taken in the Council , the system of milk quotas will end .
That is important .
If no decision is taken , the system will expire on 31 March 2015 .
Were the Council to take a decision to continue the quota system after 2015 , this should allow for a gradual transition from the current rules to a scenario without production limits .
It is in everybody 's interest to have a soft landing in order to avoid disturbances to the sector .
When I travel around the Member States and talk to farmers , they ask for predictability .
We owe it to the farming sector to give them a clear signal , and not a last-minute one on 1 January 2015 , as to whether the quota system is to continue or not .
We need to provide this predictability , and in this scenario specific measures should perhaps be introduced during a transitional period in order to make the milk quota system much more flexible than it is today .
However , it is still too early to take the appropriate measures .
We will all have a much clearer idea of the situation , and of the different options for change , once the dairy market outlook report is completed at the end of next year .
That report will be presented to Parliament and the Council and will look at the overall objectives and results of the 2003 reform , namely market orientation , competitiveness and the sustainability of the CAP in political , environmental and economic and budgetary terms .
I hope we can have a solid discussion on the future and on how to provide this predictability , which I consider so important , not just for the younger generation but also for those already in business .


on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , many thanks to you for what you have said , but I also want to extend warm thanks to my colleague Mr Freitas for taking the initiative and putting this oral question .
As you have already , and repeatedly , pointed out , Commissioner , the current state of affairs - that is to say , the decision to retain the quota until 31 March 2015 - and the question as to what will succeed it , is a cause of vigorous debate , particularly in certain regions that are , or believe themselves to be , dependent on milk and on the quotas .
It is good to hear a clear statement from you - as we indeed just have done - in which you give us the facts - namely , that the quota has been agreed on up to this point - and also tell us that we should have a debate in good time on what we propose to do about the situation .
If we want to carry on having a quota , then the farmers must be aware of that and supportive of it , exactly in the same way as they have to be of the decision to abandon the system , as is in fact currently being envisaged .
The question then arises as to what instruments might be feasible in the current financial situation as a means of preparing for its abandonment ; it may well be , for example , that an increase in the milk quota is under discussion , but I would venture to express doubt as to whether this is the right way of going about it .
How are we dealing with the option for young farmers who need the security to plan ahead and who very probably ought not to be investing a great deal more money in quotas , but rather in restructuring for the sake of their own competitiveness ?
How , too , are we to deal with areas that are nothing more than green spaces and need dairy farming if they are to be maintained as such ?
These are , in the main , areas with very beautiful and very interesting landscape , in which there are , as a rule , very few other ways available of earning a living , and so we must support them in this way .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , I should like on behalf of my political group to thank the Group of the European Peoples Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and Mr Freitas for his reflections on the question of the Commission statements on milk quotas .
Commissioner , I shall not refer to what we all know to be the importance of the milk sector in Europe at the level of production , employment , investments , foreign trade or food security .
However , I would point out that any proposal to abolish or keep milk quotas must be studied promptly and carefully and an analysis must be made of its repercussions , firstly on rural incomes and the other sectors acutely affected , and on rural development itself .
This analysis should include all the regions of the Union , as well as the peculiarities of milk production in some of them .
Commissioner , we cannot be in favour of controlling milk production after 2015 under the current preconditions , which often create oligopolies in the sector .
It is a production model of the previous common agricultural policy philosophy .
On the other hand , however , we cannot accept the liberalisation of milk production quotas from one day to the next before 2015 .
In this transitional period which we are going through , it is necessary to strengthen measures of transparency , efficacy and competitiveness of the sector in certain regions of the Community .
Nor can we announce any review of any product within the framework of the health check in 2008-2009 .
If we want to believe that it is a health check , what we have is a simplification of the common agricultural policy .
I would like to put one question to you : is there any possibility of unbundling subsidies in 2007 ?
How can this be combined with the liberalisation or maintenance of the quota system ?
Commissioner , I know that you will submit an honest proposal as regards the limits , so as not to give rise to any insecurity among producers .
I think that you have this political commitment , but above all it is the question of timely consultation with the European Parliament that will give competitiveness and a clear orientation to the sector .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I too should like to start by thanking Mr Freitas for taking the initiative and raising this important topic this evening .
When talking about the milk quota , it is important to note that the situation when this quota was introduced back in 1984 was completely different from now .
In 1984 , there were large surpluses that could not be sold , and that is clearly no longer the case .
The difference between the global market prices in 1984 and the price in the European Union was enormous , but it is now considerably less pronounced .
If EU prices approximate to those on the global market , there is far less reason to have a quota system than there was in 1984 .
I am in complete agreement with the Commissioner 's statement a moment ago to the effect that it is important for farmers to know where they stand .
I do not know when the Commission will be able to indicate the proposals or direction in detail , but it would be ideal , in the framework of the health check , to also address all other components of agricultural policy and also to hear the Commission 's view on the quota system .
The situation in the European Union is not - as somebody has already mentioned - the same everywhere .
When the Commission presents this analysis , it is important that this is done on a country-by-country , and perhaps even region-by-region basis .
For some regions , it is important that a quota system remains in place .
Would the Commission address this aspect during the analysis ?
Whatever the outcome , on the basis of current knowledge , I think it would be preferable to phase out the quota system over a period of time .
After all , if we compare the EU 's presence in terms of dairy products within the global market today to that in 1984 , the situation is now considerably worse , and that is much to be regretted .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , the Commissioner 's position on the milk quota system is most worrying , in that she is suggesting that they might be dismantled by 2015 .
Although she says that it is too early to take substantive measures , the path to liberalisation to which she refers overlooks the importance of milk production in various disadvantaged farming areas .
For example , in Portugal , both in the North and Central Regions of the mainland and in the Autonomous Region of the Azores , any dismantling of the milk quota system would hinder rural development and would impoverish vast areas in which the production of milk and other dairy production is the main activity .
We therefore emphasise the need to protect the specific characteristics of farming in various Member States and , in particular , in Portugal .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank the author of the question for initiating this greatly needed debate on dairy quotas .
The problems associated with these quotas are a concern for farmers throughout Europe .
I would like to make the point that if these quotas are to be maintained for a longer period , it raises the obvious question of how high they should be , because the sizes of milk quotas are blatantly unjust : I can cite many examples of how they do not conform to market demand in particular Member States .
There are countries which are greatly damaged by quotas not being in line with their demand as consumers .
Examples are Italy and Spain , while Poland , a new Member State , is definitely another one .
For that reason , if the quotas need to be retained , then the size of these quotas must be reviewed for the sake of fairness and European solidarity .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , since we are on the subject of milk quotas , I want to bring a serious situation to the Commissioner 's attention .
The Irish milk quota sellers ' group , whose members are all older farmers , all hold milk quotas which they wish to sell .
Their decision to sell the quotas is based on illness , infirmity or old age .
The Irish Minister for Agriculture has stipulated that she will prioritise in favour of young farmers .
European law prohibits discrimination on the grounds of age , yet our Minister is openly discriminating against older quota owners in favour of young farmers to whom she wishes to give quota - and this is the key - at below market value .
She proposes to take the cost out of present quota owners ' pockets .
This is interfering with the market .
Many of these older farmers are at present subject to scaremongering , with inaccurate information from their cooperatives .
The Minister intends to confiscate quotas not offered for sale on two bases : if the quota owner does not produce for two consecutive years or if the quota owner has a leasing arrangement which expires in March one year and he does not sell his quota by the end of March the following year .
Minister Coughlan appears to want to divide the traditionally cohesive farming community by the exploitation of one group by another .
The threat to confiscate quota is an attempt to pressure farmers into poor arrangements and to sell against their will .
I ask the Commissioner to clarify this situation .

( NL ) Mr President , I should like to thank Mr Freitas for the way in which he has presented the European Christian Democrats ' initiative , and the Commissioner for opening the debate on the future of dairy products .
Let us be honest : the situation has changed over the years ; high quota costs have caused the cost of milking to soar , while European dairy policy is increasingly becoming snarled up .
We have now lost 60 % of our exports within the global market , and the European Union and the European dairy sector have lost 4 % of world production .
Since current demand for dairy products by far outstrips production globally , Europe would do well to face the facts and ponder the question what to do after 2015 .
On the one hand there are the entrepreneurs who would like to grow but are crippled by the high quota costs .
On the other hand there are areas in Europe where the quotas are currently no longer being achieved , the United Kingdom being a case in point .
There is therefore every reason to look at how we can come up with a good timetable after 2015 in order to attain a better and effective system .
I should like to make a few suggestions in this respect .
First of all , milk quotas must become tradable internationally .
The superlevy must be lowered when the quota is being used but when sales are done with virtually no support to the European Union .
We could also consider levelling the milk quota at European level .
When one country does not manage to fill the entire quota and another country could do with some more , we could quite simply even the matter out afterwards .
A gradual quota increase for dairy farmers and cooperatives who sell their products without European support is also conceivable .
Finally , we advocate an effective use of European funds for rural development in those areas where small dairy farmers face problems in terms of employment and conversion .
In that way , the Commissioner may well be able to use a good timetable that leads to a more market-oriented focus and , as a member of the Dutch Christian Democratic party , the CDA , I would very much welcome it if the Commissioner were to adopt this line .
I have to congratulate her , also because a number of these proposals have already been expressed by Mr Rasmussen , Head of Section for Milk and Animal Products in DG Agriculture .
This bodes well for the future in terms of a timely debate on dairy products .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , the mid-term reform of the CAP was announced as simply an intermediary review , but despite this it has been one of the most significant reforms that the policy has undergone since it began .
Given this history and the public statements that you have been making regarding the quota system in recent months that have generated a significant amount of alarm and uncertainty in the sector , I would like you to make it perfectly clear that the check-up planned for 2008 will assure us that the reform is working and that under no circumstances does the Commission intend to go further , or move forward to the date with regard to which Parliament gave its opinion in the debates on the last reform . I would like to remind you that it was in favour of extending the current rules to the 2014-2015 financial year , in accordance with the Commission 's proposal .
Other colleagues have said the same thing .
This prospect of stability , Commissioner , which the Commission proposed at that time , remains essential for an economic activity which , like any other , needs to make plans , make investments , pay and prepare for what the future may bring , with a previously established regulatory framework .
In my region , Galicia , as in others that have been mentioned , such as the Autonomous Region of the Azores or Northern Portugal ( and I would like to thank Mr Freitas whose question made this debate possible ) , farms play a decisive role both in social and environmental terms and also in restoring territorial balance .
Agricultural unions maintain that it is the Galician model , based on family farms , that is the clearest demonstration of the multifunctional role of these types of farm and their capacity to tie people to the region .
If the Commission wants to change the rules of the game , it should first explain what it plans to do , when and how it is going to do it .
This should all be done with maximum transparency , because uncertainty , Commissioner , is the worst scenario for those working in the sector .
The sector needs stability and not shocks , time to adapt itself and to plan , and I therefore think that we should finish applying the current reform before thinking about the next one .
( FI ) Mr President , milk production is a typical feature of the worst off farming regions .
It has provided a livelihood and has been a vital force in regions where other areas of agricultural production would be difficult or impossible .
It has been able to make use of good levels of coarse fodder productivity in areas that are infertile , for example .
Milk production is capital-intensive .
The investment needed is massive .
The modern production structure can cost up to a million euros .
It only normally creates jobs , however , for family farms .
Milk production is subject to quotas .
Many young farmers have made huge investments in acquiring additional production rights .
It is not uncommon for production quotas to be bought for EUR 150 000 or more .
Milk production therefore needs a long-term protected framework .
That cannot be seen as an eight-year goal .
What is a sound system has resulted in a balanced framework for the farmer in which to engage in production .
Price fluctuations have been small and the market stable .
Abolishing milk quotas would alter the situation immediately .
The large industrial concerns in Europe 's best regions would be in a strong competitive position .
Agricultural diversity would be all the poorer .
Massive investments in milk quotas by family farms would immediately lose their value .
The milk markets would lose their stability .
All this would make the enterprise a very risky one and would have an adverse effect in particular on farming regions that are worse off in terms of their prevailing natural conditions .
( PL ) Mr President , the common agricultural policy has raised many doubts and will continue to do so .
It will always have its supporters and its opponents .
The European Commission 's intention to review the common agricultural policy , and with it milk quotas , has raised concerns as well as hope , especially in the countries that suffer from it , including Poland .
The quota allocated to Poland was insultingly low .
A case in point is Germany , which has 80 million inhabitants , and has a quota of around 28 million tonnes , while Poland , which has half the population , is only allowed some 9 million tonnes of milk .
In practical terms that means Poland has a quota four and a half million tonnes less than the thirteen to thirteen and a half million tonnes it should be allowed .
The question we would therefore like to ask is what would happen if milk quotas were abolished , particularly in countries such as Poland , where family-owned farmsteads rather than big farms predominate ?
Would the change to the rules of the common agricultural policy not force these farms into bankruptcy ?
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , to me it is highly regrettable that the new Member States benefit the least from the common agricultural policy .
They are participating in this ' Marshall Plan ' for agriculture , whose great virtue used to be its long-term focus and vision .
Well , we joined the European Union late .
This is not the Commissioner 's fault : such is the history of Europe .
But unfortunately Polish farmers are still grappling with the milk quotas , which are several million tonnes too low , and in the meantime we pay fines for over-production of milk , when they are to be lifted in 2015 .
Unfortunately during that time many Polish milk producers will disappear from the market .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , as a representative of Galicia , a milk-producing region par excellence , I think that this oral question put to the European Commission today is very opportune .
Commissioner , producers are quite disconcerted by information that has been circulated , from which it can be deduced that there will be changes to the system established in 2003 for the milk sector and specifically concerning the quota system .
You were not very specific today , Commissioner , but I think that you made a series of things clear : that you are going to launch a debate , that there is going to be a transition period prior to the removal of quotas in 2015 , from which I deduce that there is going to be a phasing out period prior to 2015 when quotas are permanently removed .
Commissioner , we are talking about an economic sector that needs legal security and medium- and long-term guarantees that will enable a minimum degree of planning , and any further change or uncertainty could , at least in my country , have serious social and economic consequences .
Quotas are a very important asset to farmers .
In a region like Galicia , in which there is a need to continue with the restructuring process , it is essential , in order to complete it , that the current quota system is maintained as planned .
If not , the consequences could be catastrophic , as removing quotas would have drastic repercussions for the price of milk , and consequently for profits in the dairy sector .
I therefore ask , Commissioner , that any transitions be made and ideas proposed from 2015 onwards .
Finally , I would like to take this opportunity to highlight the fact that the policies of the Member States need to cooperate in the whole of this process and that therefore any restriction on exchanges of quotas in a Member State should be considered as a serious obstacle to the capitalisation , competitiveness and development of the sector , as is unfortunately the case with the national plan proposed by the Spanish Government .
( PT ) I should once again like to thank you for being in the Chamber , Commissioner .
Your frequent attendance in Strasbourg is ample demonstration of the continued importance of farming in Europe .
We have been considering the common agricultural policy .
My group , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , held an important seminar just last week in Brussels on the theme of the CAP as it is and of the CAP as we would like it to be .
Reflection on the future does not necessarily mean introducing any element of instability .
Farmers work with nature and value nature 's cycles , and markets , as we know , react to all elements of instability .
That being said , instability does at least rule out inertia , and we must not therefore fall into the old trap of defending the status quo simply for the sake of it .
Commissioner , the latest statements coming from some quarters have , then , given rise to extraordinary alarm in the sector , to which an appropriate political response needs to be given so that the instability felt by the sector on this matter is not in some cases exploited in the service of untoward political objectives .
Instability and insecurity can only be tackled by providing regular , transparent information that is as clear as possible .
I would therefore call on you to adopt as effective as possible a strategy of clarification for the sector and also to make it clear to the sector that the Commission honours its agreements and the arrangements fixed until 2014 .
These arrangements must naturally be fulfilled without prejudice to the debate and without prejudice to the examination of alternative arrangements that may prove appropriate .
Mr President , Commissioner , the ability to have a clear and certain future is very important for any business , none more so than for dairy farmers and for the dairy industry .
Quotas are in place until 2015 and this I believe was a good decision during the mid-term review .
But to now cast doubt on this on the part of the Commission sends the wrong message and I am pleased that the Commissioner went some way tonight to assure us of what the Commission 's position is .
Commissioner , you said that quotas have outlived their usefulness .
Well , OK , you may be right , but I have to say to you that 2015 is a long time away and it is very difficult to crystal-ball gaze and see what conditions will be like at that time .
In 2015 , you rightly say , we should have a soft landing and when the time comes for quotas to disappear I think that soft landing should come into place .
What I question is the timing .
So far from the date , by all means let us have an exchange of views on what may or may not happen , but how do we encourage our young people to go into the industry ?
How do we take young farmers into the industry ?
How do they plan for the future if the future is being questioned at this moment in time ?
The dairy sector , as you know only too well , is the backbone of the agricultural industry throughout the European Union .
We must work together to achieve a sound future for that industry .
Only by working together can we achieve that sound future .
I hope that you will take the opportunity to engage with us in the Committee on Agriculture and positively and actively be involved in ensuring that there is a future for the dairy sector , for dairy farmers and for the dairy industry .
It is not only the people who are employed on the farms who are important ; the people who are employed in the processing industries and off the farms are equally important .
( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , we all agree that the European countryside and European farmers and livestock breeders need some certainty .
The Brussels Agreement in 2002 provided that certainty , and in exchange for it , the Member States tolerated a reform of the CAP that required serious sacrifices for the rural world , especially for the ' cohesion countries ' .
This certainty meant , among other things , that the system of milk quotas would remain in force until 2015 , allowing farmers sufficient time to reorganise their farms in order to make them more competitive and , if necessary , to leave the sector .
But we want the certainties to be maintained , and you know that quotas are the only guarantee for farmers in a market in which prices are falling .
And quotas are an asset for farmers , who need to have the freedom to transfer and sell them when they want to cease production .
What uncertainty does , Commissioner , is reduce the value of quotas .
In my region , Asturias , 94 000 tonnes have been lost in two years due to farmers giving up .
Between 1996 and 2006 the number of farms has dropped from 30 000 to just 3 200 .
Young farmers , who we all talk about so much , including young farmers with high milk quotas and profitable farms , are leaving the sector .
The Government has also forbidden transfers of quotas between individuals .
Our problem , Commissioner , is rural development .
You are going to do a health check on the common agricultural policy next year .
We hope that you will be acting as a doctor and not as a forensic scientist .
Do you think it is right to talk about transitional measures when there is not even sufficient funding secured for rural development ?
I would like to remind you that , for example , my country is going to lose 50 % of rural development funds in the next few years .
Are you planning to report this situation during the review that you carry out next year ?
( PL ) Mr President , the debate in this House on dairy quotas is intensifying .
We are all wondering what will happen if we end the quota system for milk production .
There has been a great deal of criticism which focuses on the fact that the current system is an archaic one which inhibits the development of the dairy sector and makes it less competitive on the world market .
Ending the system is opposed by the countries which have unfavourable natural conditions for dairy production .
To them , ending the system will mean that production will shift to other regions , leading to loss of livelihoods and stable incomes for many farmers .
This may also affect the least developed regions in the east of Poland , Poland being one of the countries that was allocated an unfair , extremely low milk quota .
We may soon become net importers .
According to some experts , the negative impact of a rigid quota system will be worse for Poland than for other Member States , because all the system does is restrict opportunities for modernisation and utilising production potential because of the low level of aid for the milk sector in the European Union .
Many people assert that the milk quotas have lost their economic raison d 'etre .
We are also in negotiations with the WTO , in which we have promised to eliminate export subsidies and greatly reduce the tariffs set up to protect the internal market .
How will this affect the EU milk market ?
It appears that limiting the restrictiveness of the system , for instance , by combining wholesale and direct quotas and restricting the penalties for exceeding the limits would be fair at this moment .
I would like to remind the Commissioner that there are some countries which are not currently using their quotas to the full .
Mr President , in Ireland they speak of little else .
I spoke to a large group of dairy farmers in Navan , County Meath on Thursday night and the question they are asking is not so much if quotas will be gone in 2015 , but what is going to be done from 2008 to collapse the value of the milk quota .
I am indebted to last Thursday 's edition of the Farmers ' Journal for outlining five key points that the Commission has in mind .
It is well worth bringing them to the attention of the House .
I believe you are looking at gradually increasing quotas from the health check onwards , reducing super-levy costs to Member States , balancing quotas across the European Union so that an over-quota in one Member State may be taken up by slack in another .
Cross-border trading is on the table , as is reducing the value of quotas in Member States .
That is already happening , certainly in Ireland .
There is a downside to all of this .
Every single study that I have read on the subject says that the abolition of milk quotas will lead to a substantial drop in milk prices in many Member States and there will be a corresponding increase in production .
That would happen in Ireland , the Netherlands , Denmark and Luxembourg .
The key to all this is that we are all for abolition if markets are positive in 2015 , but none of us knows what the markets will be like at that time .
I look forward to your analysis of the dairy market .
It will have to take a very close look at the future , because if global markets are not positive I cannot recommend to farmers that they run faster to stand still .
It makes no sense .
To those who have concerns about young farmers - and I have many myself , although my little farmers are quite small at the moment ! - who would encourage anyone to go into a business where they have to work twice as hard to earn half as much money ?
It does not make sense .
We need to bear that in mind .
The key is the WTO and what happens there .
But at least we are having a debate and that is a positive sign .
We should discuss these things more in this House , rather than reading about them in our national newspapers .

Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Freitas for bringing this forward and the Commissioner for being here tonight , because this debate is really worthwhile .
We have to face up to the fact that , as milk quotas and set-aside do not fit easily into a decoupled agricultural policy , they will have to be phased out in the future .
We must also set a date and stick to it , because ever since I have been here quotas have been about to be phased out , and it has never happened .
We must face the reality that one day they actually will go .
Everyone in this House accepts the value of dairy production to all our Member States - nowhere more so than in my own region of the UK , the West Country , where dairying is the bread and butter of the whole area but is also under huge pressure .
What is interesting about quota and the value of quota is that ten years ago in the United Kingdom the rate was nearly a pound a litre , whereas now it is worth a penny a litre .
We must therefore remember that in many ways quota is not a tangible substance , and its value can disappear overnight .
We have to be very careful about how we deal with this .
In the UK , it is the power of the supermarkets and the driving-down of prices which is now the real problem .
We are not even meeting our national quota , which shows there is a problem with price .
At certain points over the last 20 years there has been a world increase in dairy trade , but because in Europe control is exercised over the amounts produced , it has never been able to take advantage of this .
We therefore need to have a more flexible regime in the future .
I should like to hear the Commissioner 's views on that .
New Zealand - which probably produces milk as effectively as anybody - still has a form of quota , because it has a national cooperative , of which farmers have to be shareholders in order to be able produce extra milk .
It is interesting to explore the arrangements beyond 2015 , but first we must face up to the reality that quotas need to go .
author . - ( PT ) Mr President , thank you very much .
As author of the question , I should very quickly like to ask the Commissioner a specific question , so that we can all leave the House with this issue clearer in our minds .
We know , as the Commissioner said , that , if nothing is done , the arrangements will end in 2005 .
We also know that , in the view of the Commissioner herself , this is an outdated system that must be brought to an end .
What we want to know now , and this is the question that I should like to ask you , Commissioner , and that I want you to answer very , very clearly - is whether you accept that phasing out can begin before 2015 , as Mr Rasmussen , your representative in Parliament 's Committee on Agriculture , assumed it could , or whether the process will begin from 2015 onwards .
This is a crucial question to which I should like you to give me a very clear answer .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I have listened with great interest to this interesting and very passionate debate .
It reflects perfectly the importance of the dairy sector .
As Mr Mulder rightly said , the quota system was introduced in 1984 at a time when we wanted to maintain high prices for our products .
At that stage , therefore , the quota system was a good idea .
However , things have changed dramatically over the last 20 years and there was therefore a discussion , as part of the 2003 reform , on what to do with the dairy sector .
The decision was taken to maintain the quota system until 31 March 2015 .
It was decided to increase quotas and reduce prices .
The phasing-in of these changes will be finalised next year .
Then there was the possibility of this health check .
There is not going to be a new reform in 2008 / 2009 .
That is important .
The health check simply provides an opportunity to streamline and simplify the common agricultural policy , in line with the 2003 CAP reform .
In my dealings with Parliament I always try to play with a very open hand .
I do not keep my cards close to my chest .
We need to have a discussion , as part of the health check , on what we do with the quota system when it expires in 2015 .
I have no fixed ideas on phasing-out , but we need to tell the dairy sector whether or not we want to prolong the quota system .
I am not proposing any changes , as the quota system will expire in 2015 if we do not do anything , but we must therefore tell the sector whether or not we are sticking to the agreement to abolish the quota system in 2015 .
If we say nothing , farmers all over Europe will assume that this will not happen .
They will keep their quotas on the basis of these still being worth something after 31 March 2015 , only for the Council and Parliament to suddenly decide to abolish them , with the value of quotas falling to zero overnight .
They will be worth absolutely nothing !
That is not predictability , and we must therefore send a clear signal of what the future will be .
As I said in my first contribution , we will have this dairy market outlook report at the end of next year .
I have a tradition , Mr Nicholson , of working closely with Parliament , and specifically with the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , so at that point we can discuss what is going to happen , in order to provide stability and avoid uncertainty for the dairy sector in the European Union .
The debate is closed .
Written statement ( Rule 142 of the Rules of Procedure )
( HU ) In recent times , several reports have been circulating to the effect that the Commission is preparing to reform the organisation of the milk market , an important element of which would be the abolition of milk quotas .
The Commission has not denied these reports .
This news is unsettling if only because , in recent years , reform has been undertaken primarily in those sectors in which the system would in any case have ceased to be in force .
There is no such compelling reason in the case of the milk sector , since the regulations for this sector are in force until 2015 and , moreover , the quota system has been providing the market and producers with adequate stability .
Should the quota system be abolished , the income of dairy producers would fall across Europe , leading to further concentration in the sector .
Tens of thousands of farmers producing for the local markets would be obliged to stop production .
As a result , those Member States in which conditions are less favourable would see their milk production fall significantly .
This would oblige several Member States to supply their dairy needs predominantly from imports .
Although in Hungary milk production is primarily in the hands of large-scale industries and is competitive , nevertheless it would not be in the interests of our country either to abolish the quota system .
Because of current economic difficulties , milk consumption is low , and Hungary is not able to take advantage of the quotas allocated to it .
At the same time , however , we hope that if the economy picks up then consumption will also rise .
Therefore , Hungary would find particularly unacceptable any transformation of the quota system that involved transferring the quotas of Member States that make less use of them to those countries that make greater use of them .
( HU ) The reason for maintaining the strict milk quota system is that the quotas that are presently in effect allow for a greater volume of milk production than what the EU consumes internally .
From 2007 on , direct payments to milk producers have to be kept completely separate from production , that is , payments will be received not by the milk producer but by the one who owns a milk quota during the reference period , in the form of a lump sum based on land area .
Under current rules , the milk quota system will remain in force until 2014-15 .
Commissioner Fischer Boel stated that in the context of the review , we should look at the question of quotas , but she did not give any concrete details .
Maintaining the quota system is the sole guarantee of market and price stability .
Without quotas , production would rise significantly , and the resulting surpluses would bring down prices , which would very easily stifle small producers .
At the same time , without support only the most competitive industries would be able to compete with the pressure from imports or to succeed on the export market .
In Hungary , milk production is steadily declining due to problems of efficiency ; in spite of the fact that purchase prices are not falling , we are using only around 70 % of the Community quota allocated to us .
Unfortunately , in contrast to Western European practice , producers here do not own the processing establishments .
If the quota system were abolished , the proportion of imported products would rise , making the problems of competitiveness among Hungarian producers even more evident , and the fall in domestic production would probably accelerate .
For all these reasons , I do not support the abolition of the milk quota system .
Support for rural development by the EAFRD - Voluntary modulation of direct payments under the CAP ( debate )
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , before going into the content of the reports I want to thank the rapporteurs , Lutz Goepel and Jan Mulder , along with the Members of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development for their efforts in drafting the two reports .
I should like to start with Mr Goepel 's report .
I have carefully taken note of the Committee on Agriculture 's position , which is to reject the proposal concerning voluntary modulation and call on the Commission to withdraw the proposal .
Before addressing some of the report 's points I should like to recall why I presented the proposal and what the guiding principle was for the drafting of it .
The Commission proposal is a response to a request made by the European Council last December to present a proposal on voluntary modulation .
Such a modulation was a means to enable Member States to transfer funds from the first pillar of the common agricultural policy into the second pillar in order to reinforce the rural development budget , an objective with which most of you would agree .
I have expressed my concerns about certain aspects of the Council agreement , in particular that it would apply both to direct payments and to market-related expenditure as well as the fact that it derogates significantly from the basic rules of rural development expenditure .
The Commission tries to address those concerns to the greatest extent possible and ensure as much coherence as possible with the rules governing compulsory modulation and rural development spending .
That is in line with the Commission 's declaration on the interinstitutional agreement on the financial perspectives .
With regard to some arguments in Mr Goepel 's report , it is said that voluntary modulation would lead to a distortion of competition .
I do not share that view .
Both the single farm payment and rural development expenditure are considered as non-trade distorting under the WTO rules .
It is claimed that there is no proper impact assessment .
Firstly , in the short time available during the meeting last December that simply was not feasible .
Secondly , it would have encountered methodological difficulties since we have no idea which Member States would apply voluntary modulation , and if they did so , we have no idea of the percentages they would apply .
So , the proposal does not go against the principles of rural development , such as national cofinancing .
We propose optional cofinancing as a compromise , to meet the expectations of the Council .
Let me now turn to the Mulder report on the proposed amendments to Regulation ( EC ) No 1698 / 2005 .
The text is a legal translation of what was decided last September by the heads of state and government in relation to the so-called ' capping provision ' , which is common to all structural instruments , including the Rural Development Fund , and is also reproduced in the general regulation on the structural funds .
Moreover , the text reflects the non-cofinancing requirement for an amount of EUR 320 million as part of the Rural Development Fund allocation to Portugal , which was also agreed at last December 's Council meeting .
I have taken note of the draftsman 's position , in particular on cofinancing .
I agree that the exemption of EUR 320 million for Portugal from the requirement of national cofinancing should be an exception in rural development , since cofinancing is a basic rule in rural development .
It also means co-responsibility for expenditure and it is an essential element of the subsidiarity that is applied in the policy implemented in the various Member States or regions .
I look forward to a fruitful discussion on this issue .
I will respond at the end of the debate .
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , let me take this opportunity to once more express warm thanks to all my fellow Members from all the groups who have supported me in creating a framework worthy of this debate , which is of such great importance to this House and to Europe 's farmers .
You , Mr President , by your wise and astute decision , have ensured that Members from all groups will get the chance to speak , albeit at a rather later hour .
Following a decision by the Council - which , as is so often the case with agriculture debates , is notably absent today - the Commission submitted a proposal according to which 20 % of agricultural direct payments would be shifted from the first pillar of CAP to the second , from which they could be spent without mandatory co-funding .
That is a concession by the majority on the Council and , whether it wishes to or not , on the part of the Commission , as part of the budget compromise reached in December 2005 .
The Commissioner has confirmed as much .
This House has already expressed strong misgivings about this in the interinstitutional agreement on the Financial Perspective .
When I say that the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development firmly rejected this proposal , I mean that it did so with only three dissenting votes , and its rejection of the draft legislation was indeed unanimous .
This is not just about differences of opinion where specific policies are concerned ; it is also about where Parliament , as an institution , should stand in the forthcoming debates on the reorientation of the Community budget .
As part of the Budget compromise , all the institutions agreed that all the Community 's outgoings , among them the post-2013 agricultural expenditure in particular , should be subject to review , and that this House will play a full part in this process from an early stage .
Now , though , we see the Council adopting , through the back door , an extensive remodelling of agricultural funding , and this House has no option but to kill it off , for there was no prior consultation with us .
Instead , the Council has decided to proceed with such an extensive reallocation of resources that there will be such limited scope for debate in 2008-2009 that serious discussion will scarcely be on the cards .
This is something that we in this House cannot tolerate if we are to be taken seriously in future , and the proposal is , moreover , questionable in terms of financial policy .
What is worthy of note on the agricultural policy side is that there is no impact assessment accompanying the proposal .
On the contrary , the impression is given that a short-term reduction of 20 % in direct payments would not cause farmers any problems .
Taken together with the cuts resulting from mandatory modulation and those generally expected after the accession of Bulgaria and Romania , what this means , for those Member States that want to apply this voluntary modulation , is a reduction in payments of something like one-third over against what they were in 2003 .
Far from supporting structural change in agriculture , that amounts to a flagrant structural violation that would put the viability of many thousands of farms in rural areas at risk .
It is generally agreed that what our farmers need is the security to plan ahead .

In the absence of any impact assessment on the part of either the Council or the Commission , we caused evaluations to be carried out , and these confirm , not only that there will be massive distortion of competition and illegal discrimination against the farmers concerned , but also that modulation does nothing to serve the objects of the Community in rural areas , but rather jeopardises them to a considerable degree .
To date , the Council has offered no response whatever to the legitimate concerns of Europe 's farmers , and there has as yet been no discussion of the potential consequences .
This sort of behaviour is not at all what we are used to in the European Union and is also quite obviously inappropriate .
Since , moreover , the transferred Community funds are not to be spent in accordance with a strategy laid down at Community level , we find ourselves in the paradoxical situation in which the renationalisation of agriculture policy is being paid for entirely from Community funds , particularly when one considers the way the Council is thinking ahead ; I would ask you to take a look and see what happens at the next meeting on 14 November , this very week .
We all want to strengthen rural areas .
We have put forward proposals for solutions to their financial problems that are worthy of discussion ; the Böge report is just one of them .
The Council , though , preferred not to give these proposals any closer attention , so let us not reach out a hand to help it after all that we have done already .
If there has to be a paradigm shift in agriculture policy , then let that happen only after a transparent and open debate in which Parliament , too , can have a decisive part to play , for this proposal is wide of the mark - legally , in terms of its substance , and as policy - and solves none of the problems that rural areas have .
If we want our contribution to future debates on the valuation of the agricultural budget to be taken at all seriously , then we should firmly and forthrightly reject this proposal .
I hope that the Council 's response to the vote in this House will be to embark on a more in-depth discussion of the matters at issue .
My colleagues in the committee , and I myself , are willing to join them in this , but the Council must make a move .
It has to be said , though , that it probably does not entertain very high hopes at the present time .
rapporteur . - ( NL ) Mr President , my report has received unanimous approval in this House 's Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development .
We considered additional aid for rural development in Portugal to be justifiable ; although this was not , of course , ideal , it did form part of a package of measures nodded through by the Council in December , it was not something to which this House , during the negotiations on the financial perspectives , thought it necessary to make any changes .
I should like to repeat , though , that it is not ideal and should remain an exception .
We have to accept , after all , that something similar has been agreed on for various other countries as well .
I should now like - with your permission , Mr President - to turn to the Goepel report .
With regard to the financial perspectives , which were subsequently approved by this House as a whole , the committee made it quite clear that Parliament has suspended its verdict with regard to voluntary modulation .
It is therefore surprising that the Commission should come up with a proposal so promptly .
It has , actually , only followed the Council 's ' orders ' , for want of a better word .
I disagree with the Commissioner that there is no danger of a renationalisation of European agricultural policy ; it is something I regard as a very dangerous trend .
What matters most of all to the European farmer is the common market of soon to be 500 million consumers who we must try to retain as much as possible .
In addition , as Mr Goepel has already indicated , it can hardly be said that there has been any examination of the policy 's effects .
It may well be that around 2013 , the average farmer in Europe , as a result of all manner of measures , will need to make do with one third less of what he received in 2004 .
Is that the reliable authority that the European Union wants to be ?
What are the consequences of this ?
Can farmers survive this measure in certain regions and suchlike ?
We have not received an analysis of it , and it would appear to me that the Commission has no choice , when the proposal is submitted , but to analyse its effects .
One of the most important prerogatives of this Parliament , upon which Mr Bösch will undoubtedly elaborate , is the right to enact the Budget .
We have approved the financial perspectives , which contain precise figures , with so much being set aside for this , so much for that and , among others , so much for market measures in the framework of European agricultural policy and so much for rural policy .
If voluntary modulation were to be implemented , it would have an impact on these figures .
Does that not amount to a change to the financial perspectives ?
I do believe that it does .
A change to the financial perspectives requires approval by the budgetary authority , that being the European Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
I am not at all certain that Parliament will go along with this .
That is why I will be voting against the Commission proposals on voluntary modulation .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Budgets . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I have not been in this House long , but I have been here long enough to realise that solid agreement between the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development and the Committee on Budgets , such as we have here with the rejection of this draft , is not that frequent an occurrence .
The opinion of the Committee on Budgets does , of course , concentrate on the issues of relevance to the budget , and there are with regard to these sufficient arguments available to justify the firm repudiation of the Commission 's proposal .
The Member States can , by way of voluntary modulation , unilaterally and without consultation with Parliament , increase non-mandatory expenditure on rural development by many billions of euros , contrary to the wording and spirit of the interinstitutional agreement .
Nor has the Commission adequately thought through the budgetary consequences of a voluntary transfer of this kind .
It is irresponsible of the Commissioner to declare herself once more to be taking down dictation from the Council and not to have carried out an impact assessment before the proposal was adopted .
What will be this proposal 's effects on the common agricultural policy ?
We do not know that any more than she does , and yet we are supposed to agree to it ; well , we are not going to .
Perhaps then exactly the same thing will happen as did with the European aid arrangements for cotton , which the ECJ declared null and void at the beginning of September this year ; there , too , the considerable economic effects of the reform had been underestimated or insufficiently examined .
Moreover , the proposal contradicts everything previously laid down concerning modulation , since it makes no provision for cofinancing on the part of the Member States .
What our Heads of Government have come up with in order to fill the hole in the rural budget , for which they were responsible , is a cheap solution ; if the Council were really interested in topping up the funds for the second pillar , they could quite simply have complied with this House 's demands in respect of the 2007-2013 Financial Perspective .
What we should do with this proposal is reject it , and firmly .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , according to Government figures , the average earnings of farmers in my constituency in Scotland in 2005 were GBP 10 000 , or EUR 14 000 .
This is disastrous : it is forcing farmers into bankruptcy !
They do not have any room for reinvestment in the industry .
Instead of offering practical help , Prime Minister Blair comes up with the startling proposal to slash 20 % off farmers ' single-farm payments , on top of the existing 5 % compulsory modulation that already exists and , as we have heard from Mr Goepel , a further 8 % that will be deducted to pay for Bulgaria and Romania .
In other words , British farmers - as Britain appears to be the only Member State really pushing for this voluntary modulation - will lose roughly 33 % of their subsidy , which for many of them is a vital lifeline .
But worse , this naked discrimination against UK farmers will place them at a huge competitive disadvantage to all other farmers in every other Member State in Europe .
I say to the Commissioner : it may be that in the eyes of the WTO this does not amount to trade distortion , but in the pockets of farmers it certainly amounts to a catastrophe .
I must also protest at the threats being issued by the UK Government , which tells us that if we vote against voluntary modulation it will compromise the future of the popular agri-environment schemes in which many UK farmers have participated .
This is tantamount to blackmail and coming from a government that has imposed more than 80 stealth taxes , from a Chancellor - Gordon Brown - who has made taxation in the UK higher than Germany or France and now wants us to believe that he needs to slash 25 % off our farmers ' single-farm payments in order to be able to afford agri-environment schemes , it is an absolute joke .
I can tell Mr Brown that if he watches the way this House votes on this proposal , he will see what we think of his sense of humour .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are being called on today to take a stand on a proposal on rural development policy which we consider to be invalid , contradictory and dangerous to the future of the CAP itself , as well as to our own credibility .
This is , of course , a proposal which emerged from a contradictory compromise by the European Council last December .
On the other hand , however , it is worth our emphasising that the Commission proposal tries to improve the outcome of this highhandedness on the part of the European Council towards both the institutions and the Treaty itself .
We agree in principle with the Commission proposals for defining the measure on a multiannual basis at national level and retaining the limits which exist in the Rural Development Fund .
However , although these improving proposals could be considered as a good effort by the Commission towards the Council , they cannot be considered adequate .
As the Socialist Group in the European Parliament , we shall vote against the legislative text of the Commission regulation on voluntary modulation at this stage for the following reasons : firstly , in order to strengthen the Commission 's negotiating position with the Council , which in essence wants voluntary modulation as a blank cheque for managing Community expenditure under pillars 1 and 2 .
Secondly , in order to give the Commission the time needed to present an integrated proposal which responds to the real needs and the real rural development support mechanisms , without renationalising the CAP .
Thirdly , in order to provide a time margin for studying the effective and essential possibility of taking up Community resources transferred from compulsory modulation and from the new additional modulation , in order to avoid the return of significant resources from the Member States due to inadequate application of the programmes .
Commissioner , there is already a timetable for evaluating the new CAP and its priorities .
We expect the Commission to examine measures for viable , effective , simple and transparent policies which will contribute towards the objectives of rural convergence and development .
You will find my group in agreement with such a policy .
A ceiling on payments and an additional single modulation rate are policies with which we can agree in principle .
However , they will have to be clarified as to their expediency , their added value and the degree to which they help to achieve the objective of rural convergence .
Commissioner , only under these preconditions will the Commission be able to submit an integrated proposal so that , all together , we can save European aspirations and our credibility in the eyes of the citizens of Europe .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , first I would like to thank the rapporteurs , Mr Mulder and Mr Goepel , for their excellent reports .

Voluntary modulation is a bit of an oddity , something which has never been tried before in the EU 's common agricultural policy .
The conclusion adopted by the European Council that a Member State may cut a farmer 's direct aid and marketing payments by a maximum of 20 % was both unexpected and very badly formulated .
The European Council decided that even export aid could be cut .
Luckily , the Commission did not go along with this totally unrealistic proposal .
First of all , the cut would not be based on any objective rules but would merely be the result of high-handedness on the part of a Member State .
It would lead to inequality among farmers and would distort competition .
It would amount to an arbitrary additional tax on farmers .
Secondly , it needs to be made very clear that the cut would not increase resources for rural development in the countries concerned .
This additional funding would not be affected by national cofinancing as contained in the Regulation on rural development .
A Member State could use modulated cash in place of its own national funding and thus reduce it .
It would then of course be a case of a direct payment of agricultural aid to the Member State 's Ministry of Finance .
How could the European Parliament deal with discharge as regards such a transfer of funds ?
Voluntary modulation would entail moving funds from the EU budget 's compulsory expenditure to non-compulsory expenditure .
That would mean that the interinsitutional agreement would have to be altered .
The Council would thus be in violation of that agreement six months after it was concluded .
The Council would therefore not be a reliable partner in the agreement .
For these reasons I warmly welcomed Mr Goepel 's suggestion that Parliament should reject the proposal .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Mulder , we are , today , discussing the second pillar and rural economic development , something that this House , and - if one is to believe its own utterances - the Commission too , regard as important , and even the members of the Council , in their speeches , keep on emphasising that this is where the future of European agricultural policy lies , yet here we are , rejecting a proposal that is intended , to all outward appearance , to put several billions of euros aside for this purpose .

It is not easy to justify this rejection on the basis of the money involved , but the offer being made to us is an improper one .
The powers that have caused it to be made are those who are responsible for rural development falling EUR 20 billion short of the budget proposal made by this House and the Commission ; it is they who have forced through budget cuts come what may - not least to the detriment of this qualitative line - and are now saying : ' OK , you can take 20 per cent out of the first pillar , and then use it to top up what we have taken away from you . '
That is what I call improper .
These powers are no friends to European agriculture , or , indeed , to Europe 's rural areas ; what they are seeking to do instead is to use the agriculture budget as a quarry in the same way as they are trying to do with many other policy areas , but what makes this so very deceitful is that it has the appearance of being a redistribution while not really being one , with the possibility of taking the money out without co-funding , so , in other words , the agriculture budget is , as a whole , more likely to lose something than have anything added to it .
This is in fact not the proposal that the committee made for medium-term financial planning , in which we said that co-funding in the first pillar too would have made it possible for funds to be made available for the second ; we would in fact have been able to restrict the co-funding of the second pillar to 25 % , thus enabling a better flow of funds , but all these proposals were cast to the winds , and now along they come with this figure of 20 % .

The only thing is , Commissioner , that this financial plan has been agreed to by the Commission , and also - and this I have to say with bitter regret - by this House , which has gone along with this extortion in order not to put the European Union 's financial future at risk .
Commissioner , that must not be allowed to hamper us , though , and I will ask you just what you propose to do in order that rural development is not starved of funding .
What are we in this House to do ? How are we , in our groups , to make it clear that rural development can have a future not only through the reallocation of funds , and that this whole budget line must develop its financial arrangements independently , in the same way as the other structural funds have done ?
It is to that question that I would like to have an answer from you , here and now , in order that the Commission , in our next negotiations on this subject , should show its colours more openly and that we , here in this House might perhaps stand up for ourselves a bit more .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( PT ) Mr President , I should firstly like to stress the importance of adopting Mr Mulder 's report , thereby giving assent to the Commission 's proposal to exempt Portugal from the requirement to cofinance the amount of EUR 320 million , in line with the December 2005 Financial Council Agreement .
My country , Portugal , faces known difficulties in meeting the unfair criteria of the Stability and Growth Pact , given the fragility of our economy and the accumulating social problems , especially in rural areas .
Hence the importance of adopting this proposal .
As regards the Goepel report , I wish , secondly , to say that we are in favour of compulsory modulation , accompanied by capping and by the fair redistribution of these funds , and in the new Member States too .
As previous speakers have said , this is not guaranteed in this Commission proposal . We therefore call on you , Commissioner , to reconsider your proposal .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate Mr Goepel on his excellent report , whose views I fully share .
Although the proposed modulation directly affects the old Member States , it is also cause for concern among farmers in the new Member States .
The modulation impairs the vision of stable agricultural rules until 2013 , and will lead to what we fear greatly in the new Member States , that is , a partial re-nationalisation of agricultural policy , which the new , poorer Member States will not be able to afford .
That is the reason for our concern .
Let us adhere to the established agricultural policy rules .
Keeping them stable until 2013 is the minimum of certainty we owe to our farmers .
They have been subjected to too many upheavals in a short time : changes to the support system , liberalisation of agricultural markets , and increasingly stringent norms and standards in various fields .
It is all too much , too soon .
What agriculture needs is clear and stable rules for at least the coming few years .
That is why I support Mr Goepel 's report .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , today 's debate on the voluntary modulation of direct payments once again highlights the different ways in which the old and the new Member States understand the common agricultural policy .
When the old members think of the future of the CAP , they think of the future of agriculture in their own countries , rather than in the enlarged European Union .
Rejecting the Commission 's proposal is the most appropriate course of action .
The claim that it is contrary to the rules of competition and solidarity , threatens re-nationalisations and breaks the promises made to the farmers , is correct .
The point is , why were these arguments not considered when setting out the terms of accession for the new Member States in 2004 ?
These conditions have blatantly undermined competition and the principles of solidarity .
The poorer states , who receive much lower payments , are forced to compete on unequal terms .
Re-nationalisation of the common agricultural policy was introduced in the new Member States , which in 2004 paid as much as 75 % to the first pillar , while the old fifteen members benefit from 100 % EU support .
This is hypocrisy .
The terms of accession were not based on objective criteria , but discriminatory production quotas were imposed which took no account of the potential of producers and self-sufficiency in food production for example , the milk sector .
Support in the most obvious cases ( fruit and vegetable growing ) has been neglected , and no consideration has been given to the extremely low income of farmers in the new Member States .
This mindset is a threat to farmers , to consumers and to the entire economy of the European Union .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Mulder and Mr Goepel on their excellent reports and by saying that I endorse the proposals contained in their reports .

The Council 's decision last December to allow voluntary modulation may lead to distortion of competition between the farmers of different Member States , depending on the percentages of modulation that they choose to adopt .
The fact that there is soon to be a health check on the CAP 2008 , in which we shall be able to discuss capping and the increase in compulsory modulation , is a further reason not to press ahead now with measures such as voluntary modulation , which may bring irreversible consequences .
If this proposal is pushed through , we shall clearly be taking a further step towards renationalising the CAP and dismantling the communitisation of agricultural policy .
Without wishing to underplay the political importance of rural development , I must say that investment in this policy will not be boosted by this measure .
Let me give the example of my country , which returns more second-pillar funding to Brussels than any other country and which , in the EU-15 , already had the largest balance between the first and second pillars , 53 % and 47 % respectively .
Nevertheless , the Minister for Agriculture in my country , Portugal , has already announced the intention to adopt 20 % modulation .
Taking back money from farmers in order to fund the State budget or so that the money can be given back to Brussels will certainly not be the best solution for farmers , and it represents an approach based solely on economic criteria and aimed at using the money for rural development without cofinancing .
With these practical risks , which are already clearly apparent in countries like Portugal - as evidenced by the example I mentioned - it is abundantly clear that , if we are to defend farmers resolutely and to champion a common agricultural policy , we must do all we can to ensure that voluntary modulation goes no further .

( PL ) Mr President , like my colleague before me , I would like to express my support for Mr Mulder 's draft report on exempting Portugal from the requirement to cofinance its national quota of EUR 320 million .
This is a good decision which shows solidarity , and is particularly important in the light of the drought that has hit that country .
I concur fully with Mrs Batzeli 's words on Mr Goepel 's report , but as regards Mr Mulder 's report , and in particular the final section , where the rapporteur criticises the method by which rural development funds are distributed under the current rules , and where he demands that distribution be based on objective criteria , I would like to draw your attention to the following facts .
The new Member States are characterised by significant under-investment in the farming sector and their farmers ' incomes are vastly disproportionate to those in the other Member States .
They are also ignored as regards the fundamental principles of non-discrimination , solidarity and proportionality , and by having to cofinance direct payments from their own budgets , which are much smaller , not to mention the huge reduction of around EUR 20 billion in the pool of funds for rural development for 2007-2013 in comparison to what was promised during the accession negotiations .
Here I must also point out that support for rural development as set out in the strategic Community guidelines should make allowance for the differing structural problems in the fifteen and the ten EU member states , including Bulgaria and Romania .
Particular attention must be paid to ensuring the necessary funding for the new Member States in respect of their huge need for basic investment and the need to secure wide-ranging support for rural development .
Rural development policy offers a range of mechanisms which make it possible to influence the differing needs of European farmers .
However , we need to search further for effective mechanisms for such a policy in order for it to fulfil its aims and to make it increasingly effective for all countries of the European Union .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I too should like to thank our rapporteur , Mr Mulder , for his steadfast work , not only on budgetary issues in general , but also on issues concerning the funding of agricultural and rural policies .
If , in my capacity as permanent rapporteur on the Structural Funds within my committee , I asked to take the floor in this debate on the modification of the ceilings on EAFRD development support , it was to express two things : firstly , a ' democratic ' regret , but also a kind of ' strategic ' wish .
I deeply regret the fact that the European Parliament is being forced to change the ceilings that it has already adopted , and this in order to bring them into line with the decisions taken by the Council .
Furthermore , my ' strategic ' wish consists in pointing out our attachment to the fundamental principles of rural development policy , and the extent of that attachment , because these principles give Europe transparency .
I should like us to remain very cautious when faced with the temptation to make wider use of obligatory cofinancing , which could eventually lead to the renationalisation of expenditure under the first pillar .
Such a decision must not be the subject of a ' go with the flow ' policy , but must be considered as an important issue to be subjected to a clear and democratic debate .
As for the necessary - and undoubtedly justifiable - Christmas ' presents ' given to Portugal , on this subject too I regret that there is no real strategy and I would ask that we define one and that it be the outcome of an in-depth debate .

( PL ) Mr President , the proposal for so-called ' voluntary modulation ' by the Member States as regards direct payments to agriculture will in effect lead to a cut of some 20 % in the funds paid out to farmers , which will be in breach of the norms and procedures prevailing in the European Union .
Exempting farms receiving less than EUR 5 000 from modulation means that only farms under 40 hectares will be covered .
This system , which is on the face of it logical , cannot be cohesive , merely due to the fact that the new Member States , unlike the old countries , are already cofinancing the common agricultural policy by topping up EU payments from their own budgets .
In my opinion , we should aim to eliminate the existing imbalances and introduce new rules and payments in all Member States as quickly as possible .
Otherwise regional inequalities will intensify .
I would like to remind this House that it was we Polish MEPs who warned of the consequences of approving an EU budget of just 1 % of GNP and cutting rural development funds .
( PL ) Mr President , direct payments give many poor Polish farming families a chance to make ends meet .
They have been a way of buffering the increased cost of production since Poland 's accession to the European Union .
Using voluntary modulation to reduce them by as much as one third from 2008 , at a time when they are so low in our country anyway , would cause substantial losses to these farms and families .
The important aim of developing rural areas , to which the money thus saved would be directed , should be pursued on the basis of other funds .
We could restrict regional payments to recipients with a maximum not of 50 , but of 100 , 200 or 500 and more hectares .
Mr President , I should like to begin by congratulating Mr Mulder and Mr Goepel on their reports .
My first point is that this is an extremely bad proposal .
We know how it originated in the Council meeting last December .
I would say to the Commissioner that this is a proposal that will only be implemented in the United Kingdom .
We all know that .
Even the dogs in the street know that .
It has been brought in to help Blair and his government try and resolve their problem .
It will place United Kingdom farmers in an impossible position .
Financially , they will be in a totally invidious position compared to other farmers in all parts of the other 24 EU Member States .
In Northern Ireland it will erode the concept of the family farm , which is the backbone of our industry .
I therefore totally reject this proposal , and will not stand by and allow anyone to hijack farmers ' single farm payments .
This was something that was agreed .
It was promised and it is depended upon .
It is not the fault of our farmers that the UK Government has negotiated such a miserable deal on development of the second pillar in support of the rural economy .
I must say to the Commission , the Council and the UK Government that they should not blame us if now they do not have sufficient funds to support some of their proposals for the rural and environmental development of the countryside .
I can take no blame for this .
It is totally the responsibility of the negotiators .
I must also tell the truth , which is that the so-called negotiators have achieved the worst possible deal , and that they now want to hijack a maximum of 20 % or perhaps even 25 % of farmers ' single farm payments .
Such a proposal must not be agreed to , either now or in the future .
It will turn farmers and other members of rural society against each other .
It is unworkable and will spell the beginning of the renationalisation of the common agricultural policy as we have known it .
It must not be accepted .
This dossier will have to be referred back to committee , and I will call on the Commission not to fall into what is a skilful trap that would set farmers and other rural dwellers at each others ' throats .
We have a duty to reject this legislation .
We must never agree to this covert means of undermining UK farmers and placing them in a position so subservient to the rest of the European Union .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , everyone is familiar with the 2003 CAP reform , which provided for the freezing of the first pillar and the strengthening of the second , namely rural development .
The fact is that the agreement on the new financial perspective - which , I might add , I voted against - runs counter to these two commitments .
Indeed , the rural development package has lost EUR 20 billion in comparison with the Commission proposal , a figure that represents , for the 15 old Member States , 35 % less than the current period .
The proposal for voluntary additional modulation , which is aimed at transferring a maximum of 20 % of the sums from the first to the second pillar and which does not meet any of the criteria applicable to rural development policy , is unacceptable .
I recognise that the European Commission has attempted , in its proposal for a regulation , to manage this tool , but I share the rapporteur 's concerns and I endorse his proposal that it be rejected : the risk of distorted competition is too great if certain Member States choose to deduct 20 % from direct aid and not from other types of aid .
It is unacceptable for this voluntary modulation not to have to comply with the same rules as those that normally apply to rural development , and the risk of the CAP being renationalised is too great .
The funding requirements for rural development policy are , however , real , and I fear more people abandoning our rural areas .
That is why I am calling on the Commission to propose , instead of voluntary modulation , an identical increase in the rate of compulsory modulation in all of the Member States .
I should also like to stress that compulsory modulation currently applies as soon as a farm receives more than EUR 5 000 in agricultural support per year .
The large majority of farms are , indeed , affected .
If we are to have a genuine tool for redistributing aid , we should also take account of other criteria , such as the size of the farm , its dependence on aid , the workforce employed , the standard gross margin , and so on .
Furthermore , if we are to guarantee that agricultural support is divided up fairly , we should think about capping direct aid .
Mr President , I speak on behalf of the UK delegation in my group .
We fully understand the cogency of the arguments in the Goepel report and the reasons for the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development 's voting indications .
However , the approach of successive Westminster governments to EU rural development funding has restricted its availability in the UK .
Our allocation for 2007 to 2013 is only a quarter of what fairness would in principle require .
In default of some further degree of modulation , there would be severe constraints on establishing and maintaining effective rural development programmes , particularly in relation to the environment .
There is also a risk of delays in making some of the payments of which farmers have a legitimate expectation .
I am grateful to the Commission for its willingness to explore the ways in which it might be possible to overcome such immediate practical problems , but that can only be a stopgap .
We need a much longer-term solution .
We therefore call on the Commission , as a matter of urgency , to find a way of redressing the current historical imbalances in the allocation of rural development funding .
As a Scot , I ask that , in any further discussions on modulation , both the Commission and colleagues on the Committee on Agriculture take account of the fact that the levels are of concern not only to Member States but to administrations at sub-state level as well .
( PL ) Mr President , in thanking both of our colleagues for their work , I would like to focus more closely on Mr Mulder 's report .
We are raising a question that affects the mechanism of funding designated for areas inhabited by some 20 % of the population of the European Union , but which are very important as regards secure food supplies for Europe .
We therefore need to do everything to strengthen the position of rural areas and secure the cohesion that we are supposed to provide .
The European Agricultural Fund for Rural Regional Development should also serve this purpose .
This is essential for all countries , including my own country , Poland .
Although today we are debating changes to the regulations affecting Portugal - which I support - we need to stress clearly that this has upset the sequence of things .
First of all the procedure should be set out , and only then the specific financial decisions made .
Therefore , let us treat this as an exceptional situation and look for systemic solutions which , based on as objective and non-discriminatory criteria as possible , will really strengthen European farming .
Any other course of action may end up by destroying European solidarity in this area .
( PL ) Mr President , in order to keep European agriculture competitive , we must maintain the current level of direct farm payments in the old Member States , and not introduce the additional modulation of 20 % .
The arguments put forward by the European Commission are unconvincing , while the proposition does not conform to the principles of the CAP .
The new Member States need more funds for the development of rural areas , for reasons which include reducing the labour-intensity of farming and to speed up the transfer of land from social and small farms to large-scale market farms .
This will improve the competitiveness of farming in the new Member States , mainly through economies of scale .
Instead , what has been done ?
If you remember , the new financial perspective adopted for 2007-2013 cut the rural development funds by 20 billion euro compared to what was proposed by the Commission .
We must apply different methods of support , because there is a distinction between the countryside and farming in the European Union .
Rural areas in European Union countries , including Poland , are poorer than the cities , and need more jobs , the development of services and better environmental protection .
For this reason we need to support farmers and the countryside throughout the European Union for many years to come .

( PT ) I should like to congratulate Mr Mulder on his admirable report and to thank the members of the committee , who voted unanimously to adopt the report .
The decision to exempt Portugal from cofinancing for the amount of EUR 320 million is a fair one and comes on the back of a number of Council decisions aimed at offsetting the recognised difficulties faced by Portuguese farmers in relation to the CAP as it stands , whereby farmers have been manifestly penalised .
This is a way of compensating them .
As for the Goepel report , regrettably I am not able to extend the same congratulations , because this is an eminently political matter and we must use political arguments to discuss it .
We all know that the CAP unfairly works against various Member States , various regions and many farmers , and one way of correcting that injustice is to apply modulation mechanisms .
In the case of Portugal , this distortion is utterly scandalous ; just 5 % of farmers receive more than EUR 5 000 per year .
Consequently , given that voluntary modulation is possible and that compulsory modulation is currently impossible , voluntary modulation is preferable to having no modulation at all .
I therefore feel that the positions that have come to light are deeply inappropriate . I should like to reassure the Commissioner that she is not alone in defending this position in Parliament .
I believe that , in the interests of justice , it is only right that funds be given to the Member States .
I should like to draw Mr Nicholson 's attention to the fact that it is not only the United Kingdom that will apply the measure ; the Portuguese Government has already announced that it will do so .
I feel , therefore , that not allowing the Member States to use this instrument to do the right thing in relation to many farmers who are unable to receive a single cent under the first pillar of the CAP , or restricting their ability to do so , is a totally inappropriate position for Parliament to take .
I say this solely on the basis of political arguments because I have neither the time nor the desire to discuss legal , technical and other aspects of the issue .
( HU ) Mr President , the use of the current Community payments , when placed alongside the decision of the European Council taken in December 2005 , according to which Portugal receives special treatment through an exemption from the cofinancing requirement , raises serious questions about the budgetary decision-making process .
In spite of the fact that there is broad agreement on the exceptional exemption of Portugal from the cofinancing requirement , questions and problems of legitimacy may arise in relation to the horse trading methods of negotiation engaged in by the Council .
Although I do not oppose this one-time concession offered to Portugal , I consider it important that in future no Member State be allowed to benefit from special treatment solely in order to persuade it to support a particular agreement .
On the contrary , equality and transparency are fundamental criteria that should be observed in all circumstances , and at every level of negotiation with the Council .
In future , not only must we prevent these forms of positive discrimination , but since we have committed ourselves to an egalitarian agricultural policy , then the regulation of rural development should not be permitted to rely on exceptions .
We need to put an end to all forms of discrimination .
I agree with the rapporteur that the system should not make any distinctions or exceptions , but that we need a fair , standardised approach that distributes resources on the basis of objective criteria .
However , I do not agree with the rapporteur that it would be a good solution to finance the direct payments in the first pillar , because although this would lessen pressure on the European budget , it would cause serious financing problems for the new Member States , which are in a strained budgetary situation because of the convergence programmes necessary for the introduction of the euro .
As a result , this would further increase inequalities among Member States .
For the same reason , I do not consider voluntary modulation to be the most appropriate solution .
Apart from respecting current agreements , in future we must strive to create a truly united rural policy instead of making further exceptions .
Mr President , I should like to thank both rapporteurs for their reports .
When I reread the Presidency Conclusions , these seven lines of text read worse now than they did almost a year ago .
It is literally a free-for-all for any Member State that wants to take it up and it has no regard for the rules that this House , and indeed the Council itself , had drawn up in relation to rural development .
Voluntary modulation as outlined in this proposal is anything but voluntary , because the farmers certainly do not want it .
Therefore we are misusing and abusing words .
Of course this proposal distorts .
It has to , because it is allowed in one Member State but it may not be applied in others .
We need to look at the impact of this on agriculture generally .
I am also conscious that we are looking towards a health check for the CAP in 2008 and , in parallel with that , a review of the financial perspectives .
I should like to compliment the Commission on trying to make something good out of what is essentially a very bad proposal : the Commission is trying to get rules applied and is insisting that they be implemented ; it is excluding market support measures .

I shall conclude by saying that it is very difficult to make something good out of essentially a poor suggestion , or , to use an agricultural term : you cannot make a silk purse out of a sow 's ear .
I compliment the Commission for even trying to do so .
This is a bad proposal and we will be rejecting it .
( ES ) Mr President , the proposal that we are debating today is unacceptable .
It is unacceptable because it is disintegratory , fragmentary , anti-European , selfish and highly hypocritical .
From the point of view of agricultural theory , it involves cutting 20 % of direct aid to farmers in order to fund rural development and thus fill in holes .
These holes were created because , in the financial perspectives , 1 % is not sufficient to fund the agricultural policies , and as the Member States are incapable of giving more money , they have to take it away from those who were receiving it until now .
It also represents the renationalisation of the common agricultural policy : getting rid of the only truly European policy , the only policy that united European producers .
And not only does it mean renationalisation , but , if we look at the proposal by the Spanish Government to the Council , it means going much further : not only renationalising , but regionalising .
This way everyone will be able to do what they want .
I think that it is part of the disintegratory madness of the socialist Spanish President , who , Mr Parish , also has no one here to defend him , because he , along with all the presidents who signed the financial perspectives and accept this change , do not care at all about the competitiveness of the European agricultural sector and the impact that these measures may have on their economies is of little importance to them .
Therefore , and in defence of European farmers and livestock breeders and of the sector , we will of course reject this proposal .
Mr President , I apologise for not being in the House when I was first called but my travel arrangements went rather awry today .
Voluntary modulation is but fancy phraseology for a very unpleasant practice , namely government grab of farmers ' money .
As Mrs McGuiness has said , there is nothing voluntary about it , certainly in respect of those from whom the money is to be extracted , namely the farmers .
The consequence is a very unbalanced rural development programme right across Europe , both in how it is financed and then in how it is delivered .
That , of course , is then discriminatory against the farmers in those Member States that practice this madness of voluntary modulation .
In my country we are already seeing the consequences , with delays in the intended LFA payments .
Voluntary modulation is something to be resisted .
I welcome the stance of the committee and the stance of this House when it rejects it and I urge the Commission to be robust in forcing a change of policy by the Council on this matter .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I have listened to the debate carefully and with huge interest .
I can only repeat what I said at the outset , i.e. that the Commission proposal is consistent with the European Council 's request .
As Mrs McGuinness rightly said , we have tried to align it as much as possible with the existing rules on obligatory modulation and financing of the rural development policy .
Tomorrow , if - or I should say when - the European Parliament rejects the Commission 's proposal , I intend to raise the issue with my fellow Commissioners in order to consider our position carefully .
That is completely in accordance with the framework agreement between our two institutions .
Thank you , Commissioner , that was very clear .
I thank all those who took part in the debate .
I should also like to thank all the interpreters .
That concludes the joint debate .
The vote will be tomorrow .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 22.45 )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9 a.m. )
Documents received : see Minutes
Debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( announcement of motions for resolutions tabled ) : see Minutes
Decision on urgent procedure
Council Proposal on the conclusion of the Fisheries Partnership Agreement between the European Community and the Islamic Republic of Mauritania - C6-0334 / 2006 -

draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Fisheries . - ( ES ) Madam President , since the Chairman of the Committee on Fisheries , Mr Morillon , is not present , I simply wished to say on behalf of that committee that we are in favour of this urgent procedure .
We believe that it is necessary to speed up the procedure , as the Commission has requested .
The Committee on Fisheries is therefore in favour of this urgent procedure .
( Parliament adopted the urgent procedure )
Presentation of the Court of Auditors ' Annual Report - 2005 ( debate )
The next item is the Court of Auditors ' Annual Report .
I am delighted to welcome the President of the Court of Auditors , Mr Weber , to this House .
Madam President , Vice-President Kallas , honourable Members , ladies and gentlemen , I am delighted to have the opportunity today of participating in your debate on the 29th Annual Report of the Court of Auditors , for the 2005 financial year , at the plenary session of the European Parliament .
I presented this report to the Committee on Budgetary Control in Strasbourg on 23 October and to the Economic and Financial Affairs Council ( Ecofin ) in Brussels on 7 November .
Each annual report from the Court is the culmination of complex and exhaustive audit work performed in situ by our auditors over the course of the preceding 12 months at all levels of the administration of EU resources .
In accordance with the principles of international auditing standards and as corroborated by external experts , the audit evidence of the Court is based on the exhaustive examination of samples of transactions from the individual budget areas and on assessments of the functioning of the internal control systems for expenditure .
Only serious formal errors and errors with financial consequences , inflated expenditure claims , ineligible beneficiaries and expenditure form the basis of the Court 's Statement of Assurance .
One of the Court 's primary duties , and one that it has been required under the Treaty to carry out since its inception , is to perform cost-benefit analyses , the results of which the Court publishes in its special reports .
In addition , the Court 's assessments of the internal control systems , which are required for the annual Statement of Assurance , form an important basis for these cost-benefit analyses .
Allow me now to turn to the Court 's key audit findings for 2005 .
In respect of those areas in which considerable improvements have been achieved , the Court duly recognises the Commission 's success in managing and implementing the change from cash-based to accruals-based accounting .
The Court has reached the conclusion that the consolidated annual accounts of the EU general budget for 2005 , totalling EUR 105 billion , are reliable .
I must qualify this audit opinion , however , in the light of the net overvaluation of assets and the inconsistent application of cut-off procedures .
As regards the legality and regularity of underlying transactions , the Court again provides an unqualified opinion on revenue , funds commitment , EU administrative expenditure and pre-accession strategy , excluding Sapard .
A positive view can also be taken of the Integrated Administrative and Control System ( IACS ) , which covers 56 % of expenditure within the framework of the common agricultural policy .
As in 2004 , the Court confirms that the IACS has , where properly implemented , successfully played its part in preventing irregular agricultural expenditure .
In practice this is the case in the EU15 , with the exception of Greece .
In the new Member States , the implementation of IACS has progressed well , although these systems are not yet fully effective .
As the Court 's detailed audit evidence shows , the remainder of the areas of expenditure , which accounts , in terms of value , for the majority of the EU budget , is still characterised by material errors of legality and regularity in the underlying transactions .
In other words , the Court is once again unable to approve without qualification the expenditure areas , in particular , of agriculture ( taken as a whole ) , structural measures and internal and external policies .
This is the result of the high level of irregularities found , which include inflated expenditure claims , duplicated cost listings , ineligible beneficiaries and / or projects , claims for expenditure not actually incurred and breaches of the rules governing public tendering procedures .
These irregularities are able to occur because the current internal controls on EU expenditure are inadequate .
According to the EC Treaty it is the responsibility of the Commission to ensure that the internal control systems are in place and work effectively in practice at all levels of EU administration .
Not only has the Court found evidence of the inadequate performance of checks on payments under shared management , namely agricultural expenditure and structural measures , but it has also found that the Commission has failed to lead by example in respect of EU expenditure managed directly by it , that is to say internal and external policies .
Thus , in the field of research , for instance , the Commission considerably reduced its checks on expenditure claims in 2005 despite the continuing high levels of error and the inherent risk in this type of expenditure .
The Commission argues that the errors found and reported by the Court are of little import since the various multi-annual correction mechanisms detect and correct errors and irregularities when the programmes are finalised .
The audit work of the Court shows that in practice these corrections are insufficient and that they are not directed towards the final beneficiaries in all areas .
Furthermore , there are numerous shortcomings in recovery procedures .
In the areas of shared management with Member States , for example , the Court 's findings were as follows .
As regards agricultural spending , the financial clearance procedures are much delayed - the last fully cleared financial year was 1998 - and , due to failures in the system , the conformity decisions imposed fines only on the authorities of Member States .
Since , in most cases , excess amounts paid to the final beneficiaries are not recovered , the burden is borne by the national taxpayer rather than by those final beneficiaries who overclaim .
As regards structural measures , the 1994-1999 programmes have still not been completely closed and the Court finds that a number of the programmes that have been closed still exhibit substantial error levels .
Moreover , the Commission closed a number of programmes without making financial corrections despite there being significant reservations in respect of the certified expenditure .
This clearly highlights the risk that errors in intermediate payment claims may not be corrected in practice .
I would like to emphasise the fact that the Court , clearly , welcomes recoveries to the benefit of the EU budget .
However , it must be pointed out that flat-rate financial corrections are made for weaknesses in the control systems of the Member States . As a consequence of this , these corrections do not , as a rule , lead to rectification of the errors of legality and regularity in the underlying transactions at the level of the final beneficiaries .
In the Court 's opinion , there are a number of measures that should be taken to address these shortcomings .
There needs to be a logical chain of effective internal controls based on unambiguous and appropriate rules and on common principles and standards , taking into account risk assessment of the nature of transactions and types of management .
Effective recovery and sanction systems should likewise be applied in all areas of the EU budget .
For its part , the Court of Auditors is keen to explore more intensively areas of common interest with the national audit institutions .
For the meeting of the Contact Committee of the Heads of the Supreme Audit Institutions in Warsaw next month , the Court has suggested extending current levels of cooperation to cover assessment of internal control systems in the Member States .
The European Union is facing renewed challenges in the shape of the rules of operation , the completion and closure of the current structural funds spending programmes and the opening of the 2007-2013 programmes , as well as the imminent accession of two new Member States .
Allow me to conclude by setting out how EU financial management should approach these challenges .
The Commission , together with the authorities in the Member States , must ensure that there are efficient and reliable internal control systems across all levels of EU administration ; that these systems , in turn , include sufficient checks which are properly carried out , reported and followed up ; and that the systems in question are based on simplified regulations governing EU expenditure .
We should all be aiming for a European Union which has its budget under effective control for the benefit of its citizens .
Thank you for your kind attention .
Vice-President of the Commission .
( ET ) Madam President , Mr Weber , ladies and gentlemen , I presented my initial position concerning the annual report to the Committee on Budgetary Control on 23 October .
The committee is presently actively taking follow-up action and correcting the errors that have been identified .
On the day after the Court of Auditors ' Report was published , the committee sent a letter to the Member States , in which it asked them to present comments and clarifications concerning errors identified in the countries concerned , and eliminate those errors .
Thus we will take the conclusions of the Committee on Budgetary Control into consideration fully and promptly .
Like you , however , the committee has also contemplated the political significance of the report after its publication .
It is clear that the above-mentioned report is not yet a general positive statement of assurance .
As Mr Weber , the President of the Court of Auditors , said , the Court submits a statement of assurance concerning the ' legality and regularity ' of expenditures , obligations , pre-accession strategy expenditure , administrative expenditures and common agricultural policy expenditures that are part of the Integrated Administration and Control System .
The Court of Auditors does not , however , present a positive statement of assurance concerning other areas , for instance research programmes and structural funds .
The main reason for this is that the Court of Auditors has found too many errors in the sampling of transactions in these areas .
As Mr Weber stated , the cause for these errors is ' simple negligence or oversight , poor knowledge of the complex rules and presumably also fraud connected with the EU budget ' .
I think that the criticism in the area of research programmes that was presented as a result of last year 's control is , unfortunately , justified .
The reduction of the number of auditors in this sensitive area by nearly half , and our recovery procedures should be more rapid and more forceful .
It is true that we failed to notice many errors that the Court of Audits later detected .
I believe that in both this and other areas , the poor knowledge of complex rules is the main cause of errors .
Frankly , I think the Commission has done too little too slowly to simplify and clarify the rules and guidelines .
We are addressing these questions in the Action Plan and in proposals for the new programming period .
We welcome the continued attention and advice from the Court on how to improve the situation .
I would also like to look at the topic of fraud .
How much fraud is there in the performance of the European Union budget ?
Any suspicions of fraud will be investigated thoroughly by OLAF , as witnessed by the two cases recently reported in the media in connection with the Chernobyl project and the Office for Infrastructure and Logistics in Brussels .
Yet is the entire European Union budget ' riddled with fraud ' , as some journalists write year after year ?
Let me quote from the report on the management and auditing of EU funds published yesterday by the UK 's House of Lords .
The report finds that ' much of the coverage in the press suggests that there is a significant culture of corruption in Europe 's institutions .
Our investigation has uncovered no evidence to support this suggestion ' .
Based on data from the Member States , the Commission possesses fraud estimates concerning two areas in which spending is greatest - agriculture and regional aid .
These estimates show that 13-15 % of notified irregularities are cases of suspected fraud , corresponding to 0.05 % of the expenditures of agricultural funds and structural and cohesion funds .
Last year the Commission wrote off EUR 90 million as irrecoverable financial losses , representing some 0.09 % of the budget .
Thus the rate of fraud is marginal .
That does not , of course , mean that we should not seriously combat each specific case .
This also appears to be confirmed by the Court 's audit work in 2005 .
Of all the information , audits and about nine hundred sampled transactions the Court looked at in 2005 , in only four cases did the Court have cause to suspect fraud or serious violation of the rules and regulations and inform the European anti-fraud office ( OLAF ) .
After analysis , however , OLAF was unable to confirm any of the fraud cases of which it had been informed .
However , the Court traditionally has once again provided useful data that is useful to OLAF in its operational work .
Mr Weber , Madam President , now that these comments on our weaknesses , the need for simplification and the level of fraud have been presented , I presume the discharge authority would also like to assess the impact of the errors on the ' price-quality relationship ' .
The Court of Auditors ' report ( page 138 ) reveals that the Court audited 95 projects funded from structural funds , and found significant errors in 60 of them .
Does this mean that two thirds of structural funds has been lost or wasted ?
Does this mean that the objectives of these projects have not been achieved ?
It clearly does not .
Some ground-breaking research may have been done without all the necessary paperwork , and conversely , one can find projects that were brilliantly executed in terms of the formal rules , and all the paperwork was done , but the objectives were not achieved .
Unfortunately the report gives no information on the true impact of the Community funding .
Thus one wonders what conclusions Parliament and the ordinary citizen in Member States can draw based on the Court 's overview of the errors in structural policies .
The Court often states that it is only a messenger , and that the Treaty obliges the Court to give a statement of assurance on the whole budget each year .
It does this through its samples of transactions and other audits .
It tests compliance with the rules .
This work , the Court does professionally , within the limits of its human resources .
Who , though , then evaluates the impact of these errors on the achievement of policy objectives ?
On what basis should Parliament make such evaluations ?
After all , together with Council , you are the budgetary authority and have the final word on future budget allocations .
The Court 's report should offer you a basis for evaluating the effectiveness of budgets approved in the past .
In this perspective , I think one should invite the Court to evaluate how significant an impact the errors have had .
We know the Court has the expertise to do this .
It does this kind of ' price-quality ' evaluation in special reports , which we highly appreciate .
So why is such analysis absent from the annual report ?
For the Commission , sound financial management means reaching policy objectives in an efficient way and at a reasonable cost .
It necessarily takes a multi-annual view of each aid programme , and ensures that the expenditure on control over the programme is in balance with the costs and benefits .
The Commission is well aware that few university professors who apply for funding for research programmes are qualified accountants , and it knows that some will make mistakes in their applications for EU funding .
Should the funding of research stop for this reason ?
Absolutely not .
We reduce the scope for error , but live with what remains .
In terms of choices , there is clearly something missing between a negative DAS and a positive discharge .
The Treaty - Article 248.2 of the Treaty on the European Communities - requires the Court to assess the soundness of financial management .
Could it not also assess whether , in a given year , the Commission has indeed taken the steps necessary to ensure value for money ?
This would not simplify the Commission 's task , but it would give us all a clearer point of view !
You may think this sounds too radical .
Perhaps it is , but the UK House of Lords goes even further in a very serious report published yesterday .
The House says that ' substantial improvements are needed to the methodology underpinning the Statement of Assurance ' and proposes , among other things : that the Court ' should distinguish clearly between irregularity and fraud , publishing separate figures for the level of fraudulent transactions and administrative mistakes ' ; that ' the Statement of Assurance should focus on giving a detailed summary of financial management in each of the spending categories and Member States ' listing those Member States demonstrating poor management of European funds ' .
The Commission will carefully study this interesting report .
Allow me also to touch on the issue of recoveries , or ' clawbacks ' .
In this year 's DAS statement , the Court appears to cast doubt on the relevance of clawbacks for the DAS , arguing that recoveries do not right wrongs , nor do they dissuade the final beneficiary from making errors .
This Commission thinks this does not fairly represent the actual situation .
Every year , very significant amounts are clawed back by the Commission from Member States and by Member States from the final beneficiaries .
This system contributes to the effective protection of the Union 's financial interests .
It has a preventive effect , by giving Member States an incentive to improve their management and control systems , to prevent , detect and recover irregular payments to final beneficiaries .
We - actually the Member States - should receive the credit for that , and it should affect the DAS declaration as well .
I would like , Madam President , to continue on a more positive note .
The Commission has established working relations with many national audit offices and found a positive attitude towards auditing EU funds in shared management .
I am very encouraged by the announcement made by President Weber that the Court is intending to propose joint audits with these national audit offices , starting with the areas of Structural Funds and financial corrections performed in Member States .
Indeed , we could much more effectively convince Member States to take more responsibility for spending from EU budget , if the Court were willing to work with - and eventually use - the results of audits produced at the national level .
I would like to end with a comment on some of the good news in the Court 's report .
Its President , Mr Weber , has pointed out that ' the Commission successfully implemented the new accounting system with notable rapidity , and it now offers additional key information that is significantly more complete than that provided through the previous cash-based system ' .
We are proud of this achievement .
To sum up : the DAS is once again negative .
The Commission regrets this .
It will correct the errors made and take further actions to correct systemic weaknesses , as announced in the Action Plan for an Integrated Internal Control Framework .
In acknowledging that there is still much work to be done , the Commission also notes that important progress is made every year and that the overall management of EU funds is sound .
It is under control , but there is further scope for simplification of complex rules .
Together with my colleagues , I look forward to the more detailed sectoral discussions in the discharge hearings ahead .
Finally , the Commission would like to re-emphasise that there is a missing link between the list of errors reported by the Court and the discharge procedure .
The Commission would welcome an audit approach which also looks at effectiveness or ' value for money ' .
We believe this would assist the discharge authority in carrying out its important task .
Thank you for your attention .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , President Weber , Commissioner , this year we are once again being presented with the report by the Court of Auditors on the management of the Community budget and , this year once again , the European Parliament will pay the greatest possible attention to it , since it represents the most credible and reliable reflection of the state of the European public accounts .
As the Commissioner responsible for Agriculture , Mrs Fischer Boel , said yesterday , we are genuinely going to subject the Union 's finances to a proper health check .
I do not intend to demand that the institutions take responsibilities that go beyond their particular competences .
The Court of Auditors plays its role , often with little cooperation from the Member States and their national control institutions .
I hope that Mr Weber will achieve in Warsaw what we have not been able to achieve over all these years .
Despite its defects , the European Commission does an extraordinary job , an extremely difficult job , given its lack of resources and the huge quantity of work .
We do not therefore want this report to become an object of controversy , but rather a genuine instrument for improving public accounts .
The Council and the Member States also have their own responsibility , since , with the current institutional architecture , it is difficult to go any further with financial control of the budget and the execution of spending .
Previous speakers have already said it : 80 % is spent in the Member States but we do not even get the Finance Ministers in those Member States to declare the reliability of spending .
There still remains much to be done , therefore .
Amongst other things , I intend to use ' value for money ' as a basis for the cost-benefit analysis .
The guiding principle of our report will be good financial management .
We shall attach great importance to management , both shared management and direct management and decentralised management , and to the recovery of funds .
Finally , Madam President , we would like to see a new approach to the statement of assurance , but we shall talk about that over the coming months .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DA ) Madam President , those of us in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament too are , of course , unhappy about the fact that it is now getting on for many years in a row that the Court of Auditors has not been able wholeheartedly to approve the EU accounts and to give a positive statement of assurance as to their reliability .
We should like to begin by , of course , emphasising this but , at the same time , also saying that , although there are many points of criticism , we are working in a balanced , progressive and proactive way with a view , of course , to solving the problems .
It is not only a question of criticising . It is , first and foremost , about discovering what specific type of problems we are facing and how we can solve them .
We think there is good reason to commend the Court of Auditors on its detailed report .
We in the Socialist Group have on many occasions asked for further details .
We have sought a higher degree of differentiation in relation to the various types of error .
This has been provided , but the situation is still not good enough .
We might have wished , for example , for more of a distinction to have been made between what is , factually speaking , fraud and what are , factually speaking , errors .
Praise is due to the Commission for introducing a new accounting system : the integrated financial control system for agricultural expenditure .
There are quite a few areas in which progress has been made , but there are , of course , also grounds for criticism , especially in relation to internal policies , where the Court of Auditors ' report shows that things have in fact deteriorated since last year .
We shall , of course , use the discharge procedure to look more closely at these matters , to demand some answers and , presumably , also to look ahead and come up with some better proposed solutions .
We in the Socialist Group earnestly call on Commissioner Kallas and the Court of Auditors to continue their cooperation with a view to solving these problems in the best way possible .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , this debate is one we have been having for many years , with a number of recurring themes .
Yet again , there is no Statement of Assurance , much to the discontent of everyone who is well disposed towards European cooperation , and yet again , it is not entirely clear why this should be .
Every year , we ask the Court of Auditors for more detailed information and every year , we are faced with those typical phrases in the report , of which I should like to quote you a few : ' The Court of Auditors has concluded that generally , where CAP spending is concerned , mistakes of material interest still occur ' .
With regard to the structural funds : ' For both programme periods ( 1994-1999 and 2000-2006 ) , the Court of Auditors has concluded that spending was not free from irregularities of material interest ' .
Indeed , we have been asking for high-risk and low-risk budget components for years .
Is it not possible for the Court of Auditors to be a little more precise and , among other things , to specify what error percentages would be acceptable ?
This would allow us to measure any improvements that are made .
I get the impression that the Commission is becoming a little more assertive , and I see that as totally justified .
It is not only a matter of bookkeeping , but also a matter of effectiveness .
It is unfortunate for this Parliament that neither the President of the Court of Auditors , nor Commissioner Kallas have spoken one word about the new financial perspectives .
This is new .
We would ask that someone who carries political responsibility at a certain level would issue a statement of assurance annually .
For Parliament , the question is essentially : How does the Commission intend to do this ?
It is unfortunate that the Commission has given no indication of this , and that the Court of Auditors , for that matter , has not mentioned it either .
Since it forms part of the multi-annual budget , it is up to the Member States and the Commission to implement it .



on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( NL ) Madam President , Mr Weber , Commissioner Kallas , I am , above all , grateful to the Court of Auditors for the report , which I regard as a sound one .
I also think that the standard of its editing is continuing to improve .
The report has been written in clear language and , above all , has recourse to ' naming and shaming ' , something I appreciate enormously .
We are facing a special discharge , because this is the first budget year for the whole of which , the enlarged Union has had 25 Member States , and that falls entirely within the current Commission 's remit .

In that sense , I have to say that I am a little surprised , even shocked , about the rather defensive speech Commissioner Kallas gave here today - shocked , because when he came into office , he was the very man who stated on this platform that , during his tenure , we would at last see a positive Statement of Assurance being issued .
What do we see now , though ?
The Court of Auditors ' criticism of key components of the budget remains unchallenged , and Mr Kallas goes into the defence with a report , which I read last night , and which is actually worth reading , from the House of Lords .
This is not , of course , the right way of going about things .
Having read the Court of Auditors ' report , I can tell Commissioner Kallas that it contains very specific elements .
For example , the integrated management and control system for agriculture works perfectly for those Member States that apply it .
Greece does not .
This was already mentioned in last year 's report by the Court of Auditors and was an important component in Mr Mulder 's discharge last year .
What have you done about this since then ?
What have you done to call Greece to account ?
According to the same report by the Court of Auditors , there are serious problems involving export refunds .
In Denmark and the Netherlands , exporters can simply seal their lorries without customs officers having to be present .
What have you done to counter this ?
These are , after all , specific questions , and there is no need to adopt a defensive stance .
I have two specific questions for Mr Weber .
The first question is : On 7 November , when you addressed the Economic and Financial Affairs Council , did you finally make it clear to the Ministers that it is vital for them to sign off their accounts ?
Secondly , will you entertain the request made by the House of Lords that a black list should finally be drawn up of Member States that do not manage European funds very well ?
I should like to have an answer to both those questions , Mr Weber .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( NL ) Today , Parliament has the pleasure of discussing the enlightening report by the European Court of Auditors about the spending of European funds in 2005 .
Once again , the auditors are not impressed .
There are still too many errors that are too substantial and too structural in the way in which European funds are spent .
In that sense , this report is not very different from its eleven predecessors .
What is different , though , is the reaction to the Court of Auditors ' negative verdict .
European institutions , the Commission among them , would formerly indulge in regular sessions of mea culpa and promises of improvement .
This time round , the Commission has mounted a full-on offensive , and the Court of Auditors is being accused of being overly critical and having produced an ambiguous report .
They even claim that we must learn to live with some mistakes .
It is a fact , however , that Europe is the proud owner of 200 000 virtual cows that receive subsidies even though they do not exist .
It is a fact that major errors have once again been flagged in the areas of olive oil , the export subsidies and the structural funds .
It is a fact that , as a result , funds do not end up where they are most needed .
Also , it is a fact that , as a result , the European public is increasingly losing faith in the Union .
A grown-up institution should be able to use criticism to its advantage .
The European institutions are demonstrating that they , even at the age of 50 , have not yet reached this level of maturity .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( SV ) Madam President , all of us in this House are saying that the Court of Auditors has produced a good report - it is informative and clearer than it usually is .
What does the report tell us ?
Well , it tells us that anomalies are continuing to occur just as much as before , and we have to ask ourselves whether we are to continue living with such anomalies .
What we have here is , of course , an entirely unreasonable approach to the problems .
What is needed is an examination of how and why things have got into this state and clear proposals from the Commission concerning what is to be done .
Any examination of this nature would necessarily lead one to observe that most of what goes wrong has to do with the agricultural policy .
There are , besides this , very many other reasons to change the agricultural policy , in fact to do away with it all together .
If that happened , a very large proportion of the problems that we see in this context would simply disappear .
I would nonetheless still like to remind the House that it bears a very great part of the blame for the EU losing its good reputation among the peoples of Europe .
This House always votes to back everyone up but in practice never insists on responsibility .
It was pathetic to see the leaders of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats standing here in Parliament , practically in tears , telling us that they felt compelled to postpone the granting of discharge to Parliament itself as a result of the scandal relating to the buildings here in Strasbourg .
Despite the fact that I pointed out that discharge should not be granted to the Committee of the Regions , it was granted anyway .
We cannot go on like this .
Madam President , the Court of Auditors has confirmed there is no independent audit of any part of these accounts , including the treasury function , which sometimes sits on a pile of EUR 20 billion or more .
I would like the Court to explain precisely how many years it has carried out a full and specific audit of the treasury function , and would also like confirmation as to how frequently , such as once annually , it might undertake such a task in the future .
The Court has also confirmed that EU funds are held in the individual Member States before being allocated for use there .
The cash flow and interest-bearing consequences of that are important and hitherto unknown .
Net contributors like the UK and Germany are at a disadvantage , because a large proportion of their funds are stored in recipient countries .
The French , on the other hand , are always holding the funds of net contributors and routinely earning interest on the overnight money markets .
How much money has been lost to British and German taxpayers through the use of this system ?
Finally , I should point out that I have been asking Mr Weber these questions for over six months , and still await a reply .

( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , as well as for the control of the Commission 's budget , this House is responsible for monitoring the budgets of what are termed the ' other ' institutions , and if they are to be given a positive discharge , it must be clear that they have used European taxpayers ' money properly .
It is at this point that we have a number of things to discuss .
If we take our monitoring role seriously , we also have to audit those items of expenditure that we formerly disregarded , for example , the Council 's common foreign and security policy - and I regret that the Council is not present today to hear me say this , for it is in close cooperation with the Chairman of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Mr Brok , that I am , quite deliberately , making reference to this policy area today and making a demand for transparent cooperation on the part of the Council .

There will be several issues in relation to the Committee of the Regions in which closer examination will be required ; the ones I would give as examples are the failure to implement the internal auditor 's recommendations and the questionable use of the weighting , not to mention the wholly inadequate consideration of this topic by the committee itself .
The buildings policies of the Committee of the Regions , the European Economic and Social Committee and of the Court of Justice raise issues that also have to be addressed , and there are many other matters to be sorted out .
OLAF , our anti-fraud office , has also exercised an effective monitoring role with respect to the institutions over recent years , and I wonder why it is that neither the Ombudsman nor the Data Protection Supervisor have as yet concluded an agreement with it .
These bodies , too , will have to answer that question .
I call on all the interested parties to answer the questions in a transparent manner , to play their part in enabling this House to get an all-round picture and to work together in devising ways of improving things .
Only if this is done will we be able to give discharge for 2005 .
( HU ) Madam President , the report by the European Court of Auditors , which , as in previous years , is the result of very thorough , high-quality work , states that the expenditure of the European budget has been carried out essentially with legality and regularity .
I wish to emphasise the significance of this statement because once again this year , as in the past 12 years , the Court is unable to give an unqualified positive opinion .
The reason for this is that some 80 % of the European Union 's budget is spent under the system of joint responsibility by the Member States , where the Court of Auditors has , in the course of its very thorough inspections , found fairly high levels of error that have a financial impact .
This does not in any way mean that all expenditures of the Union 's budget are burdened with error , nor can these errors be interpreted as indications of fraud .
In its initial reaction , the European Commission objects to the methodology of the Court of Auditors , but continues to set as its goal a positive DAS by 2009 .
To this end , it has launched a process of reform , within the framework of which it has developed an integrated internal control system ; the introduction of a goal-oriented budget management can also be counted as a significant step forward .
Now that the Member States have recognised , at the behest of the European Parliament , that the declarations they are being asked to provide are necessary , we can look forward to a very successful Court of Auditors .
Madam President , I am tempted to ask you simply to read the speech I made last year .
The comments from the President of the Court of Auditors sum it up very neatly .
Overall , the situation has not substantially changed since last year .
In fact , the Court 's press statement makes it abundantly clear that nothing has changed , with comments like ' due to continue in high levels of error ' and the pièce de résistance , ' errors with a financial impact are found too frequently for the Court to conclude that all is well ' .
The only real difference this year is that the Commission has been more strident in denying its responsibility for the mess .
I must thank Commissioner Kallas for providing me with the rib-tickler of the year , when he said that the perception of fraud in the EU finances is ' highly unfair ' and that the spending of money in the EU is under tight control .
Yes , and Santa Claus really does come down the chimney !
Blaming the nation states for most of the fraud is an easy way out .
The Commission is supposed to enforce the rules and oversee spending .
Therefore it must take the blame for all those invisible cows in Slovenia , a country that has only been a member for two years but has quickly learnt to play the system .
Nothing has been learnt and the mistakes go on being repeated .
( ES ) Madam President , as the Court of Auditors ' report says , we have made progress in many areas .
I would like to thank it for its report . But there is one area in which we have not made any progress : in pointing to Member States individually .
We are a group of twenty-five and we cannot just give one mark for the whole of the class
The 300 pages of its report contain references to Greece , but you have never said which Member States are mainly responsible for our not achieving the target or - if you do not just want to be hatchet men - which Member States are doing well or are greatly improving .
Other institutions do it : the European Central Bank points to individual Member States by name .
You are not an assembly of diplomats defending national interests .
In your press communiqués , you must point out , amongst other things , which States are doing things well and which are not .
The Finnish Presidency is not even represented here , but on the basis of the report by the House of Lords , a report for which we have great respect , I am going to ask , on behalf of the group that I coordinate , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , for an initiative report to look into the Court of Auditors ' methodology .
I well remember how one of its members , the Belgian member , Mr Pinxten , took his post without giving up any of his economic or political responsibilities .
In the end , when he was threatened with being brought before the courts , he had to leave by the back door .
That shameful episode was not unfortunately the finest hour of the Court of which you are the worthy President .
I would like to say one thing to Vice-President Kallas .
In your speech to the Committee on Budgetary Control on the 23rd , you said that 2 100 million had been recovered .
You criticised the auditor harshly - I do not know whether that is the best you could do - but I would like you to specify , if possible , which policies , programmes and Member States that 2 100 million recovered relates to .


( DE ) Madam President , I want to congratulate the Court of Auditors on a good report , which holds up a mirror to quite a few things ; the only thing is that certain people do not want to look at it .
I have to tell Commissioner Kallas that it is not acceptable that the new Commission , acting on the ' shoot the messenger ' principle , should close its ears to the bad news from Luxembourg .
If we re-read the treaties , we will find that they state that the Commission - and nobody else - is responsible for the implementation of the European budget .
Yet I , Commissioner Kallas , read everywhere references to things for which you are not responsible , for the agencies , as you yourself say - and we will have more to say about that - or , for example , for Greece 's failure to implement an integrated administration and control system ( IACS ) ; everywhere , the Commission is disappearing from the scene , and that is something that - since we have to deal with the new Commission for the first time - we will have to have serious discussions about .
Commissioner Kallas , you must start taking on responsibility , or else you are in the wrong job .


Madam President , I would like to start by expressing my thanks to the Members of your House who have had some very friendly things to say about our report , in particular to Mr Staes , Mr Lundgren , Mr Pomés Ruiz and Mr Bösch .




If I may come back to Vice-President Kallas , he has lamented the constant focus in the media on the subject of fraud .
I can assure you that , together with the many of your Members who have spoken today - among them Mr Jørgensen , Mr Fazakas and Mr Titford - we are giving the Commission our wholehearted backing .

It is not acceptable that the same old tune - ' fraud , fraud , and more fraud ' - should be playing all the time ; it is unjustified , it is damaging , and it is something we can do without .
We do have rules .
Let me now return to the second aspect , that being the recommendation from the British House of Lords , on which Mr Kallas believes we should act .
We have a system .
Our report cannot confirm that fraud has been committed ; that is for judges , rather than the Court of Auditors , to determine .
We will , though , look carefully at the report from the House of Lords , which reached us only around yesterday lunchtime .
I myself had a hand in an agreement we reached with the Commission , according to which , if we suspect that fraud is in play , the matter is passed on to OLAF .
As I have already said , the procedures are subject to rules .
I can wholeheartedly endorse what Mr Garriga Polledo said ; collaboration with our sister authorities is vitally important , and we will take with us to Warsaw your best wishes , for which we are grateful .

Mr Mulder asked why it is that the accounts have once more not been approved without qualification , and the answer to that is quite straightforward .
It is that the transactions to which the accounts refer are still , to a large degree , not subject to appropriate risk management .
Only as and when they are will it be possible to give a positive Statement of Assurance .
Here , too , though , the incidence of errors would only result in the media once more putting the spotlight on fraud .
I am much obliged to Mr Staes for pointing out that a positive Statement of Assurance would be one result of improvements in the internal auditing systems , and for citing a number of examples ; I can do no other than endorse what he said .
I expressed myself very forthrightly before Ecofin , and the British House of Lords has highlighted a number of problems , among them countersignature and the blacklist .
We received their report yesterday and must first examine it very closely .

I will respond to Mr Mote 's comments by saying our concern today is with the Statement of Assurance , although the great importance of the matters to which he alluded is not in doubt , and I am quite happy to continue with him the dialogue on which we have already embarked .
I have now answered , in essence , most of the questions put to me .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Madam President , I should like to thank all the Members for their remarks .
This is just part of the process , and next week will see the start of more detailed hearings on the implementation of our budget .
In response to some of the remarks , I would like to say that the Commission is not pointing the finger at anyone .
It is seeking to achieve an accurate picture enabling adequate , balanced evaluation of the implementation of the European budget .
We are fully responsible for everything we do , and we are willing to bear that responsibility .
However , it would be unrealistic to expect , in response to an analysis of the implementation of the European budget the thrust of which is that the Commission is bad , for the Commission to say that it is not bad , but even worse .
That would be inappropriate , although we fully recognise our weak points .
Internal policy issues will be the most vulnerable area of our 2005 activities .
During the three budgetary discharge processes in which I have been involved , I have seen real improvements and I know what can be done to improve the situation further .
We will do our utmost to improve that situation , and are looking for comprehensive , adequate professional evaluation of the implementation of the EU budget in all its aspects , be this its achievements or weaknesses , errors or fraud , etc .
It is our aim and desire to show everybody that although the machinery is huge and could be improved , things are not bad at all .
Being familiar with the experiences of Member States in the sphere of public administration , and knowing what happens in different Member States and in other international organisations , I can state that things are indeed not bad at all .
It is our desire for the general public , Members of Parliament and the Court of Auditors to also see this side of our activities .
Concerning Mr Mulder 's question on the financial perspective and the idea of increased participation by Member States in this process - the question of national declarations - I welcome the change in stance .
When we started discussing this issue , only one or two Member States shared the attitude that Member States could take more responsibility .
That attitude is changing but , as I know from my limited experience in European affairs , this will obviously take time .
We are pleased that the Member States have agreed to provide a summary of the declarations of paying agencies , which is a step forward , and we are working with the Member States to take things further .
Regarding the declaration itself , I fully share the opinion of the Court of Auditors that this will not solve everything per se .
It is part of the much broader issue of systemic and structural control and audit , which should bring the expected results .
Let us therefore discuss every aspect and not omit anything from the scope of our discussions .
Let us also discuss the question of methodology and our actions and weaknesses .
Let us hold a comprehensive , professional and adequate discussion on this issue , and then we will all be happy .
Madam President , I was interrupted in the middle of my speech because apparently you were not correctly informed of the amount of time available to me .
I was unable , therefore , to make what I believe is a very important point and draw to the attention of this House other words that are included in the House of Lords ' report published last night , which say - and Mr Kallas omitted to mention them - that the Commission should focus on requiring officials and existing audit bodies to take responsibility for their systems and accounts , and that this process should culminate in the requirement for the Secretary-General of the Commission to sign an assurance that the Commission 's annual accounts are true and fair .
That seems to me to be one of the most important statements we have yet had on the process of improving standards in this House , and I wish to make sure it is fully understood .
You were speaking on behalf of your group , which was given one minute 's speaking time in this debate , and so it follows that I interrupted you at the right moment , and it is not right and proper that you should now , as it were , be using points of order to secure yourself even more speaking time .
Madam President , I would just like to ask Commissioner Kallas something for clarification .
He was a little ambiguous in his answer to my question , so I would just like to ask him again : when will the Commission remind Member States about the obligations in respect of the financial perspective ?
Vice-President of the Commission .
Madam President , we already reminded Member States of this obligation in our letter to them and we will also do so during the Council meeting when these issues are discussed again .
We are trying to promote the idea and do whatever we can , but , just as in the case of Parliament , there is a limit to what we can do in this matter .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
EU spending shares the weakness common to many large organisations , governments , ministries and international organisations : money is spent over such a range of activities and in so many places that the auditors cannot guarantee that the exact amounts were always spent correctly .
The US federal budget has not had a positive statement of assurance for about eight years .
Britain 's Department for Work and Pensions has not had its equivalent statement for the last 15 years - and its budget is larger than that of the whole EU !
As the UK 's House of Lords reported yesterday , there appears to be relatively little actual fraud on the EU budget .
The auditors have rather found cases of technical irregularities , which normally result in a refund to the EU budget anyway , or a late payment , or incomplete paperwork which gets chased up later .
Sensationalist press articles then classify all these as ' fraud ' , which they are not .
Further progress in eliminating such errors is needed .
I would like to see a system where the annual statements of assurance had to be given to the Commission departments and each of the 25 national governments individually , rather than in one single statement for the whole EU .
( FR ) In its annual report , the Court of Auditors gives a positive statement of assurance on the EU 2005 accounts and congratulates the Commission on putting in place the new accounting system for the fiscal year .
However , as regards the legality and regularity of underlying operations - that is to say , payments to and from the EU coffers - the Court notes that adapted risk management is not always guaranteed when it comes to important areas of expenditure .
Most of these mistakes are the result of ignorance of the applicable rules , ineligible expenses or attempted fraud on the part of end beneficiaries ( farmers , local authorities or project managers ) .
Who is to blame for this ?
Firstly , the Commission , which , according to the Treaties , is directly responsible for the implementation of the European budget .
It has to strengthen the quality of internal control , and procedures must be simplified to prevent non-compliance with eligibility criteria , the double charging of costs and the overstatement of costs .
Lastly , the Member States must also assume their responsibilities , given that 76 % of the funds are spent by national or local administrations .
It is in my view of paramount importance that the Member States undertake to submit their annual statements on how the EU funds that they manage are spent .
Joint Undertaking for the European air traffic management system ( SESAR ) ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Hennicot-Schoepges on behalf of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy on the proposal for a Council regulation on the establishment of a Joint Undertaking to develop the new generation European air traffic management system ( SESAR ) - C6-0002 / 2006 -
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the report by Mrs Hennicot-Schoepges on which you are invited to give an opinion is a thorough-going , high-quality report .
I wish to thank Mrs Hennicot-Schoepges and the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy , together with Mr Bradbourn , the Committee on Transport and Tourism and the Committee on Legal Affairs , for their support for the Commission 's proposal on SESAR , a major European project .
Your report , Mrs Hennicot-Schoepges , coincides with the Commission 's position , and we support most of your amendments .
I shall not go into the details of the debate on all of the amendments that have been tabled , but limit myself instead to a few general remarks .
First of all , I note that Parliament and the Commission take the same view of the strategic importance of major technological and industrial programmes like SESAR and GALILEO .
SESAR is a vital programme for the competitiveness of the European aviation industry .
It forms part of the Community 's technological innovation programme , which lies at the heart of the Lisbon Strategy .
In a sector as crucial for the European economy as this one , it is vital that public bodies and the private sector pool their resources to build together what will become the most efficient , most reliable and safest air traffic control infrastructure in the world .
This public-private partnership requires a clear division of roles , together with transparent procedures , so that potential conflicts of interest can be pre-empted .
The Commission therefore welcomes the amendments tabled by Parliament along these lines .
As regards some of Parliament 's means of intervention , there is a matter of principle at stake .
SESAR is a partnership between the public and private sectors , and the essential prerequisite for private sector participation is that the programme is managed as a business .
Furthermore , and Mrs Hennicot-Schoepges highlighted this point very well in her report , voting rights in the Administrative Board of the SESAR joint undertaking must be balanced and weighted in proportion to financial contribution , which is one of the sound principles of good management in any private business .
It is accordingly difficult to accept Parliament 's amendment aimed at gaining representation for Parliament on the Administrative Board .
As Parliament is the Community 's main budgetary control authority , it cannot perform its monitoring duties and , at the same time , sit even as a simple observer on a Board that it is charged with monitoring .
On a similar theme , the industry is keen for the choice of executive director to be based on objective criteria of experience and technical knowledge , rather than on political criteria .
It is important to acknowledge that the SESAR joint undertaking is an instrument for managing a technological research and development programme and has no regulatory-type role .
Consequently , it would make no sense for Parliament to be directly involved in the process of selecting an executive director of the SESAR joint undertaking .
The Commission does support , however , all amendments aimed at ensuring that Parliament be kept properly and continuously informed about the SESAR programme .
Madam President , I am delighted with Parliament 's work .
I am convinced that a few differences of opinion will not hamper our joint efforts to make this programme a success for the EU .
I should like to add that the whole of our environmental policy will receive a further boost , insofar as SESAR means aircraft being able to take off on time and not needing to be stacked , with the result that energy will be saved and needless carbon emissions prevented .
This is why , from all points of view - passenger safety , energy saving and environmental quality - SESAR is an absolutely vital project .
rapporteur . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are today examining a report aimed at establishing a joint undertaking to develop the new generation European air traffic management system ( SESAR ) .
As the technical arm of the single European sky , SESAR is tasked with adapting air traffic control to new technologies , ensuring the safety and regulation of flights , organising air navigation services and defining the respective roles and responsibilities of surveillance authorities and service providers .
As you said , Commissioner , the project is , on various levels , of paramount importance to the future of European civil aviation .
It is also one of the joint infrastructure projects identified by the 1994 European Council .
We have already lost a good deal of time .
SESAR will be indispensable , given the fact that air transport , which contributes some EUR 220 billion to the European GDP and employs 3.1 million people , is set to more than double in the next 20 years .
Given that , because of its old age , the reliability of the control equipment , whose technology dates back to the 1970s in some cases , can no longer be guaranteed , SESAR will have a major impact on safety .
The same goes for the environment .
Once the project is up and running , it will be possible to make appreciable savings on fuel , due , on the one hand , to the optimisation of trajectories and better use of air space and , on the other , to a reduction in stacking .
The Commission estimates that greenhouse gas will be reduced by 4 % to 6 % per flight .
Passengers will also see their waiting times at airports reduced as a result .
The Commission is proposing the establishment of a joint undertaking .
It is to get off the ground quickly , even before the end of the definition phase , which runs from 2005 to 2007 , and is to receive some EUR 60 million in cofinancing from the Community budget and Eurocontrol .
Between 2008 and 2013 , the joint undertaking will take charge of the development phase with a budget of EUR 300 million per year divided between three partners - the Commission , Eurocontrol and a consortium of private businesses .
Then comes the deployment phase , which will be taken charge of by the industry and which is predicted to last from 2014 to 2020 .
This first public-private partnership in the field of civil aviation will bring numerous job opportunities .
It will also be a major research and development project that may extend into markets outside the Union , provided this does not delay its entry into force .
The enhanced cooperation procedure between our two parliamentary committees reflects the relevance of this project to two areas , namely research and transport networks .
The Commission based its project on Article 171 , meaning that Parliament was not involved in codecision .
I should like to mention , however , the positive spirit of collaboration with the Commission and to say that Parliament will keep a close eye on events and that it will do all it can to help even if it is not represented on the Administrative Board .
The amendments that we have introduced clarify the text as regards potential conflicts of interest .
We also asked the Commission to produce a new document dealing solely with the third phase in order to dispel a significant proportion of the doubts raised by the first project .
SESAR is a project that will serve the citizens ' interests , that will place the European civil aviation industry at the cutting edge of progress and that will enhance our competitiveness .
The industry 's interest in the project justifies its financial involvement , and the distribution of voting rights will have to prevent any cumbersome administrative procedures .
Parliament believes it has done the right thing in keeping open the possibility of creating a levy given that the industry 's contribution , supported by figures , has yet to be confirmed .
All that remains , Commissioner , is to express the hope that SESAR suffers neither the delays that affected Galileo , nor the debacle that beset Airbus , and that it shows that European research , Eurocontrol 's know-how and the capacities of the industries concerned can come together in the interests of progress .
Finally , it goes without saying , Commissioner , that the Member States will have to be prepared to organise the distribution of air traffic control on the basis of technological development .
To conclude , I should like to thank all those who contributed and , primarily , Mr Bradbourn , my co-rapporteur .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Transport and Tourism . - Mr President , the SESAR project is one which will greatly benefit not just Europe 's aviation sectors , but the consumer as well .
When SESAR is launched , airline efficiency will be improved , with more direct routing , less congestion in the skies and greater reliability for passengers .
The environment will also benefit from the system , because it will shorten routes and reduce stacking and thus reduce the CO2 emissions caused by aviation .
However , it strikes me that , with such an important project , it is unacceptable , given that the original single skies legislation was dealt with under codecision , for the implementation process only to be carried out under the consultation procedure .
That surely raises the question as to why the Commission feels it can pick and choose about when to involve the only democratically elected EU institution in the development of such proposals .
More worryingly , the Commission and Eurocontrol are attempting to accrue to themselves 60 % of the voting rights on the Administrative Board .
The SESAR project should be driven by industry , not by bureaucrats .
We cannot expect industry to pay for the development of a project when it will have little control over its direction .
That is why I and the co-rapporteur on the lead committee , on behalf of our group , have tabled an amendment to reduce voting rights , to give industry and the air navigation service providers the incentive to be involved from the outset .
The SESAR project can help shape the future of European aviation .
It can be a positive force for change if it is given the support of all players in the sectors on a fair and equal basis .
I therefore call on the House to support our amendment to give this important project just the direction it needs .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , over the coming years , we will see more traffic on land , on water , and - above all - in the air as well , and more traffic means new problems , and more of them .
The increase in quantity must be managed , the associated health and environment issues must be satisfactorily addressed , and all that will cost a lot of money .
What we need to deal with the issues I have just mentioned is above all intelligent solutions , new technologies and better logistics , and it is on these things that we actually ought to be concentrating today .
Unfortunately , though , we have not got that far yet .
A number of things are already in the pipeline , though , and one that springs to mind is Galileo .
At present , though , we are still concentrating on preparatory matters such as : how the administrative organisation should be structured , what we should do about Eurocontrol , how to involve the private business sector in our project , and much else besides .

I would like to say a few things of an admonitory nature about public-private partnerships ; it is right and proper that we should discuss these and focus on potential conflicts of interest , but we should be doing much more to get the business sector actually involved in our project .

It has to be said , though , that previous experience with PPP models has scarcely ever been really successful .
One exception I would point to - not least because we will be kicking off its successor in a few weeks ' time - is the Marco Polo programme , where we managed to come up with the right mix of incentives for the private sector and the public interest , and that is the sort of thing we should concentrate on this time - more so than we did before .

Quite apart from all that , I want to say how very grateful I am to both rapporteurs for the work they have put in , and that I hope that we will , despite the question as to whether this House should exercise codecision or only be consulted on this issue , head for our goal with concentration and in unity .
Perhaps we will manage to tighten up the timetables a bit .
That would have a very , very beneficial effect .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , I should like to thank the rapporteur for her sterling work on the report on a common European air traffic management system , SESAR .
I agree that there is a need to develop a new generation of European air traffic system so that we might guarantee safe and smoothly flowing air traffic in Europe over the next 20 years .
The current air traffic control systems are outdated and governed unduly by specific local conditions .
They are , therefore , not especially suited to a rapid , reliable and economically sustainable development of air traffic in Europe .
Therefore , SESAR is basically a sound initiative , which will make the air traffic management system in Europe more efficient .
SESAR will mean safer and more efficient transport than is offered under current air traffic control systems , and at a reasonable price .
When , however , it comes to environmental considerations , the Commission proposal sheds insufficient light on the challenges posed by increasing air traffic over the next few years in Europe .
SESAR must not merely guarantee the safe management of air traffic . The environmental advantages must also be present .
I am therefore able to support the amendments emphasising that SESAR must lead to more energy-efficient air routes that require less fuel to be used and are kind to the environment .
Another important consideration is that it be made clear what benefit the Member States are to gain from SESAR , that is to say in terms of property rights to the material and non-material assets created through the SESAR Joint Undertaking .
At the moment , it is not clear what is to happen regarding the rights of ownership of the assets produced through the SESAR Joint Undertaking when the ownership of SESAR is at some point transferred to industry .
It is therefore crucial for the knowledge and assets created through SESAR continuously to be accessible to the constituent members for the purposes of their own , non-commercial product development .
We do not want to end up in a situation in which all the Member States have standardised their technology in a European air traffic management system while , at the same time , the rights to this technology are owned by a private undertaking .
I would again thank Mrs Hennicot-Schoepges for her report and hope that , through our joint efforts , we can launch SESAR within the planned timescale .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her work .
We need a new-generation air traffic management system for Europe to improve air transport safety and environmental performance .
SESAR will deliver what the archaic and fragmented current air traffic control technologies are incapable of .
The SESAR joint undertaking must be established now in such a way that we avoid unnecessary problems and delays further down the line .
The approach of a public-private joint undertaking is still quite a new one and I hope that the Commission will be up-front and transparent on lessons learned from the Galileo joint undertaking .
The SESAR joint undertaking needs to be reviewed periodically to make sure that the teething troubles experienced by Galileo are not repeated .
Parliament , as well as the Council , should be kept informed and consulted on issues such as the accession of new members and the appointment of the executive director .
It was strongly felt in committee that the appointment of the executive director must be made following an open competition and on criteria of competence and experience .
In no way should it be a political appointment or a perk .
The committee also stressed the ongoing importance of Eurocontrol .
Its involvement is essential , given its experience and expertise .
Finally , on the issue of where the joint undertaking should be located , I agree with the original Commission proposal that for practical reasons the seat should be in Brussels .
Opening up the seat as a discussion point would unnecessarily waste time and could prolong the establishment phase of the joint undertaking .
This is a point which will not be lost on those MEPs who deplore the waste of time , money and energy caused by the failure to locate Parliament permanently in Brussels .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , if it is used properly and enters into effect as soon as possible , SESAR will be able to make an important contribution to reducing the gases that are detrimental to climate .
It will be possible , by means of good cooperation with weather services and proper arrangement of flying altitudes and speeds , to reduce not only the numbers of aircraft circling over cities while waiting to land , but also the condensation trails that more recent research highlights more emphatically as causes of climate problems .
Its efficient functioning is dependent on , among other things , the creation of regions of airspace that are well suited to helping to saving on fuel ; it is unfortunate , though , that work on these is progressing very , very slowly , and this is an area in which Austria , like its northern and eastern neighbours , has work to do .

The organisational form was a major topic of discussion in our committee , and I do not believe that Eurocontrol should under any circumstances be marginalised .
There needs to be some central body to defend the public interest - which includes , and must in our view include , such things as climate protection - and Eurocontrol is probably better suited to doing that than the votes of industry alone , and industry 's participation in this area can be ensured by other means .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , air traffic above Europe is gradually beginning to come up against restrictions arising from the large concentration of airports and the need to cope with ever more aeroplanes taking off .
Some of these problems have already been solved by means of the International Civil Aviation Organisation agreement and other legislation adopted at various levels .
The issue of air traffic is solved mainly by means of an international convention on managing medium height air traffic above central Europe , which has yet to enter completely into force .
The SESAR programme should pave the way for significant progress in this matter .
I should like to take this opportunity to raise two questions .
The first concerns the funding of the projects .
I feel that we should be very wary of using private capital , because this is one of the key projects in this area .
It is important , in my view , that the lion 's share of the funding should not come from the private sector .
Funding should , rather , come from Eurocontrol charges and from the EU budget .
A second question which is certainly important and has long been left unresolved is the definition of the parts of the air fleet to which the new air traffic system will apply .
The question of differentiating between aircraft and ultralights remains .
There is a different classification in force in Europe to that in the United States .
I should therefore recommend that the determining factor be defined in the charter of the joint undertaking as an aircraft standby weight of 600 kg .
I believe that harmonising the definition in this way will be beneficial for future negotiations relating not only to air traffic but also to air transport as a whole .
To conclude , I wish to say that my group firmly supports the SESAR project .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for her work .
The problems of air traffic , which is currently growing at a rate of approximately 5 % annually , demand a solution that is quick , comprehensive and effective but at the same time caters for the long-term perspective .
If the necessary steps are not taken immediately , Europe 's airspace will soon be in gridlock .
It is therefore good that we are implementing the joint undertaking SESAR , which will serve aviation management and safe operation of European airports .
I am pleased by the news that the measures will improve the punctuality of connections and air safety , as well as having a positive effect on the environment .
This undertaking should provide jobs for many highly-qualified people .
The cofinancing of this project by the European Union and the private sector is a very important issue .
I hope this project is approved , as it deserves implementation .
It should , however , stimulate compatible solutions in other parts of the world .
We should also continue to search for radically innovative solutions , for example , airborne air hubs .
Mr President , Commissioner , the SESAR is a very good idea , but you will , however , need to tell us directly something that not even you know : what will its scope be ?
Where is Europe 's airspace on the southeast side ?
Do we know ?
We need to determine this space .
A few months ago a Turkish military aeroplane shot down a Greek military aeroplane southwest of Rhodes in European airspace , while a passenger aeroplane from Egypt was flying overhead within eye contact .
Can you imagine what might have happened ?
How , therefore , shall we determine its scope , when the Turkish FIR rather than the Nicosia FIR apply when you pass over the northern section of Cyprus , which is a member of the European Union .
First determine the scope and then we shall welcome the SESAR which , in all events , is designed to speed up passenger movements .
Fine , we shall succeed in the air , but what is happening on the ground when , for various bottles , perfumes and so on , we delay another half an hour so that someone does not take an extra gramme of deodorant .
This is all stupid and ridiculous .
If you want to determine something properly , go the whole way .
( PT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in view of its contribution to employment and to doubling GNI in the next two decades , the new generation European air traffic management system ( SESAR ) will be one of the priorities of the EU and its Member States and a vital factor in meeting the challenges of the decades ahead .
It will deliver security and fluidity in air transport at European and world level , and improve the functioning of the market , competitiveness , environmental impact management and European cohesion .
I should like to mention some important points .
Firstly , the legal basis should not only be Article 161 , but should be based on both Articles 161 and 163 , with a view to increasing and enhancing Parliament 's involvement .
Secondly , as you suggested , Commissioner , with a view to delivering efficient air traffic management and technology , without placing too great a burden on the taxpayer , private initiative , the industry , the operators and the scientific community should be guaranteed a role in the management model , and an absolutely central role should be given to the Commission and Eurocontrol , which are the partners with the biggest public responsibility in terms of financial contribution and participation in the vote .
Mr President , the European Union had to develop this system of air traffic control , bringing together the 40 different networks currently in place in the EU , as a result of the projected increase in the volume of air traffic .
That is why I believe the SESAR system to be of tremendous importance , and I congratulate both rapporteurs on their work .
As an aside , I do not believe that an EU-US open skies arrangement will be possible in the near future , owing to the outcome of the recent elections in the United States .
European governments will therefore have to strike individual agreements with the American Government in this area .
Indeed , a member of the Irish Government has signalled that this is the route it will have to take in order to put in place an aviation agreement .
I would also like it to be put on record that any such arrangement should guarantee the future of Shannon Airport in the west of Ireland , in its present form , owing to its importance to that region as a vital economic hub .
Mr President , I must thank the speakers who have all shown Parliament 's interest in the SESAR project , which will have a highly beneficial effect not only on air transport , but also in terms of environmental quality and energy savings .
I should like to say to Mr Bradbourn that we have chosen the legal basis that we felt was most suitable for the purpose of this regulation .
The objective at hand is to set up a joint undertaking charged with managing a technological research and development programme .
This legal basis is Article 171 of the Treaty , as Mr Fernandez has just said , and this has been confirmed by Parliament 's Committee on Legal Affairs and by the Commission .
I wish to stress the point , as mentioned by Mr Rack , that this is an example of a good public-private partnership ( PPP ) , with , of course , the support not only of Eurocontrol - something on which you insisted - but also of the whole air transport industry , which of course will be the main beneficiary and is therefore very interested in seeing SESAR get off the ground .
Even though this procedure provides for consultation with Parliament , rather than codecision , it goes without saying , Mr President , that I shall make it my business to keep Parliament regularly updated , in a most transparent way .
As Mrs Hennicot-Schoepges , the rapporteur , emphasised , we must of course do everything to prevent any delay to the programmes in question .
This is what I wanted to say .
I extend a warm vote of thanks to Parliament for the invaluable help it has given us in implementing this project which , as I said before , should give the EU the best possible air navigation system .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.30 a.m.
Measuring devices containing mercury ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the report by Mrs Sornosa Martínez , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC relating to restrictions on the marketing of certain measuring devices containing mercury - C6-0064 / 2006 - .


Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking the rapporteur , Mrs Sornosa Martínez , for her work on this proposal for what is a very important directive , forming part of the Community action to deal with mercury , the Community strategy on which was debated in this House only recently .
This has to do with our common desire to prevent more mercury finding its way into the environment , and , in order that we may have no misconceptions about this , what we are talking about here is not just any old poison , but a particularly dangerous one , for mercury and its compounds are highly toxic to human health and the environment .
The object of the directive we are debating today is to prevent new measuring devices containing mercury getting into circulation , and , if we were to succeed in that , we would prevent 30 tonnes of mercury - which adds up to a very considerable health hazard - getting into the environment .


The proposed directive will prohibit outright the placing on the market of clinical thermometers containing mercury , the reason being that alternatives to them have been available for some time .
It will also prevent the sale to the general public of all other measuring instruments containing mercury .
These proposals were put together on the basis of a risk assessment and an extensive impact assessment devised for the mercury strategy , followed by consultations with the industry and with other interested parties .
The proposed directive will not only ensure the protection of human health and of the environment , but also serve to maintain and strengthen the internal market , as harmonised rules for the marketing of measuring devices containing mercury apply throughout the Community .
Members of your House have now tabled a number of amendments aimed at securing derogations .
I agree with you that the marketing of antique measuring instruments should indeed continue to be permitted , ' antique measuring instruments ' being those that are at least 50 years old , and , being in the main collectors ' items , they are , by reason of their value , handled with very great care , traded only in very limited numbers , and the risk of such items ending up in waste is minimal .
I can also support a time-limited derogation for new barometers containing mercury and manufactured by a few small specialised enterprises .
A transitional period of two years will enable these businesses to adapt their production arrangements to the new rules without a disproportionate risk being presented to the environment .
While I regard two years as appropriate , I have to make it clear that there is no reason for mercury to be used in the devices produced by these manufacturers , for they are capable of producing the same results without it , and , under certain circumstances indeed , a better one .
There is no argument to support the idea that newly-manufactured devices of this kind must contain mercury .
It is not the case that new technology needs to be developed first ; the alternatives have been in existence for some considerable time .
These manufacturers must be expected to comply with the demands of European legislation , and I am going to be very strict about this ; two years really should be enough time in which to adapt .
The situation is actually rather different as regards the use of measuring instruments in the health sector .
It has been proposed in your House that there should - subject to a review at a later date - be a derogation from these restrictions for devices for measuring blood pressure , and I do in fact believe that there should be one .
Sphygmomanometers are , in any case , used only in certain medical applications , and are absolutely indispensable in certain medical situations in which measurements are required to be of the utmost exactitude .
We have examined this question in very great depth .
Members of the medical professions regard sphygmomanometers of this kind as indispensable , especially in certain life-threatening situations , and so we should wait until safe and equally reliable alternatives to these devices have been developed before extending the provisions to the health sector .
It follows that we have not reached the end of this process ; on the contrary , more work is needed in this area .
By way of conclusion , I should like to say that the negotiation process was characterised by close cooperation between Parliament , the Council and the Commission , and so the Commission can therefore agree to all the compromise amendments proposed by your rapporteur , that is to say Amendments 12 to 18 .
I very much hope that we will be able to get this directive adopted at first reading .
rapporteur . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we in this House all agree that it is necessary to reduce the demand for mercury in the manufacture of products and to speed up its substitution .
It would be appropriate to introduce Community level marketing restrictions on mercury-containing measuring and control equipment for consumer use and , with some exemptions , in the healthcare sector
We must prevent considerable amounts of mercury entering the waste stream .
In that way , we shall contribute to guaranteeing a high level of protection of the environment and human health , whilst preserving the internal market , as required by Article 95 of the Treaty .
Mercury and its compounds are highly toxic to humans , ecosystems and wildlife .
Initially seen as a diffuse local problem , mercury pollution is now understood to be global , chronic and serious .
As regards a potential blanket ban on the use of mercury in all devices , which is the aim of this proposal , it should be emphasised that the experts the Commission consulted came to the conclusion that hospitals need a high level of accuracy to treat life-threatening conditions such as hypertension , arrhythmia and pre-eclampsia .
Mercury sphygmomanometers provide the appropriate level of accuracy and reliability to ensure patient safety . We are therefore currently proposing that these instruments be exempted from the ban until there are complete guarantees with regard to the functioning of possible alternative instruments .
I would also call on the Commission to adopt short-term measures to ensure that all products containing mercury currently circulating in society are collected separately and safely processed . Otherwise , this Directive will be less effective in practice .
Its dumping in rubbish tips or its inappropriate disposal causes waste mercury to infiltrate waste water and to be dispersed into the environment .
Mercury is therefore found in foodstuffs , posing a particular risk to the aquatic food chain , making consumers of fish and molluscs particularly vulnerable .
You said it , Commissioner : 30 tonnes may remain inadequately treated in rubbish dumps .
Furthermore , I would call upon the Commission to increase awareness within the population , through the organisation of information campaigns on the health risks resulting from exposure to mercury and the environmental problems it may cause , since I fear that the citizens are not sufficiently well-informed about its toxicity .
With regard to the amendments presented , like the majority of political groups , I hoped that there would be an agreement , as there has been with the Council and the Commission , with regard to barometers .
The agreement we have reached relates to the exemption from the obligations laid down in this Directive for scientific instruments containing mercury , such as barometers over 50 years old intended for sale or marketing on the international antiques market .
With regard to the production of mercury for new traditional barometers , we proposed an agreement : that there should be a transitional period for manufacturers to allow them time to conform to the new rules .
Unfortunately , not all of the political groups have agreed to this , although I believe that we will have a sufficient majority in this House to adopt it .
Finally , I hope that Parliament will sign up to the agreement with the Council at first reading , so that it can be applied as soon as possible and so that , in this way , the industrial demand for mercury can be reduced , speeding up its substitution with other materials that are not harmful to human health and do not prejudice the conservation of the environment .
In summary , Commissioner , I entirely agree with what you have said .
I would like to thank the Commission for its work and for the possibility of reaching an agreement at first reading .
Thanks , too , to the Council and to the political groups that have agreed with this proposal .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , may I first of all pay tribute to the work that Mrs Sornosa Martínez has done on this report , even though I do not agree with all of her conclusions .
Nevertheless , we have worked very well together on this .
In March this year the House debated the Commission 's mercury strategy .
It asked the Commission to restrict the marketing and use of mercury in all measuring and control equipment but to allow for some exemptions .
It also called on the Commission to permit the use of mercury by the small number of professional companies in the EU that produce traditional barometers .
Nevertheless , I am sorry to say that the Commission completely ignored Parliament 's wishes at that stage and went on to propose the directive that we are debating today .
This directive will ban the production of all new barometers .
As Members will be aware , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety subsequently adopted an amendment , which I tabled , introducing an exemption for this long-established traditional European art .
Along with Mr Blokland , we have retabled that amendment for plenary to consider .
I would point out to the Commissioner that we are not talking about the general introduction of new mercury into the environment - the vast majority of these makers actually use recycled mercury taken out of the environment in the production of these new instruments .
There are a very small number of SMEs throughout Europe that continue this traditional art , mainly in Belgium , the Netherlands , France , Portugal and the UK .
If this directive is implemented as the Council wishes , those businesses would almost certainly be forced to close , thus eliminating places where consumers can take their existing instruments for repair and for maintenance .
Let us not forget that there are hundreds of thousands of traditional barometers hanging on people 's walls all over Europe .
This directive would of course not affect that , but it could potentially remove places where people could get those instruments repaired and maintained .
The banning of new barometers will not stop pollution ; in fact it could become more prevalent as the general public would have nowhere to take their instruments .
There are also some enormous loopholes in the legislation .
It is only the marketing of new devices that is prohibited .
There is nothing to stop manufacturers from selling new barometers without any mercury , along with a set of instructions on how consumers can fill them themselves .
That is surely more hazardous than allowing them to continue production in carefully controlled and licensed circumstances .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - Mr President , I think the case for this legislation is compelling .
The Commissioner said that there are alternatives to mercury barometers and I therefore support everything my colleague Mrs Sornosa Martínez has said .
Mercury is extremely toxic .
It is bioaccumulative and persistent in the environment and there is no safe exposure level .
I ask the PPE-DE Group to think again .
To Mr Callanan and the Conservatives I say that at your party conference your leader said that you want to replace dangerous chemicals with safe ones .
The Tory Party website says that you are going to do that .
You have to vote to change things and not just say you are going to do so .
I hope that the PPE-DE Group will support this very sensible measure to phase out an extremely dangerous chemical from our environment .
We have given a two-year extension to companies to phase out their production .
That is not what the Council wanted , but we have 25 governments here , experts from 25 countries , the European Commission and the majority of political groups , and I hope that the House will support the report and be consistent with the principle of substitution of dangerous chemicals .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I should like to thank Mrs Sornosa Martínez for her excellent report and her cooperation with all the shadow rapporteurs .
I also want to note the very helpful assistance of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , as well as that of the Commission and the Council in formulating a small number of necessary final compromise amendments .
Mercury , as you will all know by now , is a highly toxic substance that we all want and need to get rid of from our lives and the lives of generations to come , as soon as and as effectively as possible .
The legislative proposal will begin to put into effect the mercury strategy that we endorsed in March this year and will ban or substantially reduce the presence of mercury in various non-electrical and non-electronic devices .
Instruments containing mercury such as the household thermometer will be replaced by more accurate and versatile , quicker and safer measuring devices that do not contain mercury .
As with most pieces of legislation , some differences of opinion were encountered in the examination of this proposal .
Thankfully , a sensible compromise agreement was reached by most groups , but there are certainly still objections from some MEPs .
The problem has been the insistence , mainly by a few English , Dutch and Belgian colleagues , that modern antique-looking barometers manufactured by a very small number of SMEs in England , Holland and Belgium should still be allowed to contain mercury .
This is despite the fact that a two-year transitional derogation period has been allowed after the entry into force of the directive ; despite the fact that , at the end of the two-year derogation period , the Commission is to review the availability of reliable safer alternatives that are technically and economically feasible for use in such instruments ; despite the fact that barometers that are genuine antiques , i.e. more than 50 years old , would be exempt from this directive ; and despite the fact that , if the compromise agreement in respect of barometers falls through , the whole legislative proposal effectively falls and has to go back to the drawing board .
Do not allow yourselves inadvertently to be used by those who might want to kill the legislation as a whole and those who might want to use the issue of barometers to promote their Eurosceptic views .
Please vote in favour of the compromise amendments and help get rid of toxic mercury , for health 's sake .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , mercury thermometers have been banned in Sweden for more than 20 years now .
At long last it is time for the EU to follow suit .
Mercury measuring instruments are the technology of yesteryear . Mercury is a gravely hazardous chemical that we must stop using as soon as possible .
Any claim that mercury is not dangerous is absurd .
Even worse is mercury that leaks , finds its way into combustion plants or in some other way is disseminated and converted in the environment into readily absorbable forms that are yet more harmful to people and animals .
We cannot , for reasons of nostalgia , continue to produce barometers that are environmental hazards .
Anyone who wants to can buy an electronic replica that looks exactly like an old-fashioned barometer .
Alternatively , they can buy a second-hand one , as the directive is about the release onto the market of new barometers .
In the compromise , barometers have been given a two-year reprieve , which is completely unnecessary from a technical point of view , as the Commissioner said , but was unfortunately necessary from a political point of view in order to make it possible to reach a compromise in the light of far too much readiness to be persuaded by industry lobbying .
Anyone voting in favour of anything other than the compromise will be sabotaging this entire piece of legislation and will be preventing any phasing out of mercury thermometers at all .
We would then have to start again from the beginning within the REACH framework .
The Commission is due to put forward proposals within the next two years for the phasing out , if possible , of other measuring equipment , in particular blood pressure gauges .
I would like to remind the Commission that the compromise states : as soon as reliable alternatives are available .
This is the case for blood pressure gauges in many instances .
Go straight home to Brussels and compile a report on restricting the marketing of blood pressure gauges as soon as possible .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , I too should like to take my turn , having thanked and congratulated Mrs Sornosa Martínez on her work , to urge you to support the compromise amendments designed to remove mercury from measuring devices used by European consumers .
The compromise amendments are the minimum and most realistic approach for protecting consumers and reflect the agreement between the European Parliament and the Council .
As regards the proposed exemption from the directive for barometers , I call on you to reject it .
Any such exemption jeopardises the final opportunity to limit mercury in measuring devices for which there are alternative solutions before the legislation is adopted for the REACH programme .
This specific action is of paramount importance in order for the legislation on measuring devices containing mercury to be adopted as quickly as possible .
At the same time , I should emphasise that , if the amendments on barometers - with the exception of those in the package of amendments - are accepted , the barometer industry will not achieve anything substantial other than , perhaps , gaining one or two years .
It is almost certain that the Commission , either through REACH or through comitology , will revert to its initial position , which makes no provision for barometers to be exempted .
Finally , I should like to emphasise that the package of compromise amendments follows our previous cohesive resolution on mercury for which Mr Marios Matsakis acted as rapporteur .
Our aim must again be to protect the environment and public health and European consumers .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , although mercury and the compounds produced by it , in particular methyl mercury , are highly toxic , banning the sale of mercury thermometers , including specialised thermometers and other measuring devices with just an eighteen-month transition period is excessive and unreasonable , particularly for Poland and other countries where mercury thermometers are universally used not only in hospitals but for basic home diagnosis .
Such a short transition period may have negative effects by compromising diagnosis , with the attendant health risks , and may impose additional financial strains on hospitals and household budgets , especially those of the less well off .
In Poland we have a saying , ' when man hurries , the devil smiles ' .
Evidently the devil wants to get rich selling electronic measuring devices , while speaking fine words about people 's health .
We are in favour of a longer transition period .
- ( SK ) I also welcome this report on mercury in the environment and on ways of reducing it .
We all have to agree that where a substitute for a measuring device containing mercury exists , such a device must be removed from the environment .
There is enough mercury in a single thermometer to contaminate fish in a twenty-hectare lake .
However , it is also necessary to realise that there are other devices used in the healthcare sector that contain mercury but that as yet have no equivalent substitute - for example , pressure gauges , barometers and manometers .
Mercury sphygmomanometers used in the treatment of high blood pressure or arrhythmia do not have an equivalent substitute capable of equal accuracy , and alternative methods would be extremely expensive .
Therefore , I support the rapporteur 's opinion that the directive should not apply to such healthcare-sector instruments , because while we might be decreasing mercury in the environment we would also be jeopardising patients ' lives .
The priority we must focus on in this legislative proposal is to reduce the amount of mercury in household waste .
It will be probably difficult , particularly in the new Member States , to ask all households to replace the thermometers they use for measuring body temperature ; however , we should be able to limit their use .
Mr President , it is high time we acknowledged that mercury can and indeed does cause serious health problems .
Mercury poisoning through the ingestion of mercury-contaminated food - usually fish - is the main source of contamination in the general public .
Mercury and its compounds are not only toxic for humans : they also have very negative effects on wildlife and ecosystems .
Therefore , the restriction of the use of mercury is highly desirable .
However , I acknowledge the need to be realistic in the restriction of certain measuring devices containing mercury .
Therefore , I welcome the fact that some medical devices are being excluded for the time being from the scope of the directive .
Medical experts have indicated that in certain cases non-mercury devices may not be fully accurate , for example , for some cardiac conditions and in cases of pre-eclampsia .
It is therefore preferable to continue to use mercury devices in these limited situations until suitable alternatives are fully examined and endorsed by the medical professions , but with a time-limited review clause for suitable alternatives appropriately validated .
Given the toxicity of mercury , that is a reasonable demand to make on the industry , and I invite the industry to respond .
I support the amendment originally tabled by my colleagues , which allows for a derogation for antique barometers and scientific instruments intended for sale or trade on the international antiques market and for the production and servicing of traditional barometers using small amounts of mercury in controlled and licensed environments .
It is worth noting that traditional barometer-makers do not introduce new quantities of mercury into the marketplace but recycle existing mercury and , in this way , help to control and limit the substance - not to mention the fact that antique barometers are usually highly valued items and so even more unlikely to end up in our waste streams .
Remember that the purpose of this directive is to ban the marketing of mercury-containing devices .
It will allow the sale of a barometer with a separate phial of mercury to be added later by the consumer if we do not have a derogation for these antique barometers - a far less hazardous option in my view .
( NL ) Mr President , first of all , I too should like to express my support to Mrs Sornosa who has written an excellent report .
As all speakers have said before me , given that mercury is very toxic , we must ban its use in all unnecessary applications .
Given that alternatives are available , it is to be welcomed that the mercury thermometer , for example , is consigned to the past .
Barometers are the subject of much debate , as we witnessed a moment ago .
In the Netherlands , the use of mercury has been banned since 2003 , but barometers were exempt until 2005 and then , pending fresh European rules , until 1 January 2006 .
This House is now arguing in favour of another two years ' delay for traditional barometers , which is incredibly lenient of it .
Whilst I can , of course , imagine that this is hard news for producers of barometers to take , if we want to banish mercury altogether , we must in any event ban consumer products that contain it .
Products may break or leak , so that mercury ends up in the environment anyway .
I hope we can finalise this legislation so that the mercury ban can be introduced as soon as possible .
Mr President , across Europe barometer manufacturing has been part of our heritage for many centuries .
It often involves the recycling of mercury from old instruments .
The environmental and health threat posed is , I would suggest , so miniscule as to be out of all proportion to the devastating ban which this directive would impose on future production of barometers .
It would kill off an historic skill in return for no meaningful gain .
Thus I strongly support Amendment 19 to exempt barometer manufacturers from the ambit of this directive .
Seeking to include barometers epitomises in a way the fanatical and irrational dogma that all too often drives and brings ridicule to otherwise sensible Commission proposals .
I trust that in the name of common sense we will say no to the ban on the production of barometers .
The Commission informs me that it does not wish to speak again .
The debate is therefore closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.30 a.m.
Mortgage credit ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the report by Mr Purvis , on behalf of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs , on mortgage credit in the EU .

rapporteur . - Mr President , what I was trying to tell you before was that Mr Allister 's speech was coming through in a foreign language on the English channel , so the English was being translated into something else , I do not know what .
I am sorry Mr Allister , but we could not make out what you were saying !
European mortgage loans outstanding amount to some EUR 5 trillion , or 45 % of the EU 's GDP , and mortgage lending has grown by 9.4 % per annum over the past five years .
A home is usually the largest purchase made in a lifetime , and the related mortgage is the most important financial obligation most people ever have .
It is no surprise , therefore , that the Commission has focused on this area as it shifts its attention to retail financial services .
The mortgage market is fragmented along national lines and opening up this market should lead to consumers being offered better value and a greater choice of mortgage products .
There could be more opportunities for those people who currently find it difficult to get a mortgage , such as first-time buyers or people with fixed-term contracts .
It should make it easier for people moving to another EU country for work or retirement or wanting to buy a second property abroad .
For lenders , a more integrated market would offer greater economies of scale , reduce costs and lower rates for the borrower .
On the other hand , local culture and traditions have shaped the products available and consumers will not want any diminution of existing consumer protection standards .
Full harmonisation would be expensive for the industry and could limit the range of products it offers .
The industry is highly competitive within most of our Member States , so we must not take heavy-handed action that might damage this booming sector .
We want to see a European mortgage credit market with a broad range of products at competitive prices and any changes must benefit mortgage borrowers above all .
We are therefore against a grand harmonising piece of legislation .
It would be bad for consumers and bad for business .
Instead , the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs agrees that we should focus on targeted measures aimed at removing specific barriers to cross-border mortgages .
Any measures should only be taken after impact assessments have shown that the benefits outweigh the costs .
Non-legislative means are to be preferred wherever possible .
Our first priority should be to bring about a better European funding market .
There are a number of obstacles preventing this .
I would therefore like to see a database covering the various mortgage markets and mortgage securities , so that investors can better evaluate and price mortgage pools .
We suggest a range of standardised packages of European mortgages for trading on the capital markets .
Mortgage brokers could play an important role in helping borrowers access mortgage credit from domestic and non-domestic lenders .
I am pleased that the Commission has undertaken to assess any problems related to those credit intermediaries .
On the issue of the annual percentage rate of charge , we need an EU standard .
The majority in the committee wanted an EU standard comprising all the charges levied by the lender , but with information as far as possible regarding any other costs .
The report considers that restrictions on early repayment charges and interest rates are likely to restrict the development of new products , especially those for higher risk borrowers , as well as the development of the funding market .
Among other issues we raised are removing obstacles to the transfer of loans across borders and assessing the potential of the Euro-mortgage .
The law applicable to mortgage credit contracts should be addressed , with the revision of the 1980 Rome Convention .
On credit databases , we want to see a consistent format and non-discriminatory cross-border access to both positive and negative credit data , always subject to privacy protection .
In the area of forced sales , we support the idea of a scoreboard , comparing the length and costs of judicial processes in the various Member States .
Various professional bodies should agree on common property valuation standards .
On land registers , the report favours improving access to standardised information , as well as supporting further work on the European Land Information Service .
Tax barriers remain a problem and need to be looked at , even if their resolution is dependent upon the Member States under subsidiarity .
The European Central Bank and the Commission have the important job of monitoring the potential risks of the massive and increasing levels of mortgage debt and their potential impact on capital markets .
I much appreciate the support and input received from my colleagues on all sides of the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs .
The Commission seems to be set on much the same line as we propose .
We look forward to the White Paper next year and we hope we will be able to continue the excellent cooperation we have enjoyed so far on this important subject .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , honourable Members , the White Paper on Financial Services Policy 2005-2010 sets out a roadmap for opening up Europe 's fragmented retail financial services markets .
One of the core elements of this strategy is our ongoing initiative on mortgage credit .
The challenges of integrating European mortgage markets should not be underestimated .
Differences in product characteristics , distribution systems , consumer behaviour and many other economic , structural and indeed social factors all have a significant impact on the sector .
We should not forget that for most European consumers , taking out a mortgage is perhaps the most significant financial decision in their lives .
Given the economic and social significance of mortgage lending , the Commission has adopted an open and consultative approach .
Deliberations began in 2003 with the establishment of a forum group on mortgage credit , and a Green Paper was published in July 2005 .
A cost-benefit study was published in August 2005 to provide insight into the potential benefits of initiatives in the field of mortgage credit .
The public consultation that followed the publication of the Green Paper confirmed that the Commission was on the right track .
At the same time , however , it identified areas where further analysis was required , for example on mortgage funding , before the Commission could decide on the appropriate policy responses .
Your report comes at an important moment in our deliberations .
The consultation phase is drawing to a close and we are fast approaching a time when the Commission must decide how to proceed .
I wish to thank the rapporteurs for their hard work in preparing what I believe is a carefully thought-through and pragmatic report .
I would like to focus on some aspects of the report .
I am pleased to read that you also believe that there are benefits to be obtained from integration .
This position is consistent with our own analysis and the feedback that we have received in the Green Paper consultation .
As the responses to the Green Paper consultation illustrate , there is a lot of debate on what the right means to achieve these benefits are .
You propose a pragmatic and nuanced approach calling for focused measures accompanied by comprehensive impact assessments .
As you know , I have a strong personal commitment to better regulation with a full impact assessment identifying the problems and setting out objectives and options .
We in the Commission will be looking at the full range of tools at our disposal , not just legislative ones , in finding the most appropriate policy response to each issue addressed in the Green Paper .
I welcome the fact that the report underlines the benefits from enhancing product diversity and asks the Commission to ensure that actions do not hamper innovation and competition .
A wide range of products is currently available to borrowers in the European Union .
However , in no single country can consumers have access to a complete range of products .
In some markets , certain groups of borrowers - for example , the self-employed , or borrowers with low or incomplete credit profiles - find it difficult to obtain mortgages or are even excluded .
Barriers also exist that limit mortgage lenders ' incentives to operate cross-border , thus preventing new and innovative products and processes from being introduced in other markets across Europe .
In this respect I think our goals fully concur with those set out in the report .
Mortgage credit covers many contexts and technical issues ranging from consumer protection , through mortgage funding , to property valuation and land registration , to name but a few of the issues to be addressed .
I look forward to continuing our very fruitful dialogue with Parliament on how best to address the policy challenges emerging from this in the interests of assisting the development of a genuine single market for mortgage credit that creates new opportunities for lenders and borrowers alike , and that ensures appropriate protection for what remains for the vast majority of Europeans the most important financial decision the make in their lives .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection . - ( ES ) Mr President , I believe that the Commission has taken the right approach in relation to mortgages , because , as the Commissioner has said , it is probably the most significant commitment European citizens make in their entire lives : the loan to buy their own homes .
We must therefore bear in mind that we are moving towards a single market and , within that single market , it does not make much sense to have 27 different national legislations or 27 different mortgage systems .
Furthermore , it is an issue that relates to the most essential elements of the legal system of each State .
Results will not be achieved either easily or immediately ; it will take some time .
In any event , we in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection wish to stress the importance of making progress in the legislative field .
It is not of course possible to adopt complete European Union legislation on mortgages , but it is possible to make some progress , in the field of information , for example , maximum permitted rates , repayment of mortgages at a given time , so that , when a citizen moves from one European Union country to another , they do not find themselves in a legal framework completely different to the one they are used to .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Legal Affairs and the Internal Market . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the mortgage credit market continues to be divided up along national lines .
Why is this so ?
Is it because of difficulties with language , because of the different financial cultures , the legal framework , or is it because people have confidences in lenders with which they are familiar and which are on their doorstep ?
What the Commission is proposing to do is to examine the possibility of harmonising the legal framework in order to increase the volume of cross-border lending and borrowing .
Such an inquiry is to be welcomed .
Even more to be welcomed is the statement in the Green Paper to the effect that extensive studies are still regarded as necessary before proposals for regulations can be made , and the Green Paper 's own emphasis on the difficulty of the matter in hand .
Legal differences in the Member States are not to be found in one area alone , although they certainly are present in mortgage law , but - as both Commissioner McCreevy and Mr Medina Ortega have just pointed out - they affect many aspects of the law , among them land registration , the practices of notaries , the law in relation to forced sales , the law of contract and the protection of consumers , all of which areas of the law are interconnected .
In some of them , the European Union has no power to enact regulations , and harmonisation from the centre in one area could have seriously detrimental effects at the national level , doing , in fact , more harm than good .
What is unreservedly to be welcomed , though , is further promotion of the refinancing markets , and so I want to say an unreserved ' yes ' to this being investigated and analysed and to the efforts at achieving integration , albeit primarily through convergence .
While I do not want to exclude the possibility of Europe-wide regulation , we do take a rather sceptical view of European legislation as a consequence of its capacity for destroying functioning markets .
Extensive studies are , in any case , still needed .
We also , perhaps , need to face up to the fact that this is where we reach the outer limit of what can be standardised in Europe through legislation at the European level .
I do not think this House 's role as legislator is without its problematic aspects , since it , when the Commission itself says that more extensive investigations are needed , must , to some degree , stay its hand and should not be precipitate in calling for legislative initiatives - and , indeed , has not done that .
I endorse the essence of the report .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , many thanks to Mr Purvis for the work he has done .
The Green Paper on mortgage credit that the Commission published in July 2005 triggered intensive debate on whether the EU 's legislators should initiate action , and , if so , in which areas .
Attempting to enact regulations applicable across Europe as a whole would seem to run up against very considerable differences between legal systems , and , above all , between financial cultures , but buying real property is the biggest decision on matters of expenditure that many households will take , and so the mortgage credit required to fund that is of commensurate importance .
Studies show that private customers still - despite the euro and the internal market - have recourse to a credit institution they trust , as a rule to the bank with which they have an account , and that does of course have something to do with the fact that , of all financial markets , that for mortgage credit is the most complex .
The giving of mortgage credit is therefore still carried out on a largely national , or indeed local , basis .

Of all mortgage credit , only 1 % is taken out across borders , not least - or so one surmises - as a consequence of the market and tax barriers involved ; further integration would represent an estimated net 1 % gain for European mortgage markets - a not inconsiderable sum that would be achieved over no more than ten years .
If , then , we want an internal market in mortgage credit , we will have to guarantee that new rules applicable to it will result in a measurable added value for private customers .
One of the most important things from the consumer 's point of view is the ability to compare the various credit offers before signing a contract , along with the option of early repayment of part of the loan and the conditions subject to which variable or fixed interest rates may be agreed .
The ways in which various associated charges are calculated must also be both comparable and transparent .
Any new rules must also improve the situation of borrowers with poor or incomplete credit ratings , above all by enabling them to afford mortgages .
Persons in this category include workers on short-term contracts and younger workers in particular , and these potential borrowers should not be excluded from the mortgage market .
Experience has shown that the voluntary code of conduct to which over 3 000 lenders signed up in 2003 has not , in fact , been complied with , and here too there is a need for the Commission to review the situation and take action .
In any case , though , the further integration of the EU 's mortgage credit market would be beneficial not only to consumers but also to the economy .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) I would like to thank the rapporteur for a well drafted report and to emphasise the importance of the initiated discussion on a common European mortgage market .
New needs in the mortgage sector are emerging due to the rapid integration of the EU labour and capital markets , and the development of the internal market .
We think it is extremely important to duly assess the emerging challenges .
First of all , there is a need to reduce the costs related to capital increase by creating a common market for mortgage financing and offering attractive and safe investment products .
Secondly , there is a need to create favourable conditions for transition from the mortgage market of one country to that of another country in view of the increasing mobility of the labour force .
Thirdly , there is a need to suitably organise the network of brokerage consulting services in order to provide the population with better choices and better access to more flexible and modern mortgage products .
Fourthly , it is very important to enhance market transparency , as well as competitiveness , by unifying the payment procedures for various mortgage products and disclosing all costs related to the purchase of mortgage products .
Acquisition of housing is one of the major and most significant life investments ; therefore , the impact of all proposals must be thoroughly assessed and considered .
Presently , mortgage crediting is mostly developed within domestic markets and is very fragmented , while development of a common mortgage market is considered to be a possibility for the banks to offer their mortgage products via their branches in other European Union countries .
Therefore , the creation of a new mortgage market will be a serious and demanding challenge for all of us .
( PL ) Mr President , it is at present difficult to speak of a common European financial market .
The financial market is highly fragmented , which causes legal , fiscal and regulatory problems .
The majority of mortgages on the market are financed by the savings of small savers .
Less than 40 % of mortgages are financed by the capital markets , whose share is growing slowly , although this growth is insubstantial .
In Sweden and Germany there are quite extensive markets in mortgage bonds .
In Denmark , for example , mortgage institutions issue bonds to the entire value of the mortgage credit .
While the market for mortgage credit-based bonds is strong in many EU countries , there are some countries where they do not exist at all .
Over the last decade or so this market has also advanced a great deal in Poland , and this has had a substantial effect on economic growth .
Seeing what a great impact this has had on the markets in our countries , I support the establishment of a legal framework allowing for effective portfolio transactions to be carried out .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , we are completing the consultation process launched by the Green Paper .
Creating cross-border opportunities for lenders and borrowers raises important , but also very difficult , policy questions .
There is no easy or quick fix .
Over the next couple of weeks , I will be discussing with my services the options available for moving forward .
Parliament 's balanced report is an important contribution to this .
I thank Mr Purvis and Mr Medina Ortega .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.30 a.m.
1 .
Rules for direct support schemes under the CAP and establishing certain support schemes for farmers and amending Regulation ( EC ) No 1698 / 2005 on support for rural development by the European Agricultural Fund for Rural Development ( EAFRD ) ( vote )
2 .
EC-Canada Agreement on cooperation in the fields of higher education , training and youth ( vote )
3 .
EC-USA agreement in the field of higher education and vocational training ( vote )
4 .
Social security schemes to employed persons and members of their families moving within the Community ( vote )
5 .
Aquaculture : alien and locally absent species ( vote )
6 .
Common organisation of the markets in fishery and aquaculture products ( vote )
7 .
Amendment to the Convention on access to information , public participation in decision making and access to justice in environmental matters ( vote )
8 .
Exemption from valued added tax and excise duty of goods imported by persons travelling from third countries ( vote )
9 .
Third Community Contribution for the Chernobyl Shelter Fund ( vote )
10 .
United Nations Convention against corruption ( vote )
- Before the vote
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to begin by thanking the shadow rapporteurs on this report , in particular , Mrs Mastenbroek and Mrs Kudrycka , who have contributed to the final draft .
Corruption represents a serious problem for the transparent management of public affairs : it undermines credibility , increases distrust of democratic institutions and jeopardises human rights and the rule of law , allowing organised crime to prosper .
Corruption is an age-old problem of which there are many literary accounts : Cicero spoke of it as early as 70 BC .
Unfortunately , the cancer of corruption has also gained a foothold in the workings of the European Institutions .
It is worrying that the European Union Court of Auditors refuses to approve the Community budget because of serious doubts held over the proper use of funds , and it is equally embarrassing that the Belgian judiciary has opened legal proceedings against Commission employees for alleged payoffs for the acquisition of funds allocated for the Chernobyl nuclear disaster .
In the same way , we see the problem of corruption in the use of the Structural Funds , as the funds are often managed for individual gain , or , as is the case in my region , the classifications are falsified , to the extent that the European Commission has had to impose fines of EUR 75 million .
This is why we believe that problems of corruption are both subtle and dangerous .
The fight against corruption must be a priority for the European Union , and , in our opinion , this Convention should also be signed by all the Member States of the European Union .
In addition , we call on the Commission and the Council to take action so that , as well as this Convention being signed , the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime is also signed .
I believe that this represents a significant contribution towards the fight against organised crime , which is , unfortunately , still on the rise in the European Union .
( Applause )
11 .
Support for rural development by the EAFRD ( vote )
12 .
Request for defence of immunity of Gabriele Albertini ( vote )
13 .
Request for defence of immunity of Gabriele Albertini ( vote )
14 .
Request for defence of immunity of Gérard Onesta ( vote )
15 .
Community action in the field of marine environmental policy ( vote )
16 .
Measuring devices containing mercury ( vote )
17 .
Voluntary modulation of direct payments under the CAP ( vote )
- Before the vote
The Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development proposes that Parliament reject the proposal for a regulation .
( Parliament rejected the proposal for a regulation )
The proposal having been rejected , I give the floor to the Commissioner .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , while the Commission regrets the outcome of the vote , it has taken good note of the position expressed by the majority of Members .
In accordance with the framework agreement between Parliament and the Commission , the issue will be raised in the college of Commissioners so that the Commission 's position can be considered carefully in the light of these circumstances .
The Commission will inform Parliament , in due course and in an appropriate manner , of the outcome of those deliberations .
Very well , Commissioner .
The report shall therefore be forwarded on to the committee concerned , in anticipation of proposals by the Commission .
18 .
Joint Undertaking for the European air traffic management system ( SESAR ) ( vote )
We now interrupt voting time to hold the formal sitting .
Voting time
The next item is voting time .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Formal sitting - Georgia
Mr President of the Republic of Georgia , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to welcome you most warmly on behalf of the European Parliament .
Three years ago , following parliamentary elections annulled by the regime of the time , the Rose Revolution took place in your country and history will associate your name with that revolution , Mr Saakashvili .
Led by yourself , your compatriots demanded fair elections and an end to the corruption and bad governance that was ruining your country .
( Applause )
Although the previous regime refused to accept your demands , it was brought down without a single drop of blood being shed .
' People power ' prevailed and the Georgian people were able to elect you en masse as the new President .
Mr President , the European Parliament has supported democratic change in your country .
We sent a mission of observers to the elections and our Committee on Foreign Affairs had the pleasure of receiving you soon after your inauguration as President , not here in Strasbourg but at our site in Brussels .
The Rose Revolution reawakened hopes for real and free democracy in areas even further east of the Baltic , of Central and of Eastern Europe .
A year later , the Orange Revolution took place in Ukraine .
At that time the future seemed full of promise , but we are now seeing that many problems and obstacles have arisen on a journey that is certainly no easy ride .
You have achieved a great deal over the years that have passed since then , but the conflicts in the break-away regions of South Ossetia and Abkhazia have become worse .
It is clear that Russia is now putting great pressure on your country - I can tell you that your country was discussed at great length at the dinner with President Putin - and you now have a great opportunity , on addressing the European Parliament , to explain the situation so that the representatives of the peoples of Europe can hear directly from you about the difficult circumstances being experienced by your country and the problems relating to energy dependency on your great neighbour .
The European Parliament and the European Union as a whole fully support the sovereignty and territorial integrity of your country ; there is absolutely no doubt about that .
We have also said that the conflicts in South Ossetia and Abkhazia must be resolved at the negotiating table , and by exclusively peaceful means .
There can be no military solution to that problem either .
In a resolution that we approved last month here in Strasbourg , we called upon Russia to put an end to all acts of repression and harassment against people of Georgian origin living in Russia and to revoke any measures recently taken against your country , including the suspension of all transport links and postal services .
Nevertheless , we would also call for restraint in any verbal comments from all sides that may raise the tension unnecessarily .
We believe that the Council and the Commission must find a way to help your country to overcome and compensate for the economic and social effects of the Russian measures against you .
Mr President , we would like to express the European Parliament 's support for the approval of the Action Plan on the European Neighbourhood Policy by the EU-Georgia Cooperation Council , which has taken place today in Brussels .
We welcome you once again and I hope that your presence here will give us the opportunity , through dialogue , to overcome the problems faced by your country and which affect all of us .
You have the floor , Mr President .
( Applause )
President of Georgia .
( ES ) Thank you very much for you words and your invitation , Mr President . They are very important to our country .
Distinguished Members of Parliament , I wish to thank you for this kind invitation today .
That we meet in Strasbourg is especially meaningful to me .
It was here as a young student , coming fresh from the Soviet Union , that I first discovered Europe in all its diversity and richness .
It was here that I first learned about human rights and the solemn obligation of the state to protect , rather than persecute .
What a revelation !
And it was here that I dared to dream that one day what I studied could be applied to my own country and that I could plant those seeds which only now have finally blossomed .
At that time , it was a radical and maybe even rather a dangerous dream , but it is one that I have never forgotten .
Strasbourg is also important for me for another reason .
It is the place where I met my wife Sandra at a human rights course .
( Applause )
I called my mother from the street phone in the Orangerie across from the Council of Europe building where I was on an internship at the time to tell her that I had met a beautiful Dutch girl .
Well , they are now sitting next to each other up there in the gallery .
( Applause )
I am very proud that our multinational family is represented here today with three generations , including my grandmother .
I want to say thank you , therefore , and thank you to this city and its institutions for giving me both knowledge and love , two priceless assets that I will never part with .
Let me begin my remarks with a few words in Georgian .
We do not want to be part of a debate as to whether we are part of old or new Europe , because I believe we are the oldest Europe , so we are observing from the side .
( The President spoke Georgian .
This is a translation )
On behalf of my country , I wish to express my gratitude to all of you - to the European Union , and to you the parliamentarians of Europe in particular - for your existence and your activism .
Europe has always been home to many diverse nations , small and large alike .
Georgians have been Europeans since the time Prometheus was chained to our mountains and the Argonauts came to our country in search of the Golden Fleece .
When debates take place about the identity of Europe , if Georgians are European we do not participate in them .
We are an ancient European nation .
Georgians are not only Europeans , but we are enthusiastic Europeans and Europe was always the first choice to turn to for help and moral support through all the troubled periods .
That which brings us together is a common and unbreakable bond , one based on culture , on our shared history and on a common set of values that has at its heart the celebration of peace and the establishment of fair and prosperous societies .
This is the substance of what is often called ' the European project ' .
My nation is proud to be part of that just project and to contribute to its stability , strength and permanence .
For in Georgia please know that you have a strong and reliable partner now and in the future , for ours is a common destiny .
( The President switched back to English )
I just want to ask whether you have ever considered for a moment what the post-Soviet world would be like had there not been a European Union .
At times like this , I am reminded of the vision and leadership that led to a united Europe , expressed so eloquently in 1950 by Robert Schuman .
I wonder what Schuman would say today when presented with Europe 's map and its current challenges ?
From the rubble of war , you have created a beacon of justice , peace and prosperity .
In that respect , your actions have provided the answer , as Schuman 's vision continues to endure .
In particular , your readiness to welcome new members from the former Soviet region has significantly strengthened peace and democracy in Europe .
The success of these new Member States encourages countries like mine to move forward , for we have benefited and will continue to benefit from their experience and expertise , and your vision and prudence .
Perhaps the best way in which I can express that gratitude is to state that we wish to emulate you !
But here let me be very clear : I do not want to alarm you by requesting outright that Georgia be admitted to the European Union .
Membership is a distant goal , and it is not on our immediate agenda .
Rather , it is the principles on which Europe is built that provide the cornerstones for our development .
Here I see cause for optimism , based on enhancing our partnership .
The Georgia we are creating is built squarely on the rule of law , human rights , democracy and peace .
Our European path has been chosen by the Georgian people themselves .
For them and for me , it is indeed the embodiment of our country 's enduring European identity .
It is the only way forward .
I am in Strasbourg at a symbolic moment , because we will soon be celebrating the third anniversary of our Rose Revolution .
As many of you know , three years ago Georgia was basically a failed state .
Imagine a country where daily survival was a mighty struggle for all but the privileged few , where insecurity reigned and disorder prevailed , and where the security of the country was subsumed in the interests of larger neighbours .
Georgia was a country with rampant corruption and endemic injustice , and certainly there was no rule of law .
Today , three years on , Georgia has changed beyond recognition .
We are reforming our institutions and economy to bring greater prosperity and stability to our people and our region .
Had the changes of the last few years not been made , today we would be a totally failed state not only in our region but also in the European neighbourhood .
Today , however , I believe Georgia can rise to the challenge of being a model European neighbour and that is the message I should like to share with you this afternoon .
I make this claim before you because for the past three years we have consistently pursued four straightforward goals : the restoration of democracy and rule of law , the eradication of corruption , the creation of revenue for our citizens and the protection of our territorial integrity .
All , as you can imagine , are interrelated and all have as their first assumption the strengthening of institutions and public accountability .
For this vision to succeed , in essence , the poetry of democracy must be supported by the prose of the rule of law .
In substance , this means enacting reforms based on the understanding that justice should reign in the country .
When I say justice , I mean it in the European sense : democracy must be served by an infrastructure of values and institutions that give protection and opportunity to every citizen .
The rule of law must prevail in a transparent manner that is equal to all .
This is , of course , easy to say but harder to do , and I welcome the European Union 's support in realising this vision .
Today in Georgia we have completely reformed our police forces .
As a result , Georgian drivers no longer worry about being arbitrarily stopped by traffic police demanding bribes .
Georgian business owners do not fear random harassment .
Three or four years ago a Gallup poll in Georgia showed that the rate of confidence in the police was less than 5 % .
Basically , the police force was the most hated institution in the country , but now , the rate of confidence is in the upper seventies .
It is one of the most trusted institutions in the country and certainly more trusted than in any other countries in the post-Soviet region .
This is a big change .
We have made an irreversible commitment to reforming our judicial system and , through strong collaboration with European institutions , we created and are now funding a comprehensive multi-year programme .
I wish to comment on some highlights .
Today we are strengthening both the independence and professionalism of our judges and legal professionals , while at the same time reducing the powers of the President .
With new constitutional changes , the President will no longer be able to appoint judges directly .
I hope these changes will be adopted this December .
We are reforming our legal education system and strengthening the protection of human rights by further educating our law enforcement officials .
This is a matter of national interest .
We are building new prisons that meet the standards of human rights monitors and streamlining legal procedures to ensure due process in due time .
This is a matter of enforcing fundamental rights .
We will continue to overhaul our system of justice , because without it our reforms will lack foundation .
Today I am pleased to state that our Parliament exercises an unprecedented level of oversight .
As Head of the Executive , I can attest to the fact that budgets are scrutinised , oversight is vigorous and careful consideration is given to Parliament in the decisions of the Executive .
Georgia also enjoys one of the most liberal environments for the free press and a vibrant NGO community .
Our media freedom legislation is one of the most - if not the most - liberal .
Unfortunately for politicians , under Georgian law the media cannot be sued under any circumstances .
That is good , because it offers more opportunities .
Perhaps one of my biggest regrets to date , however , is the fact that Georgia still does not have an opposition that is sufficiently robust to challenge the Government .
I do not say this lightly .
It is not a good thing , but nothing would be more dangerous to a fledgling democracy than to artificially manufacture an opposition .
It is bad for an aspiring government not to have a strong opposition which will be more responsible and more competent and which will test the Government .
I am sure that this kind of opposition will be created as society develops .
Perhaps one day - but I hope not that soon - it will prevail in open and fair elections .
We have certainly established a political and legal environment in which that can happen .
Now it is up to opposition groups to take the next step .
Our path of transformation began with a very simple idea : that every citizen must feel secure .
To achieve that , corruption had to be stamped out and that was our major goal .
In order to provide a social safety net , we have been aggressive and imaginative in our economic reforms .
Georgia today is an attractive target for investment .
For a country with relatively few natural resources , we are left to work with our own ingenuity and discipline .
That is why we have established the lowest tax rates in Europe , some of the most flexible labour laws and some of the simplest trade , customs and regulatory procedures .
Liberal reforms have proven to be the best tool to fight corruption , while guaranteeing the freedom of business and protection of property rights .
It has also proven the best way to generate revenue , so that we can build more roads , schools and hospitals .
Today , I am proud of the fact that two years ago not a single school in Georgia had access to the internet , but now 80 % of our schools have computers and internet access , and next year the process will be finished .
We are building new schools comparable to the best schools in the Netherlands , Germany or the Czech Republic .
This year we built 340 .
That is a lot for a small country .
More roads have been built this year alone than since independence in 1991 .
At its annual meeting in Singapore this year , the World Bank ranked Georgia the most successful reformed country in the world and one of the best places in the world to do business .
In two years we have switched from being one of the worst to one of the best places in the world to do business .
Georgian economic growth this year will be strong , since , according to the World Bank , we are also the top-performing country among transitional economies in Eurasia in fighting corruption .
In fact , the EBRD ranks us among the three most non-corrupt nations in Europe .
Maybe other figures will say more about our achievements .
The year 2004 , the first year after our Rose Revolution , was the first time since 1991 that we had a positive immigration and birth rate .
Last year , in a country of just under five million people , almost 100 000 more Georgian citizens came back to Georgia than left .
They were in fact voting with their feet .
It is an amazing story .
So I do not think Europe should be afraid to open up to these areas , because Georgians are not going to flee to Europe overnight - they are coming back .
( Applause )
An amazing symbol of this is the main central hospital in Tbilisi .
It stopped being a hospital and was occupied by internally displaced persons from the war in Abkhazia .
Last year a large team of Georgian high-level professionals came from the United States , Spain , Germany and Russia .
They re-established the hospital .
We helped them and carried out repairs .
We provided the IDPs with assistance to leave and now it is one of the best hospitals in the world .
Some Europeans said that there is only one other hospital of its kind in Europe .
This is the symbol : Georgians like Nina Gedevanovna Ananiashvili , who was a top ballet dancer at the Bolshoi , are coming back and trying to recreate our country .
She left a very lucrative career with the Bolshoi to come back and recreate our ballet group from scratch .
It is now a very powerful group , perhaps one of the best in our part of the world , and it will soon be touring worldwide .
Our goal now is to focus on steady job creation .
With my economic advisor Mr Marklar , former Prime Minister of Estonia , who was one of the architects of the Estonian economic miracle , we have established very successful on-the-job training programmes .
Our reforms in that sector will only be complete when every Georgian feels that he or she has a real opportunity for employment .
Georgia is a country of tremendous warmth , hospitality and beauty .
In fact I was just showing President Borrell an album of Georgian sites .
It is a country that European travellers have enjoyed in the past and are now rediscovering .
We are , in fact , Europe 's best kept secret from that point of view .
I would like to share with you a brief quote from the writings of Sir Oliver Wardrop , who in 1888 wrote a book entitled The Kingdom of Georgia .
He wrote : ' There is no reason why Georgia should not become a popular resort .
It is not so far away as people think .
It has the great advantage of being almost unknown to tourists , there is none of the impudent extortion which ruffles our tempers nearer home and it is , after all , cheaper than Scotland ' .
Please , those of you from Scotland , do not be angry with me .
I am only quoting .
But in fact it is true !
( Laughter )
Reviewing the combined effect of our reforms , I believe it is fair to state that these steps have allowed us to move closer to Europe institutionally and culturally .
You have provided the framework for further growth through the Neighbourhood Policy .
Today we will be signing the Action Plan that translates many of our mutual priorities into detailed results .
But in the spirit and the substance of that effort we must continue to build , for I want my country to work with Europe so that Europe knows it has an utterly reliable partner and friend in Georgia .
For some , however , our strategy has proven an irritant , and it seems Georgia 's reform path means we are departing from former - and , in their eyes , still applicable - spheres of influence .
I believe , as you rightly said in your landmark declarations two weeks ago on Georgia , that the time of ' spheres of influence ' is over .
( Applause )
I would like to thank you for that declaration and for the very appropriate and specific language it contained .
Each nation must have the chance to freely decide how and with whom it wants to build their future .
We base our strategy on being a secure and reliable partner , not a tame and weak satellite .
We are a nation with a long history of independence .
That independence was interrupted 200 years ago with the violent expansion of the Russian empire .
For three brief years between 1918 and 1921 we enjoyed another moment of independence .
That again was taken away from us .
What were the circumstances ?
In 1921 the Bolshevik Army , claiming to protect a minority population in one of our regions , entered Georgia and reconquered it .
During that period , more than 500 000 Georgians perished in the gulags , including several members of my own family .
It was too expensive a price to pay and we are not willing to pay it again .
We will not allow that history to be repeated , whatever it takes .
After all , we are living in 2006 , not 1938 or 1939 , 1956 or 1968 .
At what point are small countries asked to sacrifice their aspirations for liberty ?
How often can we ask the smaller party to tone down its voice and resist reacting to provocation ?
Let us hope that we will never be asked to succumb and say that justice lies with size , numbers and power in this age , that might makes right and not vice versa .
Let us hope that never again , when our or any other European nation is threatened , will the spectre of that famous reference by one statesman in the 1930s to ' quarrels in a far-away country between people of whom we know nothing ' be seen as an adequate response .
Thankfully , I hope that policy has been left permanently in the past .
I hope one day that Georgians , as well as proud representatives of that then far-away country the Czech Republic , will be equals in the European family .
( Applause )
Today , because we have chosen to move as close as possible to Europe and to align ourselves with Euro-Atlantic institutions , Georgia is punished .
Because we are a democracy , the pressures we are under have only resulted in further consolidation of our society .
People who exercise pressure do not understand : you do not pressurise democracies , because you get exactly the opposite result from that you want to achieve .
That has become increasingly challenging because , as you know , Russia has closed its market to Georgian goods .
Our prized Georgian wines and mineral water - major sources of revenue - are now banned from the Russian market .
The situation has worsened in the last few months as Russia unilaterally introduced a complete ban on transport and postal links with Georgia .
Just a few days ago Gazprom announced a non-commercial more than doubling of the price Georgia must pay for gas .
Altogether , in plain language , the sum of those measures can be called an economic blockade .
I do not wish to use this opportunity to further elevate tensions between Georgia and Russia , or to see this afternoon as a chance to create anti-Russian feeling in the heart of Europe .
We have enough tensions and enough mudslinging .
Such rhetoric would serve no constructive purpose .
Rather , it is now time for diplomacy , discussion , the constructive identification of areas of mutual interest and mutual responsibility .
( Applause )
On behalf of my Government and my people , I stand ready to pursue that approach , for it is the only path .
Let these words once again stand as an open invitation to our colleagues and all interlocutors to return to the path of normality and harmony through dialogue .
I believe that the leaders of both countries share the responsibility for making sure that , under our leadership , relations between the two countries do not deteriorate beyond repair .
Let us move forward with haste and good intentions .
Like all of you , the people of Georgia are not and never will be anti-Russian .
Please permit me to make reference to another great European statesman , Konrad Adenuaer , who , in his memoirs had this to say about his situation then : ' We were a small and very exposed country .
By our own strength we could achieve nothing .
We must not be a no-man 's land between East and West , for then we would have friends nowhere and a very dangerous neighbour in the East ' .
Geography is a little different today , but I could apply some of those words to my country as well .
Chancellor Adenuaer 's words still resonate today .
Our European aspiration is simply to be allowed to develop according to our own free choices , in harmony with all our neighbours , as many of you did decades ago .
In that respect , I believe that current measures are temporary and that through patience and level-headedness , through dialogue and mutual respect , they will be lifted and our relations will and must normalise .
That is a desire for which I have the full support of my people .
However , if anything today gives me pause in our relations with Russia , it is the very issue that was raised so poignantly by the EU in Lahti and Luxembourg some weeks ago .
Quite simply , it is the issue of justice .
Here I would like to make reference to the great Russian author Alexander Solzhenitsyn , whose then forbidden books I read with great passion as a teenager .
He said : ' Justice is conscience , not a personal conscience but the conscience of the whole of humanity .
Those who clearly recognise the voice of their own conscience usually recognise the voice of justice . '
I believe that your solidarity during this difficult period most clearly reflects the very same sense of justice . For when children with Georgian names are expelled from schools , all our children are at risk .
When famous artists , writers , actors , sportsmen are hounded and silenced , we are all silenced .
When thousands of citizens are forcibly deported from their homes , taken off the streets in handcuffs , we are all deported .
I and the people of Georgia are grateful for your expression of support for our country .
When we feared isolation , Europe raised the banner of our values .
Indeed , this very Parliament has raised the voice of morality in Europe .
We will never forget your solidarity .
This is the awakening of fundamental values to which we all aspire .
We see these values alive in Europe , in your statement .
When I went to Lithuania after the Russian ban on Georgian wine , I saw young Lithuanian volunteers , including students from the Universities of Vilnius and Kaunas , going around supermarkets , together with their professors , telling shoppers to buy Georgian wine .
They said that this was freedom wine , that Georgians were paying the price for freedom and needed immediate help , and that shoppers they should therefore buy that wine out of solidarity .
The Polish army has decreed that at officers ' receptions it will only serve Georgian wine , which is something we are very grateful for .
We do not need arms from the Polish army , as this is a great help in itself .
However , the greatest expression of solidarity came from within Russia itself .
In fact the most powerful voices we heard were from there .
I was moved by those Russian citizens who spoke out .
There are many examples : in many parts of Russia ordinary citizens walked the streets bearing yellow stars with the words ' I am Georgian ' ; in Moscow , some high school directors threatened to fire any teacher who handed over lists of students with Georgian names to the police , at the risk of they themselves being fired on the spot for such acts ; in St Petersburg , taxi drivers instructed by the city council to refuse lifts to passengers who even looked Georgian , and to refuse to take passengers to some of the numerous Georgian restaurants in the city , refused to obey those orders and threatened to go on strike if pushed .


The acts of individuals can make a great difference .
I was very touched by the words of the famous Russian actress , Inna Churikova , who recently said , ' Is every misfortune the fault of Georgians ?
I do not like it when they try to brainwash me from the television screen .
I already see the results : people are against Georgians and soon they will turn against Armenians and the others .
This is shameful .
I want to ask people - what are you doing ?
Wake up ! '
What courage and determination .
I would also like to single out one more individual , the renowned Russian actor Alexander Saladasky , who is today 's modern Russian hero because he applied for Georgian citizenship as a protest .
Another modern Russian , and indeed European , hero is Shurshadze , formerly called Shurshin , a young student from St Petersburg about whom I read in the press .

He , together with a number of his fellow students , in defiance of policies of xenophobia and hate , took a very bold step and changed his last name from Shurshin to Shurshadze , thereby giving it the Georgian ending .
I think we are all inspired by the examples set by those Russian citizens , who have chosen to dissent from a policy that is contrary to what we call European values .
I wish to thank all those people today from this place , the European Parliament .
My purpose in travelling here today is to share with you Georgia 's European vision .
Part of that vision means applying 21st century European solutions to modern challenges .
We are a small democracy which believes that only through and with Europe will our country and region become secure and lasting partners .
We are unavoidably beholden to each other .
And so , through European approaches to conciliation built on mutual interest , as well as on common values , we can arrive at solutions that will create an all-inclusive society where no one is a loser .
To meet those standards , I want to give you some assurances and clarifications .
In many circles , Georgia is labelled as a provocative state which is trying to restore its territorial integrity through force .
I can say to you categorically that this is not true .
Our intentions are peaceful and exclusively so , because we know what war is , we know what victims look like because they reside among our population today , and we know this cannot be a solution .
I myself have dedicated my career and education to the study of human rights , specialising in particular in minority rights .
I did my university thesis at the Norwegian Institute of Human Rights on minority rights , and more specifically those of the South Ossetian and Abkhaz peoples .
Today fewer than 40 000 ethnic Abkhaz live in Abkhazia and fewer than 20 000 ethnic Ossetians in South Ossetia .
I want you to know these figures because sometimes it seems like we are talking about hundreds of millions .
They are a very small number of people , and as such I am especially sensitive to their concerns .
I know what they are feeling .
On the one hand these small groups have become pawns in a larger game - hostages if you like to big politics and a zero-sum vision , with the resurgence of imperial feelings .
On the other hand , they have real and genuine concerns which I understand and with which I deeply sympathise .
I know their concerns and we are trying to listen to and meet their needs .
Unfortunately , there are many who continue to suffer from these conflicts .
Over 300 000 ethnic Georgians , as well as Jews , Greeks , Russians and Ukrainians , were thrown out of Abkhazia .
Even now we witness the property of those expelled peoples being inhabited by others , and in many cases sold illegally .
Indeed , just recently one of the most famous Georgian-French film makers , Otar Ioseliani , while commenting on the recent campaign , remarked that history seems to be repeating itself , targeting the same victims for a second time .
He reproached the world for being silent , just as it was the first time .
He had this to say : ' The Russian administration first undertook ethnic cleansing in Abkhazia in 1993 , where 500 000 people became refugees .
Those who could not escape by walking through the high mountains were massacred by the hands of mercenaries .
They devastated and destroyed the country .
And by the way , then everybody was silent too . '
And now the same people are being picked up on the streets of Moscow .
On my way to the European Parliament this morning I met two people from Abkhazia .
They told me they had been deported from Russia , had paid a bribe to a policeman to be deported to France .
It is all happening again .
The first time was in 1993 and now it is happening again .
So this is the painful legacy we have inherited .
This time let us not be silent .
Today we do not need retribution .
The Ossetian and Abkhaz peoples are our fellow citizens , and here again I am drawn to the timeless words of Sir Oliver Wardrop , who in his book The Kingdom of Georgia wrote in 1888 : ' At the very outset it is necessary to remove from the mind of the reader an opinion which is almost universally held in Europe and which is , perhaps , the chief cause of that apathy with which politicians look upon the Caucasus .
It is generally believed , even by some of those who have been in the country , that Transcaucasia is inhabited by a vast number of tribes , more or less wild , having nothing in common but the doubtful benefits of Russian rule .
Nothing could be more misleading .
Students of ethnography may amuse themselves by making elaborate investigations into the origin of the Khevsur , the Svan , the Pshav , the Osset ( and the Abkhaz ) , it is sufficient for us to know that all these people are , politically at least , Georgians , and have fought under the Kartvelian kings since the days of William the Conqueror ' .
Georgia is a multi-ethnic state and I believe that diversity , that tapestry , is one of our greatest strengths .
Not a weakness , but a strength .
I was proud that just a few days ago I opened a new Ossetian language school outside South Ossetia , the territory we control , because right now we have twice as many ethnic Ossetian language schools outside South Ossetia as there are inside .
We are still a unitary state , but we are certainly open to all kinds of arrangements under which all minorities are accommodated and there is considerable wide autonomy for all of them , such as the ones in Southern Tirol and in many other places in Europe .
For these reasons , our task is to extend our hand in peace , justice and reconciliation , to try and solve our problems through negotiation and compromise so that these areas and all the peoples who call them home can share and be blessed by the same prosperity and guarantees of security enjoyed by the rest of Georgia today .
Some suggest that our separatist problems are simply an internal Georgian affair .
Unfortunately this is not so .
Our disputes have continued because they are based on recidivist territorial claims - remnants from the Soviet period when an empire collapsed and elites sought to retain their privilege and fiefdoms .
Generals fought wars for dachas in Abkhazia because that was the main private property in Soviet times , and they are still clinging to those dachas .
In this scenario , the tactic so visible today is to provide support to local proxies and create institutional blockages to bilateral discussions and negotiation .
In this scenario it is the people and future generations born into a climate of fear and hate that lose .
My message this afternoon is one of reconciliation , of openness and of recognition and protection of minority rights .
We cannot have 19th or 20th century solutions .
We appeal to your objectivity , interests , and above all sense of fair play when evaluating these challenges .
( FR ) Ladies and gentlemen , my remarks are founded on the conviction that , today , we must build 21st century European solutions , so that we never again witness the fatal responses of the 20th century , where ' might is right ' and small states are inexorably torn apart by larger states .
I hope that my conviction and responsibility as a democratic leader can be recognised .
I will never remain silent or inactive in the face of a great threat to democracy and to the territorial integrity of my country .
No : in such a difficult situation , Georgia must demonstrate calm and show that it can be constructive .
That is precisely what we are going to do .
Our aim is to continue with our political , social and economic reforms , as difficult as they may be , and build on our successes and our progress in order to send a positive message .
In the 1990s , Russia used an economic blockade as a weapon to prevent the integration of the Baltic States into the European Union .
In the end , however , these blockades served only to speed up the reorientation of the Baltic economies from the East to the West .
The same will apply to Georgia .
Today , I take advantage of the opportunity of this forum to propose a way forward calling for the strengthening of cooperation between the European Union and Georgia , in particular , by consolidating our cooperation in terms of the neighbourhood policy , and by exploring ways to deepen this relationship so that Georgia may forever become a model demonstrating what the European example can accomplish .
We are ready .
To achieve this , however , we need your judges , your legal experts , your economists and your security experts .
We want a Georgia that secures its borders , so that Europe itself may be more secure .
With your involvement , we can overcome the effects of the current embargo , in particular , if we are given the opportunity to trade freely with Turkey and to progress in this direction with the European Union .
Spare us from having to ask for your help , by allowing us to trade .
Let us work together to overcome our territorial disputes .
I have proposed talks with Moscow and with the leaders of the separatist regions , in order to find common ground .
We have asked European governments to become involved in order to facilitate this process .
The time has come to build confidence .
Together with the Organisation for Security and Cooperation in Europe , the United Nations and the European Union , we have offered the greatest possible forms of independence to South Ossetia and Abkhazia , and I confirm this proposal before you today .
May we who , in the past , have all been victims of war , work together today to build a better future .
It is not in the interests of Europe , Russia and Europe 's neighbouring countries to allow this issue to continue without creating a new framework for the emerging challenges .
Therefore , if we want to prevent rampant separatism , we must begin a new approach , a European approach reconciling individual beliefs with self-determination and territorial integrity .
This is vital for our collective security .
Together , we can achieve it .
It has been my privilege to share with you today my observations and thoughts on Georgia 's European choice .
I believe the path forward - one of engagement and mutual benefit - is finding greater resonance in the capitals of Europe and in European institutions , and this trend should be encouraged .
In closing , I return to the words of Robert Schuman : ' Europe will not be made all at once , or according to a single plan .
It will be built through concrete achievements which first create a de facto solidarity ' .
I believe that today we are seeing the emergence of that solidarity .
It is certainly present in this Chamber , and it is in our hearts and in our actions as we move forward together .
( The House rose and accorded the speaker a standing ovation )
( in Georgian ) Thank you very much for your words , Mr President .
( Applause )
As you can see , my Georgian is far worse than your Spanish .
It is , in any case , a way of showing you how warmly you are received by the European Parliament .
The European Parliament is a friend of Georgia .
It demonstrated that in its recent resolution calling for an end to attacks against Georgian citizens .
Furthermore , it hopes that your presence and your words in the European Parliament will contribute to improving the situation in terms of relations between your country and Russia .
You can count on us , Mr President .
Didi madloba .
1 .
2006 Annual Report on the Euro Area ( vote )
- Before the vote on Amendment 13
( FR ) With the agreement of the rapporteur , the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance are prepared to delete Amendment 7 , on condition that an oral amendment be added at the end of Amendment 13 .
This would specify each party 's responsibilities in the field of foreign exchange policy .
I will now read you the text of the oral amendment in English :
' Without prejudice to their respective powers and responsibilities in order to cope with international disequilibria . '
( The oral amendment was not accepted )
2 .
Marine environment strategy ( vote )
3 .
Mortgage credit ( vote )
That concludes the vote .
Voting time ( continued )
Explanations of vote
( DE ) Mr President , experts agree that the trend towards flight from the land will intensify still further over coming years , and the high death rate among farmers is a factor in that .
This disturbing tendency has also been encouraged by our misguided subsidy policy , from which , as a rule , only the big players benefit , not to mention the long years over which rural areas have been neglected .
It follows that we have to ensure that small farms and those in mountainous areas can survive , with the creation of equivalent living conditions in town and country , and that we must press on with the development of the infrastructure in individual regions and the establishment of links between them .
It is for that reason that I have voted in favour of the Daul report 's adoption .
in writing . - ( EL ) The Commission proposal on the development of energy crops and biomass production crops endeavours to mitigate the impasses created by the new CAP in the rural economy , for workers in agricultural product processing industries and for small and medium-sized holdings , from its first year in application and which will intensify on its completion .
However , the incentives contained in the proposal and the preconditions for paying them benefit large farm holdings in the northern countries of the ΕU which have a comparative advantage due to their soil and climate conditions and size , but do not benefit countries with a dry summer climate and small holdings , because they are of a horizontal nature and deliberately overlook these differences .
In our country , for example , there are no areas which were entered into the set-aside scheme in order to be cultivated with energy crops , with the result that there is no benefit from this measure , while the surface area subsidy of 4.5 euros per decare is insignificant and is not therefore an incentive of any substance .
That is why we disagree with the proposed regulation , despite the fact that we consider the Commission proposal for the new Member States as regards energy crops to be positive in principle , because it moves in the direction of equal treatment , even though it does not constitute equal treatment .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the report by my esteemed colleague , Mrs Descamps. on the proposal for a Council decision on the conclusion of the Agreement between the European Union and the Government of Canada establishing a framework for cooperation in the fields of higher education , training and youth .
This report is entirely in line with a very long-standing tradition of cooperation , and it is logical that we should create privileged relations by means of the youth of the European Union and of Canada , who are the sons of Europe .
The aim of these agreements is to strengthen our cooperation in the fields of higher education and training with Canada , on the one hand , and with the United States , on the other .
The texts therefore renew , for an eight year period - from 2006 to 2013 - the cooperation programmes previously concluded with the European Union , in 1995 and in 2000 .
The cooperation agreement negotiated with Canada is designed to strengthen and expand the scope of the previous agreement , by providing a new framework for cooperation in the sphere of youth .
Renewing the previous programme in part , the new agreement concluded with the United States establishes innovative programmes leading to the creation of Transatlantic Degrees .
It aims to promote exchange schemes for students and teachers , strengthen the Schuman-Fulbright programme and encourage closer institutional collaboration in higher education .
These two agreements have proven their usefulness in the past .
Implementing them should improve the openness and competitiveness of our higher education systems for the future , while building bridges between our peoples and promoting mutual understanding .
I am delighted that our Parliament has voted in favour of the conclusion of these agreements , thereby enabling the relationships linking our two continents to be strengthened .


( DE ) Mr President , the public are becoming more and more mobile ; there is no longer anything exceptional about working or studying in another EU Member State , or about living in one in retirement , and so a number of complex issues and problems - which we have not yet resolved - arise with regard to social security .
Although a certain amount has been going on since the first Community rules and regulations on this subject were enacted over 30 years ago , there is still a need for action in this respect , to which I do not believe the Matsouka report does justice , and it is for that reason that I abstained from voting on it .
Businesses in the aquaculture sector , following the rapid development of the sector in indigenous species of fish and shellfish , want to get into the cultivation of non-indigenous species .
The proposal for a regulation makes provision for certain safety procedures because there is a clear danger of disrupting the natural biodiversity in an area once non-indigenous species have been introduced and released .
Nonetheless , there can be no full safeguard , especially as the data needed have been requested from the interested parties , as was the case with GMOs .
Historically , of course , for species such as carp , trout and so on , there proved to be no repercussions in the areas in which they were released .
Nonetheless , there is no guarantee that this historic precedent will be repeated , whatever the efforts and safety valves .
On the other hand , the facility to import such organisms and the possible economic benefits which will accrue can be counterbalanced by fishing and / or cultivating them in countries where they constitute natural populations - in other words , with no danger to natural ecosystems .
This would also allow these countries to develop , for the benefit of their peoples too , in direct disproportion to any economic results there would be in the Member States of the EU .
In other words , the business interests would win , but [ not ] at the expense of the peoples in the countries of origin of the non-indigenous species .
in writing . ( SV ) I am of the opinion that the EU 's financial aid to the fishing industry should be abolished as soon as possible and that those Member States responsible for overfishing should themselves compensate the developing countries affected by EU fisheries agreements .
Such compensation should not be paid for from the EU budget .
I have , despite everything , decided to vote in favour of the report , as it reduces the chances of national special interests influencing aid .
The United Nations Convention against Corruption is in fact the first global instrument designed to prevent and combat corruption .
The purpose is thus to create a global strategy and framework , with a range of minimum , but significant , standards , which must be applied to all parties to the Convention .
The standards should help in the prevention , investigation and prosecution of corruption and the freezing , seizure , confiscation and return of the proceeds of these offences .
The Commission negotiated this agreement , which is based on elements of the Convention that fall within the scope of the Community 's competences , and concluded those negotiations in September 2005 on the Community 's behalf .
I therefore welcome the conclusion of this agreement . I am very disappointed , however , that three Member States - Sweden , Slovenia and Estonia - have yet to sign up to the Convention .
I hope the ratification process carried out by the Community , and by the Member States that have yet to do so , is concluded at the earliest opportunity .
I wish to highlight the vital importance of this Convention entering into force as quickly as possible . Once this happens , more effective action can be taken to prevent and combat this type of crime .
in writing . ( SV ) It is unacceptable for the EU now to attempt to bind all its Member States to a third party in an international treaty .
The whole idea of the United Nations Convention against Corruption is one based on voluntary participation and respect for the national right of self-determination .
The rapporteur , Mr Catania , has chosen to cite 26 assorted articles in his report as support for the proposal .
None of these articles accord the EU the power or competence to enter into a legally binding treaty with a third party .
The EU should instead focus on the widespread corruption within its own institutions .
Internal corruption within the EU is a growing problem that is in the process of eroding citizens ' trust in the whole European idea .
The June List believes that the EU is exceeding its powers and is therefore voting against the proposal as a whole .
This report is one that , naturally , I voted in favour of .
The battle against corruption around the world is an essential objective for the good governance of all members of the international community , and in turn , a key factor in peace and development .
Quite apart from ethical and economic considerations , there is a salient point that makes the fight against corruption on a world scale a key factor in international relations .
Countries with corrupt governments are governed by rules , criteria and interests that are incompatible with those of sustainable development , cooperation and peace .
To tackle them is to tackle one of the causes of conflict and poverty .
It is not enough , however , for us merely to sign up to conventions of this nature .
What is needed is for this fight to form part of our criteria for action at international level , not least in the area of cooperation in which the EU plays such a significant role .
That is why I voted in favour .
in writing . - ( PT ) The Commission 's proposal , on which this report is based , is aimed at bringing Regulation ( EC ) No 1698 / 2005 into line with the European Council Agreement of 15 / 16 December 2005 on the financial perspective 2007-2013 , as regards the capping of allocations from the Cohesion Fund , and as regards the exemption of Portugal from the application of the cofinancing requirement for the amount of EUR 320 million .
Under the terms of this agreement , the amount of EUR 320 million to be awarded to Portugal would not be ' subject to the requirement of national cofinancing ' ' in light of the specific difficulties of Portuguese farming ' .
The provision of a ' national envelope ' in the context of a global appropriation provided for by the new rural development instrument ( EAFRD ) , and the doubling of the originally proposed amount , increased on account of the exemption in recognition of the difficulties faced by Portuguese farming , were , for Portugal , among the most positive aspects of the new political agreement that was reached under the UK Presidency as part of the lengthy and difficult negotiations on the financial framework for the next period 2007-2013 .
I therefore voted for the Mulder report , which advocates the adoption of the Commission proposal before us .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List believes that the common agricultural policy ( or ' rural development ' , as we will be calling it from 2007 onwards ) should be abolished .
This week ( the week commencing 23 October 2006 ) , the EU 's Court of Auditors observed for the thirteenth time in a row that it could not guarantee that more than a small part of the EUR 105 billion from EU budget had been used correctly or for the purposes intended .
Aid under the agricultural policy is one of the biggest problem areas to monitor , and there are great problems with monitoring in certain sectors , such as aid for olive oil production .
This cannot go on .
The running tap that is EU funding must be turned off .
We have therefore voted against this report .
in writing . This report approves the Commission 's proposal to make two changes to the rural development financing mechanism in line with the December 2005 European Council 's agreement on rural development funding for the period 2007-2013 .
Conservative MEPs condemned the December 2005 agreement and therefore cannot support proposals originating from it .
The British Government squandered a golden opportunity to achieve a fairer distribution of rural development funds and allowed certain Member States , even at that early stage , to allocate for themselves substantial sums of the already reduced amounts .
Ultimately , the UK ended up with only 3.5 % of the funds available for the EU-15 .
The proposal in question allows Portugal to exempt itself from the obligation to cofinance the amounts it secured for itself at the December Council .
Conservatives believe that this sets a dangerous precedent .
In addition to general considerations concerning the need to bring agricultural policy and the funds awarded to farmers increasingly into line with the objectives of rural development , a further reason for my vote in favour of this report was that the exceptional situation faced by Portugal has been acknowledged and that the requirement of national cofinancing has accordingly been removed .
Clearly as a consequence of the question I put to the Commission , Portuguese farmers , Portuguese farming and the potential for rural development have recently been hindered by the Portuguese government 's inability or unwillingness to take action , with large amounts of funding going unused .
For this reason , this special case is well justified .
I voted in favour of the Lienemann report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a Framework for Community Action in the field of Marine Environmental Policy , because this Marine Strategy Directive will duly implement the proposals of the Sixth Environmental Action Programme on promoting the sustainable use of the seas and marine ecosystems .
A significant proportion of European citizens live in coastal regions and depend on the sea for their livelihood , whereas for others it is a place of leisure .
Developing national marine strategies - aimed at achieving good environmental status , and at protecting and preserving the most vulnerable marine ecosystems and biological diversity - will make it possible to maintain activities in the marine environment at levels that are sustainable and that compromise neither the uses and activities of future generations nor the capacity of marine ecosystems to respond to natural and human-induced changes .
in writing . ( PT ) We welcome the initiative to establish an action framework in the area of marine environment policy , with the appropriate financial resources .
Given its strategic importance , the Member States must set out assessment strategies and environmental objectives for their marine environment , in collaboration with the other Member States or with third countries , this after all being an issue in which one country 's actions may have a knock-on effect in other countries .
There is a key question throughout this process , and that is who owns and manages the sea areas to which this directive applies .
Both the proposed directive and the amendments adopted today in the Lienemann report begin with the definition of ' European marine waters ' , which fails to clarify what our exclusive economic zone is and what the role of each Member State is in this context .
As regards the creation of supranational bodies , there is no indication as to whether this is a decision that can only be taken unanimously on the basis of the principle of sovereign States with equal rights or whether , contrariwise , this can be imposed by a majority as proposed in the so-called European Constitution .
Given the lack of clarity on these issues , we abstained from the final vote .
The purpose of the ' Marine Environment Directive ' is to establish a high level of protection for Europe 's seas and oceans , to extend our knowledge of this heritage , on which there remains a great deal to discover , and to define a management strategy based on an integrated approach , with qualitative and quantitative objectives aimed at reducing the pressure on marine resources and their ecosystems .
I wish to highlight the reference to the need for EU cofinancing of measures to be carried out in order to enforce the directive , and their inclusion in the budgets from 2007 onwards .
This measure is very important for Portugal given that it is a country with an enormous exclusive economic zone , the largest in the EU , which therefore involves high costs .
Approving the change to the deadline for achieving the objectives set out - from 2021 to 2017 - as proposed by the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , is indicative of Parliament 's ambitious attitude to this issue and the extent of its commitment to seeking ' good environmental status ' for the marine environment .
The remaining measures provided for , which are aimed at ensuring the sustainability of economic activities involving the seas and oceans , protecting biodiversity and preventing pollution , also proposed by the PPE-DE , are also highly important , improving substantially upon the Commission 's proposal ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
in writing . - ( FR ) I welcome the adoption at first reading of Mrs Lienemann 's report on the ' Marine Strategy Directive ' , an essential document that is in line with the Framework Water Directive ( FWD ) .
However , I would like to say that I am not convinced of the feasibility of the timescale that has just been adopted .
Indeed , we do not yet have sufficient knowledge of the marine environment in order to reach a true assessment of the environmental situation of European seas within the shortened period .
As we are witnessing with the implementation of the FWD , the preparation and analysis phase is always difficult and longer than anticipated .
Moreover , the marine environment is by no means characterised by rapid change .
I therefore feel that the timetable proposed by the Commission is already sufficiently ambitious .
in writing . - ( PT ) We welcome the initiative of a marine environment policy as part of the cooperation and coordination that is needed between different countries , whilst ensuring that full sovereignty over territory and resources is safeguarded for each country , and that economic , social and environmental aspects are taken into account .
The preservation of fisheries resources has been put in jeopardy particularly by marine pollution and by the large volume of shipping , both of which affect fishing .
Fishing itself is just one of many factors , and certainly not the most significant one .
Fish stocks , and the regeneration thereof , are an indispensable component in ensuring the future of fisheries ; without fish there is no fishing .
Fishermen are therefore the most important stakeholders in protecting and regenerating the marine environment .
Against this backdrop , stock recovery measures must , with appropriate funding , involve much-needed economic and social compensation for the sector and its workers .
The key issue is respect for the Member States ' sovereignty , in particular over their exclusive economic zones and their ability to implement independent measures to defend their fisheries resources .
Lastly , although the marine strategy and the CFP need to be closely linked , the latter must not impose its structures on fishing structures .
in writing . The marine environment requires protection and conservation .
The conclusion of Good Environmental Status should be welcomed .
However , in supporting Amendment 91 we clarify that oil and gas exploitation in the marine environment can continue , subject to international rules .
The contribution of the oil and gas industry to the Scottish economy is important to recognise .
Mr President , mercury is a highly toxic and dangerous substance .
Eliminating it from all uses , especially household uses , where there are adequate substitutes is an eminently sensible proposal , supported by all 25 governments in the Council .
Yet the PPE-DE Group , egged on by the British Conservatives , has voted to allow extra exemptions for precisely those products which are likely to find their way into household use , which is the most dangerous place for them .
That does not square with what David Cameron is saying back home in Britain , or even with what the Conservative Party website says about its commitment to phase out dangerous chemical substances .
I hope at least that the British Conservatives , after weeks of campaigning against so-called ' diktats ' from Brussels , will now refrain from using such language .
They will have seen today that the outcome of European legislation is being determined by a democratic vote in this Parliament , rather than by European Commission ' diktats ' .
Even if they express no regret over what they have done today , I hope they will at least desist from using that sort of vocabulary when campaigning on such issues .
in writing . - ( PT ) This proposal follows on from the ' Community Strategy concerning mercury ' adopted in January 2005 and is aimed at reducing the use of products containing mercury by banning the marketing of devices containing mercury .
Once this report is adopted , the marketing of all measuring devices will be banned and the Commission 's original proposal will be amended so that the new regulation can enter into force as quickly as possible .
Excluded from this regulation are products that are already on the market , devices regarded as antiques and collectors ' items , and barometers , the manufacture of which should be duly licensed , and which may be phased out .
The use of traditional barometers in Europe is very low , as is the total amount of mercury that they account for .
Their exclusion and that of measuring instruments over 50 years old from this proposal is an important measure , because it protects existing small manufacturers , and because the mercury is usually recycled and reused .
Had they been included - thereby hammering the final nail in the coffin of the traditional barometer manufacturing industry - there could have been contamination and unforeseen flows of mercury ...
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 163 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
I voted in favour of the Sornosa Martínez report on the proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Council Directive 76 / 769 / EEC relating to restrictions on the marketing of certain measuring devices containing mercury . In view of the highly toxic nature of this substance for human beings , ecosystems and nature , restrictions are needed on the marketing of these products .
This will help prevent substantial quantities of mercury from entering the waste stream and will contribute to a high level of protection of the environment and human health .
Devices containing mercury must be replaced wherever there are safer alternatives on the market . Exceptions may , however , be authorised in cases where there are no alternative solutions yet available and in rare cases of keeping traditional barometers , museum collections and industrial heritage .
in writing . I voted for this report to limit the use of mercury - a highly dangerous substance .
I was astounded to see the British Tory MEPs vote against a ban .
This runs counter to their leader David Cameron 's explicit commitment to banning dangerous chemicals .
It is sad to see that the Tories hold the health and safety of future generations so lightly .
Once again they say one thing at home and another thing abroad .
in writing . A Lancet report published in the UK last week highlighted the dangers of toxic chemicals for the health of the unborn and young children .
Mercury is extremely toxic , bioaccumulative and persistent in the environment .
There are no safe exposure levels and yet mercury is getting into our waste stream from discarded household products containing mercury .
That is why Labour MEPs agree with the 25 EU governments and the Commission that mercury should be phased out in all but essential uses .
We are opposed to a permanent exemption for mercury barometers because substitutes are available , but we proposed and will support a longer , two-year phase-out period for mercury barometers to allow industry to adapt to the new law .
in writing . - ( FR ) In January 2005 , the European Parliament approved my report on the European Environment and Health Action Plan 2004-2010 by a very large majority .
Its recommendations included the progressive banning of a number of chemical substances which , like the mercury used in dental amalgams and in non-electronic measuring and checking devices , are extremely worrying in terms of human health .
They need to be replaced by safer alternatives .
Indeed , the 33 tonnes of mercury used each year in the European Union are , like other heavy metals , the cause of neurological illnesses affecting children , in particular .
In our societies , where chemicals are ubiquitous , public health absolutely must from now on be the first consideration .
That is why I regret that - notwithstanding the opinion of our rapporteur , Mrs Sornosa - 327 of my fellow Members have seen fit to limit the bans whereby items such as thermometers and barometers that contain mercury and are intended for the general public could no longer be placed on the market .
Tomorrow , however , it will be necessary to go further and to call for the 25 Member States to take ambitious measures to ensure that mercury in all its forms disappears from public places as vulnerable as maternity hospitals , day nurseries , hospitals and schools .
Mr President , this vote shows that reform of the common agricultural policy still faces stiff resistance from vested interests every step of the way .
Despite such resistance , step by step reform has already led to a relative decline in CAP spending and a switch from spending on price support to support for more environmental improvements , income support and rural development .
Export subsidies will also be phased out .
But further steps down this path remain necessary .
They will be achieved , despite the resistance displayed by the votes today .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , the MEPs from the Czech Civil Democratic Party today refused to support the Goepel report on the proposal for a Council regulation laying down rules for voluntary modulation of direct payments .
The report rejects the proposal tabled by the Commission , on the basis of an agreement with the Council , to increase the flexibility of the common agricultural policy ( CAP ) basing it more closely on actual national conditions .
This is a ridiculous position for Parliament to take , and one that we cannot support under any circumstances .
The CAP currently discriminates against all of the new Member States including the Czech Republic .
The rapporteur 's reference to the principle of prohibiting discrimination thus makes a mockery of all farmers in the new Member States .
Discrimination against these farmers is actually taking place .
This year they received 35 % of appropriations in direct payments , as opposed to the 100 % received by farmers from the old Member States , and this explains why we voted as we did .
( DE ) Mr President , my apologies for not having been paying enough attention earlier on .
What I wanted to say was that I very much approve of Mr Goepel 's - our rapporteur 's - approach and the line he has taken , and that I do not quite understand why the Commission is being so stubborn in holding to its own .
I hope that we will , over the next two months , which the new timetabling arrangements have now made available to us , be able to find ways and means of preventing any renationalisation of agricultural policy at a time when money is needed right across the Community , and I will endeavour to work towards that end .
I believe there should be room to negotiate , and I hope that the Commission will have a more sensible attitude to that .
It goes without saying that the Dutch Members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament are in favour of more modulation , of transferring funds from the first to the second pillar of the agricultural budget .
Modulation is , from a social democratic point of view , a considerable improvement on the unfairness of the present income subsidies .
Indeed , the biggest farmers receive disproportionately a great deal more than the others .
Moreover , income subsidies are inefficient , because they insufficiently increase farmers ' spending power .
Rural development offers more opportunities for all people living in the countryside .
Young and old need good facilities , a strong infrastructure and a diverse economy .
Rural development is also in the interest of the large majority of farmers .
Although voluntary modulation is less desirable than compulsory modulation on account of the possible distortion of competitive relations between European farmers , the Dutch Labour Party can go along with it nevertheless , because it represents a step in the right direction .
The Council has taken a decision , though , without walking the most basic democratic path first .
The European Parliament has not been heard about this major intervention in the budget .
The unfortunate fact is that , due to this democratic deficit , it is impossible for us to support the motion for a resolution , and we have therefore abstained .
in writing . - ( PT ) We voted against the rapporteur 's position and therefore in favour of the Commission 's legislative proposal because ' modulation ' - that is to say , the possibility of transferring up to 20 % of appropriations granted to farmers receiving more than EUR 5 000 per year from the first to the second pillar of the CAP - is an essential instrument for introducing a measure of justice into the distribution of agricultural aid .
We wish to point out that in Portugal only 5 % of farmers receive more than EUR 5 000 per year .
We fail to understand how the current situation can be preferable to the alternative proposal of ' voluntary modulation ' .
We , the undersigned to this explanation of vote , advocate that the ideal solution would be ' compulsory modulation ' , which we believe to be inevitable in the short to medium term .
Given the alternative put forward , we find its rejection by Parliament incomprehensible .
In Portugal 's case , the proposed mode of application would make it possible to increase rural development aid by some EUR 50 million per year , which would benefit many farmers who are currently excluded from any support .
The central thrust of this report is that the Commission 's proposal is not a proposal for genuine modulation . Such a proposal would increase aid to those who receive the least , or receive nothing , at the expense of those who receive a large amount , the purpose of which is to ensure greater fairness in the distribution of aid among producers , countries and holdings and to support small and medium farmers and family farming .
We feel that the Commission should table a fresh proposal in order to create genuine modulation , which would guarantee greater fairness and release financial resources by introducing a maximum limit to aid per holding ( capping ) and a percentage increase in aid for farmers who receive the least from the CAP ( modulation ) , for example , by proposing a 15 % to 20 % increase for farmers who receive less than EUR 5 000 in aid and , in addition to this figure , taking various circumstances into account .
Without this , there is a risk that existing inequalities will be exacerbated .
We therefore urge the Commission to recast the proposal in order to ensure that a decision on this issue does not ultimately lead to the renationalisation of the CAP .
Hence our vote against the report , in the hope of paving the way for a new proposal .
in writing . - ( FR ) At a time when the EU is facing an upsurge in nationalist sentiment , the Commission 's proposal to introduce a voluntary modulation of direct payments within the framework of the common agricultural policy signals a new stage in the disintegration of Community solidarity .
Faced with this danger , Parliament had to respond and make its voice heard in order to reaffirm the commitment felt by the representatives of the European nations to defending the ' common ' character of the EU 's public policies , of which the common agricultural policy is the most potent symbol and the most successful achievement .
With this in mind , I voted in favour of the Goepel report , which was presented today in plenary , and , in particular , in favour of the explicit request outrightly to reject the European Commission 's proposal .
This position , which expresses the opinion of the majority of Members present today , reflects Parliament 's clear and unambiguous desire not to betray its vision of the future Europe and not to make of the CAP an adjustment variable intended to compensate for the reprehensible weaknesses of a European budget crippled by the EU Member States ' lack of ambition .
It signals the demand to retain a system of support for producers .
Based on the principle of equity , this alone is capable of guaranteeing the future survival of viable and competitive European agriculture characterised by solidarity .
in writing . ( SV ) We are voting against this report , but we are abstaining from voting on the Commission 's proposal in this area .
The explanatory statement in this report contains a number of views such as criticism of the common agricultural policy being abandoned or renationalised - something which the June List would find desirable - and of it contravening the European Parliament 's right of participation , a view that the June List does not share .
In addition , the explanatory statement maintains that the ' health check ' , or the ' mid-term review ' as we prefer to call it , of the long-term budget planned for 2008 / 2009 should only form the basis of proposals for the financing period after 2013 .
The June List absolutely does not share this view .
We believe that the mid-term review must lead to cuts in the agriculture / rural development budget as early as in the budget period currently at issue , 2007-2013 .
Following the Council 's offer to the Member States of the option of voluntarily modulating 20 per cent of the agricultural direct payments from the first to the second pillar , this was incorporated into the Commission 's proposal and will , without doubt , have cuts in agricultural subsidies as a consequence .
The Council , Parliament and the Commission had , in the Financial Perspective , agreed to review the EU 's expenditure on - among other things - the common agricultural policy , but not before 2013 .
Our farmers need the security to plan ahead if they are to remain competitive , and so it is now that we must ensure that the money set aside for the agricultural budget until 2013 remains unchanged , and that those funds will indeed be spent on agricultural activity .
It is unacceptable that farming families should , through compensation payments , get better financial support in one Member State than in another .
The object of European agricultural policy is to secure European farmers comparable economic conditions in a single market .
Since the Commission 's proposal was not preceded by an impact assessment that might have brought to light any unequal treatment , it is impossible for Parliament to endorse it .
I voted ' no ' in the hope of making the farmers ' demands felt .
The Commission is preparing a new attack on small and medium-sized farm holdings in its proposal to reduce direct payments by 20 % .
Transferring 20 % of resources from the first pillar , in other words direct payments , to the second pillar , which is basically reaped by businesses and large holdings , means a reduction in income support for small and medium-sized holdings .
The result will be to speed up the eradication of small holdings and the concentration of agricultural production in fewer hands .
In numerous cases , agricultural production and employment will even shrink , without being compensated for by the development of second pillar activities .
As regards the proposal for this transfer to apply voluntarily , on the one hand this will create twin-track farming and , on the other hand , the prospect in the immediate future will be of the voluntary transfer becoming compulsory .
This sort of modus operandi has been used in the past .
Farmers in Greece are experiencing the adverse impact of the new CAP .
Tobacco production has fallen by 70 % and sugar beet crops by 40 % .
The completion of the CAP will have the same adverse impact on other basic crops in my country .
Today 's proposal will be yet another blow to the cumulative and major problems of farmers , which is why we reject it .
The Danish Social Democrats have voted in favour of the Commission proposal whereby it would be possible for the Member States to apply voluntary modulation within agricultural policy , and we have thus voted against Parliament 's report , which rejects the Commission proposal .
It must be emphasised that the Danish Social Democrats would prefer to see comprehensive , compulsory modulation . Since , however , it has not been possible to reach agreement to that effect , we see voluntary modulation as a serviceable alternative .
It must be emphasised , however , that compulsory modulation - involving the long-term abolition of direct subsidies - continues to be the objective .
in writing . The CAP requires continued reform .
It is disappointing that the Commission 's proposal to introduce voluntary modulation of the CAP has been rejected .
The introduction of voluntary modulation of the CAP would have provided for a sustainable approach to rural development .
I hope that all those Members who have a direct interest in farming declared their interest and did not vote on this measure .
in writing . The Conservative delegation voted for the rejection of the modulation proposal presented by Lutz Goepel to give the Commission a chance to come forward with something better .
We strongly object to the deal that Prime Minister Blair cobbled together last Christmas at the European Council which reduced the single farm payments made to English farmers in order to fund rural development schemes .
My farmers in the Witham and Maldon area - around Coggeshall , Terling , the Teys and the Tolleshunts - as in other parts of England , want a fair deal from the common agricultural policy .
Voluntary modulation of 20 % , top-slicing the single farm payment , will mean that our farmers are likely to be 20 % worse off than even their Welsh , Scottish and Ulster counterparts , let alone the French .
My farmers have no confidence in the British government , through either DEFRA or the Rural Payments Agency , being able to make payments on time , accurately or indeed to be able to make the payment at all to many individual farmers .
Furthermore , there is now a danger that the UK will be fined by the European Commission for its ineptitude , and farmers will pick up the tab .
Our rural community needs a fair deal and they are being completely short-changed by an incompetent Government .
in writing . ( PT ) The purpose of this Commission proposal , as confirmed in this report adopted today , is to set up a public-private partnership ( PPP ) to create a European air traffic management system .
Such a PPP would set a dangerous precedent , given that it would be the first European PPP with the European Community 's participation .
We do not wish to call into question the need for air traffic management systems to be constantly updated and enhanced , in order to make them more reliable , more accurate and , most importantly , safer , given their importance for the safety of all those who work in and use air space .
We feel , however , that this objective is not best served by subjecting it to the interests and pressures of the private sector .
Quite the opposite , in fact .
We are very disappointed at the rejection of the draft amendment to which we put our name in the Committee on Transport and Tourism ( the committee responsible for delivering an opinion ) , which was aimed at safeguarding the interests of bodies representing employees in the air traffic management sector in decisions taken in the Board of Directors of the joint undertaking .
Consequently , we could not support this report .
The joint project for a new generation European air traffic management system gets my vote .
It is particularly in my capacity as rapporteur on the extended powers of the European Air Safety Agency ( EASA ) that I wholeheartedly endorse the Community 's declared objective of guaranteeing a high-performing air safety infrastructure that will make possible the safe , energy-efficient and environmentally friendly development of air travel while making use of the technical advances of such programmes as GALILEO .
According to current predictions , the volume of air traffic in Europe is set to double by 2025 , and this makes it necessary that communications between pilots and air traffic controllers , which are still transmitted via radio , should be brought up to the latest state of the art .
I also advocate a public-private partnership , in which the European Community would participate , in order that SESAR 's long-term success be secured .
I have abstained from the vote on the report by my esteemed colleague , Mr Garcia-Margallo y Marfil on the euro zone in 2006 since , though it puts forward some very interesting analyses , I regret the fact that it does not raise the issue straightaway of the development of the euro from a technical currency to a political tool benefiting growth and employment .
The monetary policy conducted by the European Central Bank ( ECB ) seems to be at odds with reality : the exchange rate should normally be strong when there is strong economic growth and should depreciate when there is weak growth .
The fact is that , in Europe , the opposite has been true since the start of the 1990s .
While the Member States are undergoing reforms , the quest for zero inflation through an inappropriate monetary policy is leading Europe to record mediocre results in terms of economic growth .
If this state of affairs continues , at a time when the price of raw materials and of energy is rocketing worldwide , we will have zero inflation and zero growth , and manufacturers will end up setting up their businesses in the dollar zone .
With everything that is happening , it is as though the ECB is disregarding economic policy , while its US counterpart is thinking of nothing else .
As we know , the creation of the euro was a political decision that took no account of the specific needs of the members of the euro zone . This view is borne out by the differences , in relation to 2005 , among those Members as regards economic growth , unemployment rates and inflation .
We have always stated that , with a single monetary policy , given the budgetary restrictions arising from the Stability and Growth Pact , the workers would have to carry the can for the problems associated with adopting the euro , in order to serve the interests of economic and financial groups .
The report before us makes this very clear : ' Labour markets should be made more flexible and those aspects of the legislation on permanent employment that may act as a barrier to labour market adjustment should be removed . ' In other words , it is promoting the liberalisation of redundancies and fixed-term contracts .
It also calls for ' wages to respond more rapidly to changing economic circumstances ' , or in other words for wages to be reduced depending on the cycle .
These intentions could not be clearer .
Not satisfied with this , the rapporteur also promotes the liberalisation of services and energy , the strict application of the Stability and Growth Pact and compliance with the Lisbon agenda : the very blueprint for the European neoliberal consensus .
Hence our vote against the report .
in writing . ( SV ) Even though Sweden decided , through a referendum , not to participate in economic and monetary union ( EMU ) , we have chosen to vote against the report and would like to take the opportunity to explain why we have done so .
The report provides a clear picture of how EMU goes hand in hand with the creation of an EU state .
According to the report , macroeconomic policy between the countries of the euro area is to be coordinated , and the euro area is to speak with one voice in international financial institutions and fora .
The report advocates better fiscal , especially budgetary , coordination and the coordination of national fiscal calendars .
Moreover , the objective of introducing a Common Consolidated Corporate Tax Base in Europe could be achieved through the mechanism of enhanced cooperation if Member States were unable to reach unanimous agreement .
We can only conclude that the representatives of the ' no ' campaign in Sweden 's EMU referendum in 2003 were entirely correct in their argument when they pointed out that EMU was a major step on the road to a United States of Europe .
in writing . The Conservative Party policy in relation to the euro is clear and unequivocal : we are firmly committed to keeping the pound .
We have no desire to be part of the single currency , but neither do we have any wish for the project to fail , as we believe that there is a UK national interest in there being a strong European economy with a stable currency that provides a good trading environment for British business and industry .
In line with our long-standing position on matters relating to the euro and euro area , I and my British Conservative colleagues have abstained on this report .
in writing . As an oceanographer , I am delighted to support this report on the Strategy on the Marine Environment .
The EU has for too long collapsed rural policy into agricultural policy .
Finally this has begun to change in a positive way to recognise that farming is only a minority , if important part , of the rural economy .
We face an identical problem with respect to maritime policy .
It has been seen as fisheries policy writ large , but now , with the Commission Paper on maritime policy currently out for consultation - I recently participated in a conference on the subject in Weymouth organised by the South West Regional Development Agency - this report and the Lienemann report voted earlier today , it looks as if we are going to finally move away from a one-dimensional maritime policy to a policy that embraces our seas , oceans and coasts as vital for food and the environment , transport and tourism .
in writing . ( SV ) In this commentary on the strategy on the marine environment , the rapporteur brings up many interesting and important issues .
One example is when he states that the Common Fisheries Policy must meet the requirements for sustainable development , whilst those Member States that wish to adopt more urgent measures in order to protect a particular stock should have the opportunity to do so .
Amongst the negative aspects of the report are the comments on funding ; the rapporteur is concerned about the lack of resources with which to implement the strategies , the implication being that resources from the Community budget should be contributed for this purpose and that it would be a good idea to use resources from , for example , the Structural Funds .
We have made the judgment that the positive elements in the report outweigh the negative ones and we have therefore voted in favour of the report in today 's vote .
in writing . ( PT ) This own-initiative report is aimed at creating a single European market for mortgage credit and the promotion thereof at cross-border level .
The banks and the capital markets have a major interest in this issue given that in 2004 the volume of outstanding loans was EUR 4.7 billion , equivalent to 45 % of the EU 's GNI . This is very much a growth market .
The report follows the neoliberal line . It provides for more competition in the sector , European or cross-border mortgages , a secondary market for mortgage credit and the possibility for it to be negotiated on the capital markets , cross-border mergers and acquisitions in the financial services sector , the opening-up of this market to institutions other than credit institutions , guaranteed freedom to provide services and the liberalisation of these services , restrictions on the State 's ability to regulate , online marketing of mortgage credit and access for foreign organisations to customer credit databases , including non-compliance .
It is not difficult to see the risks involved with all of these proposals , in terms of market volatility . This would jeopardise mortgage assets , that is to say , the savings of many workers and other home buyers .
We therefore voted against the report .
It goes without saying that we in the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe are in favour of opening up markets , including the market in mortgages .
I am therefore well disposed towards the Purvis report , which suggests investigation into different measures that might benefit the consumer through , for example , competition among mortgage lenders , but I have no choice but to vote against it on the grounds that the report is not very clear about the different systems of tax benefits when mortgages are concluded , and particularly harmonised .
This is an exploratory first proposal in which , above all , the call for further analysis is prominent .
The legislative phase is a long way off .
Since the mortgage market falls within the scope of the free movement of services , I support the creation of an internal market for mortgage lending .
I refuse , though , to lend my support to the harmonisation of the system of tax deduction of mortgage interest via a backdoor in Brussels .
Time after time , politicians stress that Europe must look after the core themes and cross-border issues , but this statement by the European Parliament is at odds with that .
Most of its Members do not appear bothered about the fact that tax policy is not one of the EU 's competences .
That is why the Dutch People 's Party for Freedom and Democracy delegation in the European Parliament deemed it necessary to vote against paragraph 45 of the Purvis report and , indeed , against the report as a whole .
I find it regrettable that , since none of the big groups dared apply for a roll-call vote on this matter , the European citizen can only guess how individual MEPs have voted .
in writing . I welcome the Green Paper on Mortgage Credit , which explores how competition in the EU mortgage market could increase consumer choice and reduce costs .
Consumer confidence in banks is of paramount importance .
Therefore the willingness of a borrower to deal with a foreign lender will be determined not only by the competitiveness of the mortgage , but also by the level of consumer protection that will apply to the foreign lender .
Ireland enjoys a relatively sophisticated mortgage credit market in EU terms , including access to the full range of competitively priced mortgage products .
Expansion of this market across borders may develop naturally through subsidiaries or branches abroad on a more widespread basis , if the market is encouraged in other areas .
Therefore I believe that legislative intervention should only be used as a last resort and to address proven market failure .
I fully encourage the Commission in creating electronic land registers which can be accessed online .
The fact of the matter is that lenders cannot enter other markets without absolute certainty regarding the security of their collateral .
Given the experience that many citizens have had purchasing overseas property , an online register reflecting all relevant charges affecting property ownership rights is vital .
in writing . - ( FR ) There are 25 national legislations governing mortgage credit , and soon there will be 27 standing in the way of a common European approach .
This Green Paper issued by the European Commission will finally make it possible to carry out proper studies of this issue and to go for the sensible options .
Any Community measure concerning the European mortgage credit market must , above all , be of direct benefit to the public .
However , consumers often come up against too many obstacles , be they legal or economic .
In voting in favour of the report by Mr Purvis , I opted for making the mortgage credit market accessible to a larger number of potential borrowers .
In the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , I had , in this connection , personally pushed for its rapporteur , Mr Medina Ortega , to take account of borrowers with insecure and insubstantial credit profiles , workers on fixed-term contracts and first-time buyers .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3.10 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Commission Question Time
The next item is Question Time ( B6-0445 / 2006 ) .
We will take the questions to the Commission .
Part I
Subject : European universities
A survey carried out in 2006 by the Times Higher Education Supplement , ranking universities on five continents , lists 40 European universities , mainly in the UK , among the top 100 universities in the world .
Most of the other 60 universities are in the USA , Australia and China .
The survey also reports that the annual budget of Harvard University which retains top position in 2006 - amounts to 26 billion dollars .
Will the Commission take further measures to support the competitiveness of European universities and what will those measures comprise ?
Does the Commission intend to increase further its co-funding of institutions of higher education and does it plan to draw up an official ranking list of European universities ?
Member of the Commission .
Under the principle of subsidiarity every Member State of the European Union retains full responsibility for the content and organisation of educational systems .
I have just come from the Education Council which completed its work today under the Finnish Presidency .
The Commission played and will continue to play a role in building a policy for the modernisation of higher education as part of the implementation of the important Lisbon Strategy , through policy dialogue and mutual learning , in particular through the open method of coordination in education and training as well as in the field of research .
As set out in the Commission communication on delivering a modernisation agenda for universities , measures in higher education are needed , ranging from curriculum reform to governance and funding reforms .
The main responsibility , of course , lies with the Member States ' national authorities and universities .
There is also financial support for the modernisation agenda from the Community programmes in education and research .
There is potential for substantial support from the structural funds under both the competitiveness and the convergence objectives .
With regard to university-based research , it should be noted that the forthcoming Seventh Framework Programme for Research and Development substantially widens the opportunities for enhanced university research activities .
As you know , total eligibility for projects is going up from 50 % to 75 % and programmes in lifelong learning and research for the next seven years will both see a very substantial increase in their budgets for the 2007-2013 period .
I think a very important message is sent out by the European Institute of Technology .
That is not something outside the framework of this question .
It is a very important initiative to boost the transfer of knowledge by those who intensify investment in creativity , innovation and the improvement of our competitiveness .
The EIT can improve European competitiveness in all three parts of the knowledge triangle : education , research and innovation .
With regard to ranking , which is an important part of the question put by Mr Mavrommatis , there are indeed several international rankings worldwide .
Each has its own strengths , but also its own weaknesses .
Although they are useful in terms of giving an impression of the competitive position of universities , the diversity of universities ' missions means that no single set of criteria can be considered as an objective measure .
Different ranking systems give different weights to various criteria and consequently arrive at different results .
However , provided the criteria are explicit , they can be a useful tool for both policy-makers and managers .
At this stage , to answer the question directly , the Commission is not planning to draw up an official ranking list .
( EL ) Madam President , Commissioner , do you believe that many of the higher education institutes in top positions in the general classification of another two new surveys since carried out owe chiefly their progress and progress in their courses and of their students to the fact that they have private education standards and , if so , does the Commission perhaps intend to subsidise Member States which will try such an endeavour , irrespective of the private grants that many of the universities in the world receive ?
Member of the Commission .
I think that Mr Mavrommatis is right in pointing the finger at the teaching , because when teaching is separated from other activities , namely research or even the transfer of knowledge , via innovation , into real practice and the real economy , then all those aspects become rather weak or average , and we fall in the rankings , moving into a second division .
The best answer is therefore to invest more and better .
The question is slanted towards more investment in teaching and research , whereas better means efficiency and the way we organise ourselves , how we transfer knowledge and how we build partnerships between public and private interests and between academia and society . All these can be improved in our various policies , and in the EIT , which I mentioned as one of the examples of how these issues could be integrated .
Secondly , there is also a need for more investment .
I would not call this a subsidy from the European Union , but rather support for European cooperation , because we put together monies and distribute them in line with agreed rules , and these rules should lead us to excellence , the transfer of knowledge , and the rewarding or promotion of quality , not just quantity , in our academic institutions .
That is our shared responsibility and common task .
( DE ) Madam President , I can follow on seamlessly from where the Commissioner has just left off .
Research is important , but education and teaching of students are undoubtedly another of the lofty objectives of universities .
When I worked as a professor , I was saddened to find that some universities , particularly those that always appear right at the top of the major rankings - for example British elite universities such as Oxford and Cambridge - were extremely reserved when it came to the Erasmus programme , in contrast to many other universities .
Could participation in the Erasmus programme be made one of the criteria ?
Madam President , Mr Davies , the Commission attaches great importance to the voluntary commitment on the part of the automobile industry to reduce CO2 emissions from passenger cars .
These commitments have made it possible to achieve considerable reductions in consumption by new passenger cars . In 2004 , average CO2 emissions from new passenger cars were 12.4 % lower than in 1995 , falling from 186 grams of emissions per kilometre to 163 grams .
It is in the industry 's own interests to keep to the commitments it has entered into .
Failure to attain the target value of 140 grams per kilometre would threaten the credibility of voluntary commitments as an alternative to legally binding regulations .
So far , all three industry associations have attained the interim targets that were set as part of their voluntary commitment .
Although they consider the final target very ambitious , they have all reaffirmed their determination to achieve it .
I shall not hide the fact , however , that I am very concerned in this regard .
Since the appearance of the report on the progress achieved by the end of 2004 , I have been concerned about the fact that the average annual reduction over the coming years will have to be very much greater than before if the final target is to be achieved .
We do not yet have any final data for 2005 , but I expect no greater reduction for that year than for 2004 .
If it becomes apparent that the industry is not going to meet its commitments , the Commission - as I have already announced - must step in and propose legal acts to ensure that CO2 emissions are reduced to the level considered necessary .
The Commission is currently reviewing the Community strategy to reduce CO2 emissions from passenger cars .
The CARS 21 High Level Group recommends the future strategy consist of an integrated approach involving all relevant stakeholders and thus a wide palette of measures .
I consider this approach essential for achieving a further reduction in CO2 emissions from passenger cars at reasonable cost .
A Commission decision on the future strategy is to be adopted at the end of the year .
This strategy will certainly require further progress in automotive engineering .
We are also considering laying down mandatory targets for motor-vehicle fuel efficiency , for example , but other aspects , too , have to be taken into account , such as policy measures to promote the use of low-carbon fuels , and changing driving habits .
Incidentally , we should also pay greater attention to the other two main components of the strategy : labelling of and tax concessions for low CO2 emission vehicles .
It must be said , unfortunately , that these two parts of the strategy have had extremely little effect so far , but I do believe that there is potential for improvement in this regard .
I am glad the Commissioner is worried , as indeed he should be , because the car industry has comprehensively broken its agreements with the European Union to meet these reductions .
This was largely for profit reasons , because there is money to be made in four-wheel drive SUVs or ' Chelsea tractors ' as they are known in the UK .
Three weeks ago , from the very same seat , Commissioner Dimas said legislation would , of course , be necessary .
Can the Commissioner indicate what the earliest date will be at which legislation can be introduced , once the Commission has carried out its review to be published in December ?
I should like to start by responding to Mr Davies ' assessment of the European motor-vehicle market .
One of the reasons for the failure to meet the targets - but only one of them - is indeed the fact that European market habits have changed , with one market segment undergoing particularly rapid growth , one that is not exactly helpful with regard to CO2 . This is the segment of SUVs : the large , supposedly off-road vehicles with very heavy fuel consumption .
Astonishingly , these heavy , particularly high-emission vehicles have enjoyed favourable treatment in regulations up to now .
The Commission 's proposal for the ' Euro 5 ' standard plans to put an end to the preferential treatment of these particularly large , particularly polluting vehicles .
That is a very important point .
This issue is currently being discussed in Parliament .
As far as the timing is concerned , for reasons of fairness and trustworthiness , the industry has to be given the time we have granted it : that is , until 2008 .
If , however , it becomes apparent - as it is doing - that the targets are not being met , the Commission will have to start preparing legislation next year , so that it can be presented in 2008 .
( DE ) Madam President , Mr Vice-President of the Commission , particulate-matter emissions from diesel vehicles are a topical issue .
Parliament , together with the Council , lays down high values for pollution .
What is planned with regard to emissions ?
Is there any relevant legislation that relates to diesel vehicles and is aimed at the motor-vehicle industry ?
Of course , Mr Rack .
The proposal the Commission presented at the end of last year to introduce a ' Euro 5 ' standard for vehicles reduces particulate matter from both light commercial vehicles and passenger cars .
Our proposal reduces the limit value for soot-particle emissions from diesel passenger cars to 5 milligrams per kilometre as of 2009 .
We cannot set this value any lower as it would then be impossible to measure .
In 2009 , therefore , the limit value of 5 milligrams will enter into force , which means that , as of then , diesel vehicles without a particle filter will be a thing of the past .
The situation with nitrogen oxides is more difficult as , for a large majority of vehicles , the relevant technology is not yet available - at least at present .
The Commission 's proposal provides for a reduction to 200 milligrams per kilometre and is currently being debated in Parliament .
A second measure also being discussed at the present time is my proposal to reduce emissions of nitrogen oxides from diesel vehicles from 200 to 80 milligrams . This would enter into force in 2014 or 2015 .
( DE ) Commissioner , these CO2 emissions have a global impact , and of course global CO2 emissions also have an impact on Europe .
For this reason , I should like to ask whether the Commission knows of any figures from other industrial centres as to the situation there regarding the reduction of emissions and , secondly , whether the Commission is attempting to influence this .
Vice-President of the Commission . ( DE ) I am much obliged to the honourable Member for asking this question , as it gives me the opportunity to dispel a relatively widespread misconception .
Of course we have access to such figures , and it is pleasing - in my view - that levels of emissions from new European passenger cars are far , far below the average for passenger cars in other parts of the world . They are significantly below those in the oil-producing countries - the USA and Japan included .
It is interesting to note here that such countries with poorer emissions levels than ours have legally binding regulations in place for all fields .
Part II
Member of the Commission .
I would like to inform honourable Members that on 8 September 2006 the Commission adopted a proposal to adapt the minimum rates of excise duty on alcohol and alcoholic beverages to take account of inflation since 1993 , when the current rates were established .
This proposal was inspired by a call made unanimously by the Council on 12 April 2005 .
The proposal provides for the proposed increases to come into force from 1 January 2008 .
However , in order to ease the difficulties that some Member States may have in increasing their national rates to meet the revalorised minimum , transitional periods have been proposed until 1 January 2011 .
The inflationary increase is 31 % , based on Eurostat data and the harmonised index of consumer prices .
For beer this means that the current minimum rate of 74.8 euro cents per hectolitre per degree will rise to 98 euro cents .
In other words , the current minimum duty based on half a litre of beer of an alcoholic strength of 5 % will rise from 4.5 euro cents to 6 euro cents , an increase of some 1.5 euro cents .
The majority of Member States are not affected by this proposal , as their national rates are already above the proposed revalorised minimum .
However , the impact on those Member States that are affected will clearly depend on the level of their current national rates .
Germany , for instance , will need to increase its national rate on beer by 24.5 % in order to meet the revalorised minimum .
This equates to a duty increase on half a litre of beer of just over 1 euro cent .
Furthermore , under the transition period proposed , Germany will have until 1 January 2011 to make the necessary increase .
Honourable Members will see that the impact of the proposed adaptation to inflation will be rather modest and does not justify the outcry in some Member States .
In response to the specific question asked by Mr Paleckis , the Commission points out that the purpose of the minimum rates is to limit distortions of the internal market through different tax levels being set by Member States .
Therefore , the minimum rate should be the same across the European Union .
In the Commission 's view it makes no sense to have different minimum rates depending on the point in time one or the other Member State joined the European Union .
As mentioned above , the Commission 's proposal contains appropriate transition periods .
Finally , I would like to add that the proposal is currently the subject of discussions in the Council .
These are proving to be more difficult than one would have expected considering that the proposal sets out a purely mathematical adaptation , which has only a marginal effect in some Member States .
I want to inform honourable Members that on 7 November , just a week ago , when we discussed it for the first time in the Ecofin Council , three Member States - Germany , the Czech Republic and Lithuania - opposed the proposal .
It did not , therefore , gain the unanimous support requested , so we postponed the final decision and debate to the next Ecofin meeting which is due on 28 November .
As honourable Members are certainly aware , it will also be the subject of discussions in Parliament .
( DE ) Did the Commissioner know that , when Bavaria joined the German Reich in 1871 , it did so only on condition that beer be recognised as a basic foodstuff whose consumption was permitted even during military service ?
In Bavaria , therefore , beer is a basic foodstuff .
In addition , should a sharper distinction perhaps be drawn between beer and alcopops - that is to say , between a healthy natural product and a load of rubbish ?
My second question for the Commissioner is whether greater account should perhaps be taken of regional and national traditions .
In particular , I should like to ask him whether a better idea might be to reduce VAT and beer taxation for the catering trade , in order to ensure the survival of our high-quality catering establishments - which are essential for health .
The healthier the catering trade , the healthier the people .
Member of the Commission .
I do know this concept and I do appreciate it .
I like beer myself .
But this is a position not shared either by the Commission or by the Council .
- ( LT ) Until now , a minimum excise duty has been applied to the most popular alcoholic beverages such as wine and beer , with zero excise duty being applied to wine but not beer ; at the moment , there are efforts to increase the excise duty on beer .
How can the Commission explain such differences in excise duty on different types of alcoholic beverages , especially now , in view of France 's negotiation for an exemption on a specific type of wine ?
Member of the Commission .
Last year , when the increase in excise duty on alcohol and alcoholic drinks was discussed by the Ecofin Council , some Member States raised the issue of the difference between the taxation of beer and the taxation of wine .
As the honourable Members probably know , since 1992 , when the current rates were established , there has been no positive excise duty rate on wine .
At that time , it was finally agreed that wine would be zero rated .
Unless there is another decision to re-evaluate the excise duty , zero remains zero , even if increased by a proposed 31 % .
I appreciate the views of those who argue there is basically not much difference between wine and beer , and it is also a fact that wine and beer are competing on the consumer market .
However , to change the legislation would require unanimity and , as far as I know , at least ten Member States would certainly veto any positive rates on wine .
- ( LT ) Unfortunately , due to changes in the order of the Commissioners ' presentations , I have missed part of the answer to my question ; therefore , I would like to ask the Commissioner once again whether he can give any guarantee that the new members of the European Union will not be discriminated against as regards alcoholic beverages .
Member of the Commission .
It was already part of my answer that , according to the Commission , there would be no sense in having two different rates of excise duty for the new and old Member States .
As regards the question of the point of departure , and whether or not this should be the excise duty rates established in 1992 and entering into force in 1993 , these can be a point of departure and that is the basis of the current proposal .
Should the Ecofin Council agree , we could find some other starting date , but that is not yet something officially tabled for the next Ecofin meeting , which will take place on 28 November .
The Commission is , of course , trying its best to find a solution that is universal and the same for all Member States , be they new or old , and I do hope that on 28 November we will finally arrive at a solution acceptable to all Member States .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , although Europeans traditionally like a drink , alcohol consumption has been declining for years even without taxes and health warnings .
Indeed , the US example demonstrates what happens when the consumption of alcohol is criminalised : young people turn to designer drugs .
Perhaps the Commission would do better to step up the fight against illegal drugs instead of demonising and ever increasing the tax on alcohol , the preferred drug of European culture ?
Member of the Commission .
The Commission has certainly not proposed to increase the tax on alcohol , because what we are doing is just revalorising .
The current excise duty rates were established in 1992 and came into effect on 1 January 1993 .
Between then and now they have lost 31 % of their value .
The proposal simply revalorised the excise duty , but it has not been increased by a single euro cent .
Do you accept , Commissioner , that what we are facing in our single market is a double distortion , a distortion between beer and wine , which is grossly unfair , and the distortion arises that because of grossly different rates of taxation and excise duty between Member States .
This is the cause , in my country , of hundreds of white vans going to Calais , filling up and coming back to Britain to sell on the black market , to the great detriment of the British brewing industry , pubs and retailers .
I am sure it is the same elsewhere .
Member of the Commission .
Madam President , in accordance with the principles of institutional and procedural autonomy which underpin the EC Treaty , it is for each Member State to determine which courts are responsible for competition matters .
Most Member States , as you are aware , have specific procedural rules for competition-related issues and these include , for example , referring these cases directly to higher courts , limiting the number or type of competent courts or using specialist courts .
National courts also have at their disposal a number of mechanisms in case of doubt about the application of Article 81 and Article 82 to a proceeding .
In particular , further to Article 15 of Regulation 1 / 2003 , national courts can ask the Commission for its opinion on any question on the interpretation of the EC competition rules raised by the facts of a case .
So far the national courts have done so in some twenty cases .
If a binding interpretation of the rules is sought , the national court can refer to the Court of Justice under the preliminary ruling procedure and a number of Member States also provide for the possibility for the courts to refer awkward questions to the national competition authorities .
The Commission , of course , welcomes all initiatives taken by Member States to increase the expertise of the national judiciary in EC competition law .
The Commission itself has already cofinanced the training of approximately 1900 judges on the application of EC competition laws .
( EL ) Madam President , perhaps the overlap between the competences of the national competition authorities and the competences of other regulatory authorities is leading to the fragmentation of competition policy in numerous Member States ?
Is it perhaps a source of insecurity of law ?
Do you think , Commissioner , that a strong institution merging the regulatory authorities - such as , for example , as in Holland , where the competition authority has taken over the energy regulatory authority and the telecommunications authority - would be a good model for other Member States as well ?
Member of the Commission .
It might indeed be a possibility to give more information on how the ECN is working in the situation you touched upon .
In our regular contacts with all the authorities concerned we should push to ascertain what would be best in their specific circumstances .
I believe that our formula , if it can be done in the Member State itself , and if linked with our rules and regulations in this area , can be of help .
We should take into account that national courts have only had the right to apply under Articles 81 and 82 in full in actions already commenced .
Coordination between the national authorities and the Commission is intense and on a regular daily basis .
I am fully aware that the dialogue has been fruitful until now , and see no reason to expect any change .
One of the benefits of decentralisation was supposed to be that the Commission would be able to concentrate better on the bigger cases .
May I ask , then , why the Commission , as the world 's biggest competition authority , has never effectively tackled one of the world 's biggest restrictive practices , namely the De Beers Diamond Company , as regards the so-called supplier of choice system , which is highly restrictive to competition ?
Member of the Commission .
Let me start by offering my regards to the honourable Member , because he has touched upon a very important issue , starting with the compliment that we are the biggest competition authority .
My colleague , Commissioner Figeľ , replied to a question about ranking , and at the moment our ranking in the competition field is number one .
Being number one is an honour , but it is also a challenge because one wants to retain that position .
You mentioned De Beers and I shall write to you in detail about what we have already done .
As you are aware , we were active in the ALROSA / De Beers case and that was also quite specifically related to the issue you are touching upon .
We have limited resources , but at a certain point , when it is decided to tackle a monopoly or a quasi-monopoly , we take things further .
We will remain alert and follow this case .
( EL ) Madam President , I should like to comment on the Commission 's position on the merger between competition authorities and regulatory authorities .
I should like to point out in your reply that safeguarding the effectiveness of the regulatory authorities , the competition authorities and transparency come first .
These are the basic principles .
I believe that the regulatory authorities , as selected and decided by the Commission , especially the energy regulatory authorities , play an important role in maintaining their independence from the competition committee .
Member of the Commission .
The Commission is currently in discussions with the UK authorities concerning the UK film tax incentive scheme , which has been notified to the Commission under the state aid rules .
The Commission is assessing that case on the basis of the 2001 Cinema Communication , which provides that Member States can grant state aid to film production if the content of the film concerned is cultural , according to verifiable national criteria .
In line with the subsidiarity principle , the Cinema Communication leaves Member States to determine those verifiable national criteria .
Neither Article 151 of the Treaty nor the Cinema Communication exclude the possibility that third-country productions or co-productions can benefit from state aid provided by Member States to support films .
However , the Cinema Communication allows Member States to require that up to 80 % of the film production budget be spent in the territory concerned in return for state aid .
The UK scheme contains such a requirement .
Also it was not quite clear , on the basis of the initial notifications of the UK film tax incentive , that European co-productions which meet the conditions of the European Convention on Cinematic Co-production do not need to pass the UK cultural test to benefit under the scheme .
At the Commission 's request the UK authorities have clarified that in their published guidance on the scheme .
Therefore , the conditions for European co-productions to benefit from the scheme are in line with commonly used European standards .
In contrast , US productions and US-UK co-productions must pass the UK cultural test to benefit from the tax scheme .
The UK cultural test contains the verifiable national criteria , which are intended to ensure that the aid is being directed towards a cultural product .
That is one of the aspects of the scheme that the Commission is examining .
( DE ) I should like to ask the Commissioner whether the drafts that the British Government has presented up to now already contain these cultural criteria for UK-US co-productions or whether they need to be added ?
My second question is as follows . What is the situation as regards British co-productions in other EU Member States ?
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , on the subject of human immunodeficiency virus ( HIV ) and acquired immunodeficiency syndrome ( AIDS ) , the Commission has been supporting the activities implemented by national and provincial health ministries since 1994 .
A number of non-governmental organisations have also received direct aid from the European Reconstruction and Development Programme and / or from the budget heading for poverty-related diseases .
These activities have , by and large , achieved the results targeted by the various projects .
Nevertheless , their sustainability , particularly in the social sectors , is a cause for concern due to the ongoing costs they involve .
Two operations with the health ministries are currently benefiting from funding from the indicative programme .
First , there are the partnerships for the provision of primary health care , including for HIV / AIDS , which have received EUR 25 million : this programme establishes partnerships between the NGOs and five of the nine provincial health ministries .
The NGOs fund scholarships and provide appropriate training to untrained or poorly trained healthcare workers .
These healthcare workers give basic care relating to AIDS treatment to patients who previously did not have access to such care .
There are currently 187 000 patients receiving care from 5000 providers , and these numbers will increase considerably once the new programme , to which EUR 45 million have been allocated , comes into operation in 2007 .
The second programme comprises support for the South African Government 's Comprehensive HIV / Aids Care Management and Treatment Plan , amounting to EUR 25 million .
This programme was approved by the Commission in December 2004 .
It aims to support the implementation of this anti-AIDS plan , particularly with regard to human resources planning , marketing authorisations for drugs , funding for care and health promotion activities .
There is also a programme targeting HIV / AIDS in the field of education - the programme on AIDS in higher education , HEAIDS - which has received EUR 20 million .
This programme follows up on a project funded by the United Kingdom Department for International Development ( DfID ) and Ireland .
It aims to reduce the spread of HIV / AIDS in an age group that is particularly badly affected and is showing signs of lapsing into old behaviour patterns , as well as in the higher education community in general .
A regional HIV / AIDS awareness and education programme - which has received Community funding of EUR 10 million , in addition to EUR 20 million provided by the United Kingdom , the Netherlands and Ireland - was approved by the Commission in 2002 .
It is being implemented by Soul City , a South-African NGO .
For the last 14 years , Soul City has been receiving considerable aid from the European Community to develop its ' edutainment ' - education and entertainment - approach , which involves the use of TV and radio soaps , backed up by leaflets and other documents in a wide range of languages , providing more detailed information on the subjects covered in the broadcasts .
This programme covers not South Africa , but eight neighbouring countries .
Although its activities in recent years have produced excellent results , it must nevertheless be noted that this programme is facing administrative problems connected to its cross-border nature and to the fact that it is supported by a number of different sources of funding .
Alongside the programmes funded by the regional development programme , six projects funded to the tune of around EUR 10 million by various budget headings are currently being implemented in South Africa .
All of them have objectives relating to the fight against AIDS .
One project worth mentioning is a vaccine research project linking research institutes in South Africa and Europe .
In terms of the use and availability of drugs , the Commission does not have a specific programme in South Africa to promote the use of generic drugs , but it does support the measures taken by the South African health department to rationalise and improve legislation on medicinal products .
It should be remembered that the problem is very often not a lack of availability of anti-retroviral drugs , but the reluctance of patients to be examined and treated , together with lack of access to healthcare equipment and staff , particularly pharmacists to see patients and advise them before they start treatment .
Commissioner , thank you for that comprehensive answer .
I know of your personal commitment to this issue , but I met with Zimbabwean and South African AIDS activists at the weekend and the question they asked me , which was difficult to answer , was whether , in your opinion , in relation to the take-up of anti-retrovirals as well as all the other measures you announced , the EU is making a significant impact on the AIDS pandemic .
Is it actually making a difference ?
My worry is that in Zimbabwe we are clearly losing the fight because of the special circumstances there .
But they were also telling me that the situation is still extremely serious in South Africa .
Member of the Commission . ( FR ) I believe that the fight against this scourge depends primarily on there being far more consistency between the various players .
From that perspective , the Commission has also paid a further significant sum into the Global Fund and it will do so again in the future .
At the refinancing meeting in London , we paid something like an additional EUR 90 million into this Global Fund .
I must say that this Global Fund refinancing meeting was not as successful as we had expected : even though we succeeded in raising a relatively large amount , we did not raise the amount that we wanted .
Next , I believe that the European Union , the Commission , must fund projects and strategies that are effective .
We ourselves have neither the necessary expertise nor the necessary ability to become operators or players in this area .
We must therefore trust those who do have this expertise and who have already shown themselves to be somewhat effective .
This will be a long-term fight .
If we think that we can settle this issue quickly , then in my opinion we are mistaken .
I believe that this action is effective , but that there is still a long way to go .
For example , we cannot , in my opinion , ever do too much to promote the provision of education , if only at primary school level , for all girls in Africa .
Indeed , if we really want to have an effective measure in Africa for fighting against this scourge , then we need to start by sending girls en masse to primary school , and to do so very quickly .
I believe that this will be one of the most effective preventative measures for fighting this scourge .
So , yes , Europe is doing everything it can .
However , you are asking me a question that I have difficulty in answering .
You are asking me whether I think we are being effective . Yes , I think that we are effective , but we will never be effective enough .
Nor can I answer the question about when we will eradicate this scourge .
We can only bet on the quantity of resources , on the strategy of the experts - of whom there are many , sometimes even very many - and on the strategy and the goodwill of the players - of whom there are many , sometimes even very many .
Personally , I believe that it is in our interest to have coherent strategies , and I am not sure that spreading them , as it were , among all sorts of different players is the right answer .
I am very much in favour of the idea of conducting strategies directly with the governments of the countries concerned because I believe that countries must take ownership of the actions that are carried out .
Countries must get involved .
In Botswana , for example , the government , the State of Botswana is making a real effort ; it is really going from door to door .
Its work consists in going into every home and explaining about prevention and treatment .
I believe that there is certainly a systematic approach to be taken in this regard .
To return to the question that you are asking me - it puts me in a predicament .
I cannot tell you whether we are effective , because I would be lying if I said that , yes , we are effective .
I believe that we are effective , but I cannot make a bet on it .
- ( LT ) Madam President , Commissioner , I have a question concerning HIV / AIDS prevention .
I had an opportunity to discuss this issue in Mozambican rural communities .
All people know perfectly well what this disease is and that it must be combated .
Still , the protection is a problem : it is either unavailable or too costly .
What , then , can we do about preventing this disease ?
For any action concerning migration and development to be crowned with success , it must be exhaustive and integrated , and we must use our financial instruments in the short and medium term and embark on an enhanced political dialogue , particularly with our African partners .
The Commission 's strategy for helping the countries of West Africa faced with returning migrants is thus based on three additional lines of action .
Firstly , it is a question of responding to the urgent nature of the situation by harnessing the instruments available : I am thinking of the B-envelope , and of the rapid reaction mechanism .
Regarding Senegal , for example , the Commission is going to spend EUR 9.6 million on implementing measures for supporting and reintegrating repatriated migrants .
This sum is in fact the remainder of the ninth European Development Fund .
These measures will be accompanied by other financial measures funded by the rapid reaction mechanism , amounting to around EUR 1.9 million .
Secondly , we must work on the medium term by taking account of migration-related aspects when implementing our cooperation instruments .
Migration-related issues constitute an important aspect of the tenth European Development Fund programme , in addition to the existing instruments .
We have therefore provided a ' migration ' facility with EUR 25 million , taken from the balance of the B-envelope under the 9th EDF .
There are many types of reintegration-related measures that are conceivable in the medium term : to implement effective readmission systems between all of the countries concerned , while respecting people 's dignity and fundamental rights ; to emphasise training and admission so as to help returning illegal immigrants reintegrate into their countries of origin ; to financially support national and regional programmes aimed at reintegrating migrants ; and to promote information and awareness-raising campaigns for potential immigrants on the risks of illegal immigration .
However , at the risk of seeming somewhat unrealistic , I should nevertheless like to add that we obviously need to ensure that the support and reintegration measures , whatever they may be , do not appear to favour migrants who return to their countries over those who do not leave .
If they do appear to favour them , you will obviously encourage others to leave , and I think that it is extremely important to monitor this .
Ultimately , in the long term , the real answer , as we know , is to have a policy for training and employing young people , which is one of the policies receiving the backing of the European Community , through its support for economic integration policies and through the negotiation of economic partnership agreements aimed at attracting investment and at increasing economic growth , which are prerequisites for the creation of attractive jobs .
These policies are central to the development priorities and the strategy concerning Africa .
I must tell you that , from this perspective , I am one of those who believe that , while growth does not necessarily lead to a reduction in poverty , there can be no reduction in poverty without growth : we must remember that .
I am therefore convinced that the long-term answer consists in promoting economic partnership agreements and in supporting the emergence of integrated regional markets which , I might add , can go hand in hand with a massive aid effort on the part of the European Union in terms of bringing the qualitative standards of products up to the required level , of technology transfer and of the construction of regional and subregional infrastructure , of infrastructure to improve access , and so on .
To conclude , I am going to take the liberty , Madam President , of digressing in order to make a somewhat personal observation , which deserves to be given some thought .
There are immediate measures , which must necessarily be taken and which are sadly often of a security nature , which is something that I can understand because our citizens are worried , are bothered by the phenomenon , and because we have difficulty in managing migratory flows .
There are also long-term policies , which are development policies .
Alongside these immediate measures and these policies , I wonder whether it would not be useful if we were to start giving thought to what I shall refer to as supported migration .
I am not talking about quotas , which is an old idea , and one that I am not very keen on for the moment .
I am thinking instead , for example , that funding could be allocated to migration agencies in the migrants ' countries of origin .
These agencies could provide potential migrants with information and could also work with the Western European countries that offer job opportunities , without for all that encouraging a brain drain , which is another of my concerns .
These agencies could , as it were , play the role of regulator in the two ways mentioned .
There is in fact one thing about which I will not be convinced : it is not by closing the borders , it is not by taking coercive measures , and it is not by repatriating people en masse that we will settle this issue concerning migrants .
We are going to have to live with this phenomenon for many years yet .
Immigration is not a new phenomenon .
There have always been migrations .
We , in Europe , have the impression that we have suddenly unearthed a phenomenon that did not previously exist .
For as long as the Earth has existed , there have been migrations .
I am sorry to have to point that out .
That being said , I understand that this phenomenon is difficult to manage and I understand that measures must be taken , and sometimes taken immediately , but I wonder whether , precisely because we are Europeans and because we uphold European values , we ought not to start giving thought to what I will call a third way , which I feel is more realistic .
These migration agencies could easily provide training so as to enable young people from the countries concerned to become , for example , small business owners , traders and small craftsmen , because what is lacking most in these poor countries is a significant middle class .
It is also lacking in both the economic and political spheres , since there is generally more political stability in countries in which there is a significant middle class .
There you have the small digression that I wanted to make , Madam President .
I believe that it is important to be a little bolder in our thinking .
( ES ) Thank you , Commissioner , because it seems to me that you are attaching the appropriate degree of importance to the issue of immigration and I agree with almost all of your comments .
Nevertheless , masses of immigrants are currently arriving illegally , particularly on the shores of Southern Europe , causing not just a social and economic problem but also a political one .
The mass arrival of immigrants at small islands in the Mediterranean and the Atlantic causes a political problem .
I agree with the Commissioner that we cannot ' stimulate ' immigration , but perhaps we should look at the phenomenon of immigration as evidence that something is going wrong in terms of development aid .
This would lead to a policy that complements the policies we currently have .
Member of the Commission .
( FR ) I have already answered that question .
Let us imagine , for example , that we could devote ten times more resources to our development policies .
The fact remains that , if you carry out development projects in developing countries in which , for example , there is no State capacity , not even any State sovereign capacity , that is to say , where the State is incapable of providing equal access to education for all children , access to the authorities , access to the judiciary and access to health care , then your development policy will not be truly effective .
It will not be truly effective until you have States that are capable of providing their citizens with basic services and of organising society along social lines .
That is why the philosophy that I try to propound in the tenth European Development Fund is all about saying that we absolutely must make these States more able to provide .
That is what the debate on governance is all about .
As you know , I recently presented a communication on governance , which was fairly well received by our Member States and which was well received , too , within the context of the meeting of the World Bank , in Singapore , in which we explained what made Europe different .
Major development days on the issue of governance , together with numerous round tables , are due to take place in Brussels tomorrow , on Thursday and on Friday .
The President of the World Bank will take part in these .
Seventeen African Heads of State or Government , countless ministers , experts , Mark Malloch Brown from the UNDP and others will also be present .
They will all gather together in order to hold a genuine debate on governance .
How can we make States more able to provide ?
The experience that I have acquired in this area leads me to conclude that we will never manage to make a success of development if we do not simultaneously consolidate the States concerned .
What applies to Europe - what has applied to Europe , what has applied to our countries - also applies to these countries .
I believe , in fact , that if everything that is poured into our development policies is poured into failing States , the consequences will only be negative : a great deal of waste , heavy losses and heavy efficiency losses .
I have one final thought with which to conclude .
As regards development , 75 % of the resources that we devote to development are not used in order to bolster States ' budgets .
Only 25 % of our development expenditure is going to help States , and thus to consolidate them or to give them a chance to consolidate .
The remaining 75 % goes to parties with an indirect involvement .
Admittedly , these parties are useful and important .
They need to become partners .
However , I find it difficult to hope that developing countries will be endowed with this ability to provide if they are only given a quarter of the development budgets .
I recognise that this issue warrants a far-reaching , open debate , but , as everyone knows , I am in favour of a substantial increase in the quantity of budgetary aid .
Thank you Commissioner .
You have answered part of my supplementary question already .
However , does the Commission not feel that rather than pay illegal immigrants to return home , thus encouraging higher levels of migration , it would be better to alleviate the conditions that forced them to leave their homeland in the first place ?
That , of course , would require much higher levels of development spending than we currently enjoy in the EU .
Member of the Commission .
( FR ) I have already answered that question .
It is very complex .
Indeed , if the idea is to say that a sum of money will be given to all those who want to leave behind their countries so as to make them stay , that amounts to implementing a widespread intervention system targeted at individuals .
That has nothing to do with development .
That is extremely dangerous .
On the other hand , I support your idea - since it is also mine - that huge sums must obviously be invested in development projects that , for example , create jobs or work ; I am thinking of labour intensive work , which we are , moreover , funding .
If you take Rwanda , we are funding road building projects , which are directly carried out by the unemployed , by people who have been put to work , who admittedly earn just one and a half dollars a day , but who have a status , who work and who therefore provide for their families .
Yes , I totally agree with you : maximum investment is obviously required for development , but on the conditions that I mentioned .
I believe that to merely pour out resources without having a State that can govern , that can orchestrate all of that , will not amount to very much .
( DE ) May I start by remarking that I found the Commissioner 's views very refreshing .
To move on to my specific question : migration and asylum policies in the EU create the impression that the majority of Member States have a policy of doing as they please , not doing what they are supposed to , and everyone joining in , even though we already know that a single European migration and asylum policy is probably the only sensible course of action .
For this reason , I should like to ask what efforts the Commission is making towards a single migration policy , and how much longer it will be , in his opinion , before migration policy falls within the powers and responsibilities of the EU .
Member of the Commission .
( FR ) Madam President , I am going to be extremely brief .
I can only wholeheartedly agree with your remarks .
Every time it makes proposals to unify , to align , the various laws and approaches of our Member States , the Commission - it really must be said - comes up against sharp divisions between our Member States .
I therefore believe that things are moving forward , that progress is being made , but I also see the difficulties that exist when it comes to convincing the Member States to take concrete measures .
Let us take the example of the efforts made by my colleague , Mr Frattini , to encourage the Member States to adopt a far more consistent and unifying policy .
You are therefore absolutely right .
The Commission is doing everything it can , but unfortunately it cannot force the Member States ' hand .
Council Question Time
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Council that met last June asked the Finnish Presidency to work closely with the Commission to look into ways of improving decision-making and action in the area of freedom , security and justice on the basis of the current Treaties .
The Commission has put forward several proposals for this in its communication ' Implementing the Hague Programme : the way forward ' .
The proposals are being considered by the European Council , which is expected to return to them at its meeting in December .
The main proposal by the Commission for improving the decision-making process relates to the use of the passerelle clause under Article 42 of the Treaty on European Union .
That would bring police cooperation and criminal justice within the framework of the Treaty establishing the European Community .
The proposal was discussed at the informal meeting of Ministers of Justice and Home Affairs this September , although it did not obtain the unanimous support it needed under Article 42 of the Treaty on European Union .
The Presidency will be giving a report on this to the European Council in December .




I would also ask the honourable Member to note that the Council gave a decision on 22 December 2004 on applying the codecision procedure in certain areas under Title IV of Part Three of the Treaty establishing the European Community , which are measures referred to in Article 62 ( 1 ) , ( 2 ) ( a ) , and ( 3 ) and Article 63 ( 2 ) ( b ) and 3 ( b ) , which concern , for example , the lifting of checks at internal borders , checks at external borders , conditions relating to travel , sharing the burden of responsibility in matters to do with refugees , illegal immigration and illegal residence .
( ES ) Madam President-in-Office of the Council , I believe that you have given me the information you have at the moment .
I simply wished to stress one point. immigration .
At the moment we want to create a great Union market , a great area of freedom , security and justice .
Theoretically there are external borders and then internal borders , but the external borders differ from State to State and , therefore , if decisions cannot be adopted in the Council in this area enabling immigration to be regulated in a uniform manner throughout the European Union , it will be impossible to create a great Union market .
Do you think it will be possible to make progress at the December Council , at least on this point , in order to ensure that decisions relating to European immigration policy are not subject to unanimity , but to majority , in accordance with the ' passarelle clauses ' that you have just referred to ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is the Presidency 's aim specifically to strengthen the Union 's consistent and comprehensive immigration policy , which covers both legal and illegal immigration .
It is also worth pointing out that the second point in Article 67 ( 2 ) of the Treaty establishing the European Community allows the Council , acting unanimously after consulting the European Parliament , to take a decision for the codecision procedure to be applied to legal immigration .
Can the President-in-Office confirm that these are subject matters which , for the United Kingdom and Ireland , are covered by the special protocol annexed to the Treaty , which allows those two countries to opt in or opt out of any measures adopted ?
Having regard to that fact , President-in-Office , do you agree that it is quite unreasonable for some people in those countries to object to switching to qualified majority voting on the grounds that national sovereignty would be lost , because , in any case , it is an area that those countries can opt in and opt out of , and it would be quite unreasonable to block such a decision on those grounds ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , representing the Council as I do , I do not want to adopt a position on debates going on within the Member States .
Let me just say that the use of the passerelle requires the unanimous decision of the Member States of the Council , but hitherto no such unanimity has been found .
This matter will continue to be looked into , however , as cooperation on justice and home affairs is just the sort of cooperation where Europeans expect and hope for effective action on the part of the Union .
- ( LT ) Madam Minister , I have a question concerning migration .
The European Commission has presented its Green Paper on an EU approach to managing economic migration .
We all know that this is primarily economic migration .
The Paper states that entry to a Member State is a question that falls within the competence of the Member State .
Therefore , I would like to determine whether the discussion concerning the transition to qualified majority voting does not violate the subsidiarity principle in this case ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in September the Finnish Presidency proposed some Council draft conclusions on decent work .
The proposal has now been debated by three Council preparatory bodies , where the discussions have been on social issues , questions relating to trade and questions relating to development cooperation , because decent work is a vital factor in all these three areas of policy .
The Council is expected to adopt its conclusions in December .
The Presidency 's draft conclusions consider several matters with reference to the Commission communication on decent work , which the honourable Member mentions .
Apart from proposing Council draft conclusions on decent work , the Council , during the Finnish presidential term , has spent a good deal of time and done a lot of work on the proposal for a European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , something that has been examined by the European Parliament .
Finland hopes that this will reach a conclusion as soon as possible so that the fund can be used to help employees who are likely to feel the negative impact of globalisation .
At the informal Council meeting of Employment , Social and Health Ministers in Helsinki on 6-8 July , the ministers present discussed how productivity might be improved by developing the quality of working life .
They stressed the importance , for example , of the spiral of growth of decent work and labour productivity .
At the sixth ASEM Summit in Helsinki on 10 and 11 September , the Heads of State or Government acknowledged the need to strengthen the social dimension of globalisation and emphasised that productive employment , decent work , the rights of all employees , social welfare and dialogue in the labour market are decisively important for sustainable socio-economic development .
' Decent work for all ' was also the main theme of the high-level segment of the meeting of the UN 's Economic and Social Council on 3-5 July 2006 .
The Commission is , moreover , organising a conference on decent work in Brussels on 4-5 December .
The Action Programme for Decent Work covers freely chosen productive employment and a respect for rights at work , as well as labour standards , dialogue between the Social Partners , social security and gender equality .
The Programme 's scope is an opportunity for the EU 's institutions , especially the European Council and the Council , as legislators , to examine , and encourage various bodies to examine , the notion of decent work in its entirety , both inside Europe and also in the context of Europe 's trade and development cooperation relations with third countries .
The social dimension of globalisation and decent work are the EU 's priority themes in its efforts to achieve consistency in development policy .
When the cash in the European Development Fund is allocated , special attention needs to be paid to several issues , including that of decent work .
Considerations relating to certain challenges posed by globalisation were also on the agenda at the Informal Tripartite Social Summit in Lahti in October .
( EL ) Mr President , I thank the President-in-Office of the Council for her reply .
I wanted to also ask if provision has been made for funding the decent work agenda and if there is agreement on such funding in the Council .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , no decisions have yet been taken on this funding , as far as I understand , and obviously Parliament , as an important budgetary authority , can also influence where common funds are channelled .
Since today we are discussing the challenges of globalisation , my question is about the European Globalisation Adjustment Fund , our new annual fund , our new financial instrument to meet the challenges of globalisation .
Is the Council in a position to enforce this fund as soon as possible , and by that I mean in 2007 ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council has noted the European Parliament 's resolution on trade and economic relations between the EU and India .
The Seventh EU-India Summit in Helsinki on 13 October examined trade and economic relations between the parties .
In particular , a report by the EU-India High Level Trade Group was examined .
The Group was set up at the 2005 summit to look into how bilateral trade and investment relations could be developed and expanded .
The Group recommended that a large-scale trade partnership be developed through talks on a comprehensive trade and investment agreement .
It was also the Group 's view that a major , comprehensive agreement would also be of significant benefit to both the EU and India .
The Group recommended that future talks should cover the areas set forth in the report , such as trade in goods and services , investment , the promotion of trade , public procurement , technical regulations , intellectual property and geographical indications , competition policy , and the settlement of disputes .
Discussions on this at the Summit were constructive and reflected support for the work of the Group .
The EU-India Summit took a positive view of the Group 's work and backed its proposal for a future , comprehensive trade and investment agreement .
The view was taken at the Summit that both parties should promote the start of negotiations on an agreement of this sort .
Both parties are now holding internal discussions on this .
The Summit was also confirmation of the undertaking and commitment on the part of both parties to achieve a strategic partnership and close cooperation , which has helped strengthen relations between the EU and India .
President-in-Office , only last week I was informed by Kamal Nath that he found the report I had prepared on behalf of the Committee on International Trade to be very helpful and that he was able to quote it in the negotiations .
The notion of a free trade agreement with India is clearly a key element of Commissioner Mandelson 's external review strategy Global Europe , which sets out a clear strategy for building bilateral trade arrangements with emerging economies , notably in Asia .
What is the Council 's view of this new strategy and does it believe such bilateral arrangements are the best mechanism for advancing Europe 's growth and competitiveness , and how does this stand in relation to our commitment to the multilateral Doha round ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council discussed the matter of CIA secret detention centres at a meeting held on 15 September .
EU ministers repeated that they were committed to the effective fight against terrorism using all the ways and means available .
Terrorism in itself is a threat to the system of values that is based on the rule of law .
The Council repeated its insistence that human rights must be respected and humanitarian standards complied with in the fight against terrorism .
Representatives of the Member States therefore welcomed the statement by the US Administration that all prisoners would be treated in accordance with the provisions of the Geneva Convention , and its assurances that the International Committee of the Red Cross would have access to the prisoners in question .
The existence of secret detention centres , where imprisoned persons are held in a legal vacuum , is against international humanitarian law and international criminal justice .
The EU ministers said that they would continue the dialogue with the United States of America which focuses on the notion that a respect for human rights should be guaranteed even in the fight against terrorism .
This dialogue has been continued .
These views , which were strongly expressed at the meeting , will appear in the bulletin on the meeting .
deputising for the author . - President-in-Office , I am reassured by some of what you say , but great concern remains about so much that may or may not have actually taken place , and we need to establish the facts .
According to an article in the Italian newspaper l 'Unità , on 7 December 2005 Condoleezza Rice had frank discussions with EU ministers at a dinner at which the issue of extraordinary renditions was discussed .
I should like to know whether this dinner took place .
If so , who was there ?
Were extraordinary renditions discussed ?
If so , what was said ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , the dinner to which the honourable Member refers was not organised by the EU Presidency , at least .
We know nothing about the dinners the Member States of the European Union organise within the context of their own foreign relations , and we cannot possibly comment .
Excuse me , it may be a matter of the interpretation but I am quite surprised to hear what you say , because I do not think that you have responded to either of the questions .
You have not responded to the first question that was put to you in writing .
You refer to the dinner on 7 December of last year as concerning bilateral relations between Member States and the US .
If I understand correctly , that was a meeting where all the Member State governments and the US were represented , and if I am not mistaken Mr Solana and Mr de Vries were there as well .
I think , President-in-Office , that a great deal has come out in the meantime about the existence of secret prisons and the rendition flights that took place in Europe .
Can you confirm that the dinner took place and that the matter was discussed ?
When will the Council start its own investigation and recognise what the rest of the world already knows ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , accession negotiations with Turkey began when it was considered that that country met the Copenhagen political criteria .
This means that Turkey is assumed to be complying with the reform process and endeavouring to bring in new reforms .
As the negotiating framework adopted by the Council in October 2005 states , progress in the negotiations depends on Turkey 's progress in the implementation of reforms .
The Council of the European Union will not adopt an opinion on the alleged genocide of Armenians in Turkey .
Making historical judgments is the job of historians .
The Union takes a positive view of certain initiatives , such as the conference in Turkey on the Armenian Question and Prime Minister Erdogan 's proposal to set up a joint Turkish-Armenian commission of historians to research the tragic events of 1915 .
The Union is enthusiastically encouraging Turkey to do all it can to improve relations with its neighbour Armenia , especially with regard to opening the border between the countries , which would be a very propitious move for the entire region .
It was this summer that the European Council last reconfirmed that it would adhere to its commitments on enlargement .
No new criteria should be set midway though the negotiations process .
( SV ) Mr President , it is not clear to me whether the Minister believes that Turkey must acknowledge the genocide or whether this is something that is to be left up to Turkey and Armenia to settle .
What is the Minister 's view on this ?
Like the rest of the Swedish June List , I am in favour of Turkish membership , provided that Turkey meets the conditions of membership .
Is it not a cause of concern that modern Turkey , which is a nation state founded , in fact , in the early 1920s , should refuse to acknowledge an action committed by the Ottoman empire many years before ?
What does the Minister have to say about that ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , as I said in my previous answer , the Council of the European Union will not adopt a position on the alleged genocide of Armenians in Turkey .
Making historical judgments is the job of historians .
The Union , takes a positive view of certain initiatives , however , to shed new light on the tragic events of 1915 .
The Finnish Presidency and the Commission too have stated that an admission regarding the Armenian genocide is not a criterion for Turkey 's membership of the EU .
- ( LT ) Madam Minister , I fully agree that historians are the ones charged with evaluating history ; however , they have different attitudes .
A democratic state , which is unable to assess its own past , cannot be called democratic .
I doubt that Turkey complies with the first Copenhagen criterion .
Turkey also fails to meet other requirements , such as the specification of the Ankara Protocol to open Turkish ports to Member States of the European Union .
It seems that Turkey is dictating EU membership terms ; therefore , I am concerned about possible severe outcomes if Turkey starts dictating further terms .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , the Union itself dictates and imposes the conditions of membership for new Member States , but it is important that no new conditions or new criteria are set midway through the accession process .
The last time that the Commission made an evaluation of the extent to which conditions for membership were being met was in its report out on 8 November .
Ultimately , an analysis of the scope for continued talks with Turkey will also be undertaken at the December European Council .
( FI ) Mr President , Minister Lehtomäki , you have now twice stated the Finnish Presidency 's view that recognition of the Armenian genocide cannot be a new condition for Turkey 's membership .
The Commission is of the same opinion .
Is this the Council 's common position , by which I mean has the legislative process on the Armenian genocide now under way in France been discussed and common conclusions adopted ?
I would also like to ask how the Council intends to deal with the report on integration capacity adopted yesterday by Parliament 's Committee on Constitutional Affairs and which is to be adopted in December 's plenary part-session .
President-on-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council has unfortunately not discussed this issue , as it does not fall within its competence .
The promotion of human rights , however , is one of the European Union 's main priorities .
Commitment on the part of the Member States of the Union to a respect for fundamental rights is also written into the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights .
The Member States of the EU are also members of the Council of the Europe and thus committed to compliance with their obligations under the European Convention on Human Rights .
Presumably , when the European Union Agency for Fundamental Rights is set up and in operation , it will strengthen the Union 's monitoring and information facilities , thereby promoting the implementation of fundamental rights to the greatest possible degree .
It still needs to be said once and for all that it is for the Commission , not the Council , to monitor implementation of the Union 's Treaties .
( FI ) Mr President , Mrs Lehtomäki , we nevertheless have precedents for the Council including in its agenda supposed or impending human rights violations on the part of one Member State .
When Austria 's new government was elected , certain Member States pushed through sanctions against Austria in the light of its government programme .
This is now , however , a matter of concrete decisions which official bodies in Poland have taken , which is to say that they have completely rejected the perfectly reasonable application for YOUTH programme funding for no good reason whatsoever .
Does the Council not think that this would be at least as important an issue as the Austrian government programme was , though that did not lead to any tangible human rights violations ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , following the case which I believe the honourable Member is referring to , the status of fundamental rights in the work of the Union was in fact reconfirmed in the Union Treaties .
There is now no plan , however , to act on the basis of any sort of precedent , and the implementation of this Community programme and matters relating to its criteria are of course the responsibility of the Commission .
As the author is not present , Question No 8 lapses .
Subject : UN Human Rights Council
The UN Human Rights Council ( UNHRC ) has concluded its second round of sittings without adopting any of the resolutions put before it .
The debates were dominated by those countries which have a history of human rights abuse , and no leadership was given by those states which are deemed to be the defenders of human rights .
Furthermore , although the reform seeks to confer powers to enable rapid action to be taken in the event of serious violations of human rights , the UNHRC failed to deliver an opinion on the situation in Darfur , the attacks on civilians in Sri Lanka , or the consequences of the violence in Lebanon and the occupied territories .
What is the Council 's opinion of the outcome of the second sitting of the UNHRC ?
What role is the Council prepared to play in the UNHRC 's deliberations ?
What measures are planned in order to tackle the challenges it faces if it wants to be an effective body ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union took an active role in the first and second session of the Human Rights Council .
The Human Rights Council should live up to the high expectations which the international community has set for it , and needs to employ effective and fruitful mechanisms to be able to fulfil all its tasks .
The European Union believes that it is too early to judge the work of the Human Rights Council properly .
We are establishing a new body with new working methods and processes , and this will take time , patience and creativity .
The Human Rights Council 's broad mandate covers the prevention of violations and the building of cooperation and resources , but urgent human rights situations also have a major role .
Crucial to the new body 's role are cooperation and dialogue , which are contained in the UN General Assembly resolution , on the basis of which the Human Rights Council was established .
The EU thus intends to continue to work steadfastly with other countries in the same spirit , and hopes that the other players involved are equally committed .
The EU 's view of the second session of the Human Rights Council is that it was a very positive achievement to hold discussions on situations on both certain matters and country situations , within the context of the Special Procedures , and with the UN 's human rights body .
Allowing extra time for the Special Procedures was a major improvement in Human Rights Council practices .
The quality of the dialogue and the large attendance figures were a tribute to the important role that the Special Procedures and the human rights body play within the human rights machinery , in that , for example , they bring the discussions closer to practical realities and act as an early warning system .
This work needs to be developed in future sessions .
The EU welcomes the active participation of NGOs in the debate both on particular subjects and on national situations .
The EU continues to support their active participation in all the work of the Human Rights Council .
The EU supported the efforts made by Mr de Alba , President of the Human Rights Council , to draft a concrete ' omnibus ' resolution , based on a consensus on Human Rights Council results , and relating to certain matters and urgent human rights situations .
The EU regrets that the talks on the text did not lead to consensus .
The EU is in favour of an approach based on consensus whenever possible , and worked very hard for this at the second session of the Human Rights Council .
We will continue along this path in the future too .
It was a disappointment for the EU that no tangible results were achieved regarding the very serious human rights violations that have taken place in Darfur .
Action on the part of the Council is also needed in other urgent situations , such as that in Sri Lanka .
The EU intends to continue to be active so that the Human Rights Council can fulfil all the tasks within its mandate at future sessions .
deputising for the author . - ( ES ) Thank you very much for your reply , Madam President-in-Office of the Council .
We currently have the problem that the United Nations Human Rights Council is suffering from the same defects as the Commission on Human Rights , that is , its inability to adopt resolutions .
The European Union and its Member States , particularly those that are members of the Human Rights Council , can help to overcome this situation .
Specifically , tomorrow , 15 November , a special meeting is taking place on Israel 's violations of human rights in the occupied territories , and from 27 November to 8 December the Council will consider its decisions .
Does the Presidency-in-Office of the Council believe that the States of the European Union can help to achieve results in these two coming meetings ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , the Union has an important role to play in the work of the Human Rights Council , and preparations are now under way for the Council 's third session .
This will mainly focus on formulating the Council 's working practices .
The Union is now very actively participating in the preparatory work that is taking place in Geneva .
The Council 's future agenda is also being discussed .
The EU aims to push its own objectives through in these talks , for example , to ensure that the special mechanism system is preserved and reinforced .
In addition , the Union will be involved in discussions on the establishment of a new periodic review .
- ( LT ) Madam Minister , as a member of the delegation of the Subcommittee on Human Rights of the European Parliament , I have participated in the session of the Human Rights Council of the United Nations and have seen the Member States of the European Union negotiating their positions and trying to speak with one voice .
My question is as follows : what issues were initiated by the European Union to be discussed in the Human Rights Council during the Presidency of Finland ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council regularly evaluates the situation in the Middle East , and last did so at its sessions on 17 October and 13 November .
It was then that the Council adopted its conclusions on these matters .
These explored the Council 's position with regard to various issues .
Furthermore , contained in them was an expression of concern about Israel , and matters on which it would like Israel to take various forms of action .
The Council raises these matters with Israel within the context of the EU-Israel Association Agreement at meetings held regularly with Israel .
An opportunity for this last presented itself at the EU-Israel Association Agreement meeting held on 13 June 2006 .
A meeting of the Working Party on Human Rights on 7 June 2006 was an opportunity for a more in-depth debate on the EU 's particular worries about Israel .
Furthermore , the Sub-Committee on Political Dialogue and Cooperation , at its second meeting on 9 November , held a discussion largely devoted to these issues .
Mr President , what is going in Gaza amounts to nothing less than sheer bloody slaughter .
Just how many Palestinians have to die before the Council recognises that Israel might be in breach of the human rights requirements of the Association Agreement ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , Gaza and the Middle East situation was last discussed at the meeting of the General Affairs and External Relations Council held yesterday .
At that meeting , conclusions on this situation were adopted .
The Union has been especially worried about the appalling humanitarian situation in Gaza .
The Union has provided its own humanitarian aid and has also regularly raised with Israel , in many different contexts , the matter of the measures which are needed to improve the humanitarian situation .
As the author is not present , Question No 11 lapses .
Subject : EU-Balkan relations
Can the European Council state what tangible measures have been made this year in terms of building closer economic and political relations between the European Union and the Balkan States ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , the Council has worked continuously to ensure that the Union is committed in the future to closer relations between the Western Balkan countries and Europe .
It confirmed its complete support in the Salzburg Declaration of March 2006 for the agenda set out at the Thessaloniki Summit in 2003 and for furthering the Stabilisation and Association Process .
One of the major challenges this term has been how to ensure support for the current talks on the status of Kosovo , headed by UN Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari .
The talks have also featured a plan for the EU 's future position and presence , especially in the areas of policing , the rule of law and the economy .
Since the referendum in Montenegro and the Republic of Montenegro 's declaration of independence , the European Union and its Member States have agreed to develop relations with Montenegro as a sovereign , independent country and have urged both Serbia and Montenegro to continue with their frank and constructive dialogue on future relations .
The Council welcomed the fact that the elections in the Republic of Montenegro went peacefully and without problems , and the recommencement of talks on the Stabilisation and Association Agreement .
The Council stressed that the speed of progress of the talks and their conclusion depended in particular on Montenegro 's progress in implementing the necessary reforms .
Work has continued on bringing to conclusion the negotiations on the Stabilisation and Association Agreement with Bosnia and Herzegovina .
After the elections in early October , the Council emphasised that recently elected political institutions needed to accelerate the implementation of all the reforms that were required for concluding the Agreement .
The Council also welcomed the report by Javier Solana and Olli Rehn on a reinforced EU presence in Bosnia and Herzegovina .
The purpose of reinforcing its presence is to prepare for , and put into effect , the move away from the current arrangement towards greater local responsibility .
Talks with Serbia will continue once it is seen to be cooperating fully with the International Criminal Court for the former Yugoslavia ( ICTY ) .
The Council repeated that a peaceful , prosperous Serbia , one that is a full ally of the European nations , is very important for the stability of the entire region .
In accordance with the commitments made at the Thessaloniki Summit in 2003 and the Salzburg meeting in 2006 , the Council has endeavoured to make closer ties to the EU more tangible , by , for example , increasing contact between people by means of agreements that facilitate the issue of visas concluded with all the countries in the Western Balkans .
The mandate for negotiations for such agreements was adopted yesterday by the General Affairs and External Relations Council .
Similarly , the mandate for negotiations was adopted for readmission agreements with Bosnia and Herzegovina , the Republic of Macedonia in the former Yugoslavia , Montenegro and Serbia .
Albania already has a readmission agreement with the EU .
Negotiations with all the Western Balkan countries are to start on 30 November in Brussels .
The purpose is to bring the talks to conclusion as soon as possible .
The Council , moreover , supported regional cooperation and the local responsibility of various regional forums , not least the reform of the Central European Free Trade Agreement and its expansion to include all the Balkan countries .
The Council welcomed the initialling of the Central European Free Trade Agreement on 9 November in all the countries in the Balkan region , excluding Bosnia and Herzegovina and Serbia .
The Council anticipates that the Free Trade Agreement will be signed according to plan on 19 December during the CEFTA Summit in Bucharest .
President-in-Office , thank you for that very comprehensive answer .
I should like to focus on two other areas you spoke about in your response .
Firstly , with regard to the role of Martti Ahtisaari in Kosovo and how that links in with the commitments from the European Union under the common foreign and security policy , what kind of money is being given for the rejuvenation of the police force and the judiciary within that area ?
Secondly , has there been any further discussion of an idea that originally came from Croatia concerning the creation of a new semi-single market within the former republics of the Yugoslav Republic in order to try and create economic regeneration within that area itself , and has the EU been asked to participate or to advise with regard to any parts of that ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , we do have to remember that the job being done by Special Envoy Martti Ahtisaari to find a solution to Kosovo 's status is under the auspices of the UN .
The Union , however , strongly supports Mr Ahtisaari 's efforts and hopes that a solution to the question of status will be found .
It is very important that stability in the region can be maintained and that long-term preconditions for development can be established .
The European Union is preparing for a diverse presence and support in Kosovo even after a decision on its status has been reached .
With regard to the honourable Member 's second question , I would refer to my analysis of the Free Trade Agreement in my original answer .
Projects connected with the Free Trade Agreement are well along the way , and we are expecting it to be signed this December .
( DE ) Madam President-in-Office of the Council , to what extent are the local authorities in the countries of the Western Balkans and also in the countries the President-in-Office mentioned really prepared to work together with the EU on a common foreign and security policy , and particularly on combating organised crime ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Community 's energy policy is based on the third pillar : security of supply , competitiveness and environmental sustainability .
Energy efficiency is a way to promote the achievement of these three main objectives of the Community 's energy policy .
This we are aiming to bring about by , for example , improving security of supply by reducing our dependence on outside sources .
In the same way , it is important to boost competitiveness in the European Union , so that new energy efficiency technologies can be developed , the position of industry in the Union in the field of energy-efficient products and services reinforced , and energy costs for companies and the authorities cut .
To achieve these goals we also need to promote environmental sustainability , to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and the other adverse effects on the environment which result from the use of some forms of energy .
Energy efficiency and energy saving may be regarded as both the cornerstone of the Community 's energy policy and a priority goal , which the Council has been committed to for a long time now .
This commitment is clearly reflected in the legislative measures and other measures which have recently been adopted or which are to be adopted in the Council 's conclusions on energy efficiency and energy saving and in the conclusions by the Presidency adopted at the March and June 2006 European Council meetings .
Regarding research and development , the Council would like to refer the honourable Member to the proposals for the Seventh Framework Programme , about which there have been intensive discussions between the European Parliament and the Council .
Energy efficiency is one of the objectives in the field of energy that we intend to promote .
Special attention is to be paid to coordination of the views on the reasonable and efficient use of energy in the framework programme and in other Community policies and programmes .
As you will certainly know , the Council for its own part has already approved the results of the tripartite negotiations held on 26 October , meaning that efforts to reach agreement on the Seventh Framework Programme will be made at second reading .
I believe that the Council and Parliament will continue to cooperate successfully and that it will be possible to adopt the Seventh Framework Programme by the end of this year .
You will also certainly be aware of the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme for the period 2007-2013 , which was recently adopted and will be published in the Official Journal of the European Communities in the very near future .
The budget for the ' Intelligent Energy - Europe ' programme under the Competitiveness and Innovation Framework Programme is bigger than before , so it will help to make it easier to implement concrete action in the field of energy efficiency .
Among the legislative measures and other measures which have recently been adopted or which are to be adopted soon , it is worth mentioning in particular the European Parliament and Council Directive of 2005 for the setting of ecodesign requirements for energy-using products and the European Parliament and Council Directive of 2006 on energy end-use efficiency and energy services .
These two ambitious legal instruments , combined with the measures contained in the Action Plan on energy efficiency adopted by the Commission , will promote the realisation of the potential energy saving figure of 20 % proposed by the Commission by the year 2020 .
At its meeting of 23 November , the Council will hold a general discussion on the Commission document ' Action Plan for Energy Efficiency : Realising the potential ' and adopt its conclusions on it .
These conclusions will help serve as the basis for the Council 's instructions to the Commission , the Member States and other stakeholders for implementing the measures contained in the Commission 's Action Plan .
Implementation of many of the measures proposed in the Commission 's Action Plan is one of the Council 's priority areas over the next few years .
deputising for the author . - President-in-Office , thank you for the response to the question .
I have two very brief supplementaries in regard to that .
President Barroso said here today in Parliament that climate change and energy are some of the main challenges facing the European Union over the next ten years .
One of the elements relating to energy efficiency is that if you turn off your television properly instead of leaving it on standby , you can save 25 % of the electricity that is normally used for a television .
Maybe , when we speak about design and energy-efficient design , those kinds of design features should be taken out of televisions and radios and computers , so that there is no standby .
Secondly , concerning the Stern report on economic environmental matters , I know you cannot speak on behalf of Finland but I also know it has one of the best records on alternative energy use and recovery of energy .
The Stern report is quite explicit on the economic savings that can be made with regard to energy efficiency .
Can we see legislative programmes directed towards that ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Community 's programme of development cooperation with Mozambique , as with the other African , Caribbean and Pacific States , is accomplished via the European Development Fund .
The Fund 's deployment is the responsibility of the Commission , which is the proper body to answer this question .
I can nevertheless say that Mozambique is one of the largest EU development cooperation recipient countries among the ACP countries , and its share of EDF funding is also one of the biggest in Africa .
According to the information that we have received , appropriations for Mozambique this year will be approximately EUR 165 million .
The proper body to provide information on EDF payments is the Commission , so I suggest that the honourable Member consults the competent body on this matter also .
deputising for the author . - I just wish to say that I understand that there is a cross-over here between the different rules .
However , Mozambique is Ireland 's biggest destination for development aid money and the reason is that the Irish Government works very closely with the Clinton Foundation in tackling disease , including AIDS , as well as giving education on the ground .
Would the Council consider giving more support to foundations like the Clinton Foundation , which has proven to be so successful in individual countries ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , Mozambique 's significant position as a recipient of development cooperation is obviously a clear reflection of the peaceful development that has taken place there and the successful transition which the country has gone through in the last 15 years since the conflict .
With regard to the honourable Member 's mention of additional funding from the EDF or the Community budget for the Clinton Foundation , this is naturally the responsibility of the Commission .
I might say , however , that , to the best of my belief , several Member States also support work of this nature within the context of their national development cooperation programme , and , as the honourable Member referred to the example of Ireland , as minister responsible for development cooperation in Finland , I might add that Mozambique also plays an important role in Finland 's programme of bilateral development cooperation .
The presence of the European Union in Mozambique , in the shape of the Community and the Member States , is therefore important on the whole , because , as I have said , appropriations for Mozambique in the Community budget will be EUR 165 million this year , and the national presence of the Member States and the contribution they make are also undoubtedly considerable .
Question No 15 has been withdrawn .
Subject : Iceland
What negotiations has the Council had with the Republic of Iceland regarding the slaughter of whales ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Council is aware that Iceland has said it is recommencing commercial whaling despite the International Whaling Commission 's moratorium on whaling , in effect since 1984 .
This issue was discussed at the meeting of the Environment Council on 23 October under ' any other business ' .
On 10 October 2002 Iceland rejoined the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling of 1946 , although it expressed reservations with respect to the whaling moratorium .
As the honourable Member knows , membership of the International Whaling Commission is open to every country officially aligned to the 1946 Convention .
Each Member State can decide itself whether to join an international convention devoted to matters that do not fall within the exclusive competence of the Community .
Up till now 18 Member States of the European Union have joined the Convention , and they are also members of the International Whaling Commission .
The Commission has pledged to protect whales , as endorsed in the Habitats Directive .
The Directive provides for high levels of protection for whales , at the same time banning any deliberate hunting and killing of whales in Community waters .
In addition , the import of whale meat and other whale-derived products into the Community for primarily commercial purposes is tightly restricted under Council Regulation ( EC ) No 338 of 1977 .
When Iceland declared that it would recommence commercial whaling , 15 EU Member States that belong to the International Whaling Commission and the European Commission , together with Australia , the United States of America and eight other like-minded countries , made official contact with Reykjavik , urging Iceland to comply with the moratorium and end its commercial whaling activities .
I thank the President-in-Office for her answer .
It was perhaps more than I expected and I am very grateful .
Iceland , as she and everyone here knows , is not a member of the European Union ; it is , however , a member of EFTA and a member of Schengen - although that is obviously not related to this .
However , it really proves the point that Iceland has close connections with the EU .
I would urge the President-in-Office , in the time that she and her successors have left , to do everything they can to urge Iceland to not continue with the unnecessary and , I would say , cruel slaughter of one of the world 's great mammals for unproven reasons .
I applaud what the President-in-Office has said about not allowing whaling in Community waters and banning the import of whale products .
Keep up the good work and push the Icelandic authorities even further .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , the question is actually not so much a question as a comment , and you have my sincerest thanks for that .
I would nevertheless still like to mention some forthcoming measures that are presently being discussed with regard to this matter , in particular by the International Whaling Commission .
Its next yearly meeting is in the United States of America next May , and we can be absolutely certain that at least the countries that share the Union 's strongly adverse view of this will want to see a debate on Icelandic fishing , so this issue will be very much on the agenda .
Questions which had not been answered for lack of time would receive written answers ( see Annex ) .
That concludes Question Time .
Gambling and sports betting in the Internal Market ( debate )
The next item is the Oral Question to the Commission by Arlene McCarthy , on behalf of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , on gambling and sports betting in the internal market - B6-0443 / 2006 ) .
author . - Mr President , I am not the author of the question but the Chairperson of the committee that is taking the question forward on behalf of Members .
I want to stress that the members of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection took a unanimous decision to table this oral question to ask the Commissioner for an update regarding the ongoing infringement proceedings against nine Member States concerning restrictions imposed on sports betting markets .
The committee would like the Commission to tell us in particular what progress has been made on the infringement proceedings launched on 4 April 2006 and what future steps are planned in this area .
Is the Commissioner considering a legal framework for online gambling ?
As we are on the brink of agreeing the Services Directive , we are well aware of the need for Member States to fulfil their Treaty obligations under Article 49 as regards the free movement of services .
The Commissioner will be aware of the committee 's decision to remove gambling services from the Services Directive , not least because of the complexity of the gambling market .
However , the freedom to provide services has in the case of the gambling sector clashed with national law in a number of Member States , which have introduced restrictive laws limiting the cross-border supply of online betting and gambling services .
We support the Commission in ensuring that these laws are compatible with Article 49 , while respecting the rights of Member States to protect the public interest , as long as the rules are necessary , proportionate and non-discriminatory , i.e. not discriminating against other EU operators .
It is hypocritical , on public interest grounds , for a Member State to prevent other EU online operators from entering a national market , while at the same time allowing its own national online market to grow considerably while not applying those public interest rules .
That is the issue we hope the Commission will address .
I would like to take the debate in a different direction .
I believe that we need an EU response to the challenge of the global online gambling market .
This is a market set to grow to a value of EUR 20 billion by 2010 .
In 2003 , in the EU-25 commercial gaming industries , lotteries and casinos and betting services were worth some EUR 51.5 billion and there are some 2300 worldwide online casino sites .
In the UK , for example , during the World Cup football matches , 30 % of those making online bets on UK services were women .
It crosses all classes and all generations .
The rapid growth of online services and remote gambling and betting services has de facto already erased national boundaries .
However , let us not follow the US model of pulling up the drawbridge by enacting the 2006 Bush legislation - the Unlawful Internet Gambling Enforcement Act , making it a crime for banks to process or transfer funds via online betting sites .
This is simply protectionism hiding behind a smokescreen of the so-called protection of consumers against gambling excesses .
In reality , it is a law to stop foreign operators from competing or undermining the US casino and gambling market , while the States of Nevada and Las Vegas continue to develop their own online and remote gambling services .
I believe it would be good if the Commissioner , on behalf of the 25 Member States , would engage in the campaign to get an international agreement on standards and rules in regulating eGambling .
This is one way to minimise the differences between not only the international community but also the EU Member States , to ensure in the end that all states opt in to high standards both for operators and consumers .
The objective would be to ensure that we develop standards to protect vulnerable consumers , in particular young adults and minors , to engender a sense of social responsibility from good operators and investors and to ensure that gambling is not used as a source of crime or financing criminal activities .
The internet genie is out of the bottle : some 3.3 million EU citizens are regular online gamblers .
This is a market that will grow .
The EU should therefore be part of a wider international campaign for good and high standards .
We need greater international cooperation to curb problem gambling and more research into the extent of participation in remote gambling .
The study commissioned by the European Commission on gambling services in the internal market highlights the need to find common international standards and regulatory requirements that will protect EU citizens while allowing the market to operate .
I hope the Commissioner will feel encouraged by tonight 's debate to continue with infringement proceedings .
However , in reality , it is a thankless task , which takes years to resolve , often not with a satisfactory conclusion , and I believe the best way forward is for the EU now to be a leader , driving good and high common international standards that can help minimise the differences , protect consumers and force the operators to be socially responsible .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , gambling services are clearly services within the scope of the Treaty , and Treaty principles , including those on the freedom of establishment and the freedom of services , apply to gambling .
The Commission has an obligation to ensure that Member States ' legislation is fully compatible with the Treaty .
Therefore the Commission decided in April to ask seven Member States for more information on their legislation that restricts the supply of sports betting services .
The Commission has responded to a number of complaints from operators in the sports betting area .
Having met with the authorities of all seven Member States , my services are now examining the formal replies received from each .
At this stage I cannot pre-empt the outcome of that examination .
I should like to inform Parliament that I expect that to be completed in the next few weeks .
Based on that examination I would put forward a proposal to the college of Commissioners on how to proceed .
It would then be a matter for them to decide on the next steps .
In addition to the seven cases opened in April , the Commission decided , on 12 October , to send formal requests for information related to the gambling sector to three other Member States .
Complaints from operators , to which the Commission is responding , relate mainly to sports betting services .
That is why nine of the ten cases opened so far related to the provision of sports betting services , some of them online .
However , in October the Commission also enquired about national legislation in Austria , which prohibits advertisements from casinos licensed and operating in other Member States .
We also have concerns that Austrian legislation requires national casinos to protect only nationals from excessive losses , without having similar protection for foreign players .
As guardian of the Treaty , the Commission will examine all complaints that it receives .
However , at the same time I do not underestimate the sensitivities that exist in many Member States on the question of gambling .
Member States are fully entitled to protect general interest objectives , such as the protection of consumers .
However those measures must be necessary , proportionate and non-discriminatory .
In particular , they must be applied to national and non-national operators in a systematic and consistent way .
The Commission does not seek to liberalise the market in any way , but rather to be assured that whatever measures Member States have in place are fully compatible with existing EU law .
Member States are well aware of the case law of the European Court of Justice , which I expect will develop further .
The Commission accepted Parliament 's request to exclude all gambling services from the scope of the draft Services Directive .
It was made quite clear to me at that time that the regulation of gambling should be left to the Member States .
I fully agree , provided that such national legislation is compatible with the Treaty .
In the context of the infringement proceedings I am willing to work in close cooperation with the Member States to ensure compatibility of national legislation with Community requirements and allow for appropriate and effective protection to be put in place , for example to safeguard consumers and to protect minors .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , would you allow me to make a point first , before you start the clock .
According to the agenda , this debate was scheduled to start at 10.30 .
That was quite clear and I notice that a number of my colleagues made an effort to be here at 10.30 .
So I am disturbed to find that I missed most of the speech of my colleague Mrs McCarthy , because the debate appears to have started at least ten minutes early .
I do not think that is acceptable , if I may say so , and I am sorry that your predecessor in the Chair has gone away .
If the schedule for the day says a debate starts at 10.30 , I submit to you that it should start at 10.30 , even if there has to be a short adjournment .
Perhaps I could now move on and if you will restart the clock , please , I shall make my substantive points .
I very much welcome the fact that Mr McCreevy is here to address this issue and I am pleased that , under the leadership of Mrs McCarthy , we have taken an initiative that I hope will shed some light on this issue .
As the Commissioner made clear , this is a highly sensitive issue and it involves many aspects of public interest .
But nevertheless , from the point of view of the operation of the Single Market , which is also of overriding interest to us , the situation is , as you suggested , deeply unsatisfactory .
Clearly we await the results of your investigations but I suggest that , at the very least , it would be appropriate for you to issue some form of guidelines to Member States on their attitude to receiving applications from reputable and well-established gambling operators who simply want to be able to operate in other EU countries under the law of those countries , which they are perfectly entitled to do .
One of the things you did not mention , but which seems to me to be rather extraordinary in terms of discriminatory practice , is that some Member States have tried to restrict access to those markets on the grounds that they do not want to encourage gambling .
Yet at the same time those Member States are promoting participation in their national lotteries with billions of euros across Europe .
Clearly that is entirely inconsistent .
I believe it is sensible and good that the European Court of Justice has struck down some of the restrictions , but I think those guidelines will be important .
As Mrs McCarthy said , in terms of operation and protecting the public interest respectable operations are extremely important .
The big issue that we have to face is online gambling .
Whether Member States want to preserve a monopoly or not , the fact is that consumers are taking advantage of online gambling .
I believe it is much better , in the public interest , that we have well-regulated online gambling services than uncontrolled services which come into Europe from other countries outside the remit of the European Union .
Before giving the floor to the next speaker , I am going to respond to a procedural motion .
You are absolutely right ; the debate was indeed scheduled for the time that you indicated .
However , it was explained on the European Parliament 's website , at the start of the afternoon , that the debate could start slightly earlier if question time finished earlier than scheduled , which was the case .
Furthermore , the services tried to contact all of the speakers .
They managed to contact all of them , except you , Mr Harbour , but I think that your presence in the Chamber this evening shows that you have not missed a great deal of the debate .
That being said , I felt it my duty to explain the situation to you .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , ' Rien ne va plus ' [ ' No more bets ' ] is the curious opening of the recent opinion delivered by the Advocate General Dámaso Ruiz-Jarabo Colomer to the European Court of Justice , which had been asked to rule for the third time on Italian legislation on gambling , following the Zenatti ruling and the Gambelli ruling , the latter rightly referred to in the recitals of the oral question under discussion .
It is truly important to be familiar not only with the Commission 's findings , but also with the recent measures by the Member States against whom infringement proceedings have been opened , and , specifically , the steps that the Commission intends to take .
I believe that it is also important for there to be moderate but definite rules in this sector , also involving the European Parliament directly .
That is the only way to help Member States exposed to the risk of appeals and negative judgments in what remains a worthy attempt to protect individuals , in particular minors and the most vulnerable , as has already been said .
The explosion of gambling , lotteries and online betting is a problem that cannot be left to market liberalisation , even if the difficulty concerning the non-discrimination principle is obvious .
I must just point out that the ' Services Directive ' , which has already been referred to here , excludes gambling precisely for reasons of public order and consumer protection .
on behalf of the ALDE-DE Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , I thank the Commissioners and my fellow Members for taking the trouble to discuss this topic , which is , after all , an exciting one .
We have left gambling and Internet gambling outside of the Services Directive because we do not dare take a decision on it .
It still falls within the scope of Articles 43 and 49 of the Treaty and at the moment - as is also evident from the 11 infringement procedures - there is enormous legal uncertainty among the Member States and businesses .
How should we tackle it ?
I am pleased that the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection has put this oral question , for the problems are , after all , real .
There is the problem that on the one hand , it is very lucrative for the Member States in terms of tax revenue , but on other hand , it also brings with it social problems .
The main problem , though , is that , if there is no sound legal framework in place within a market where serious money can be made , this opens the floodgates to a huge number of illegal practices in which criminal organisations reign supreme .
I therefore believe that the politicians , and I hope that the Commissioner will agree with me on this , must take up the gauntlet and dare take decisions .
We must not surrender ourselves to the very wise judges in Luxembourg who then have the onerous task of biting the bullet .
I fear that many more judgments from the European Court of Justice will follow as long as we as politicians do not take the right decisions .
I hope that the Commission and the Council will get there in the end .
If not , I hope that Parliament itself will produce an own-initiative report in order to guarantee legal certainty , which is desperately needed given the many problems that exist , including addiction , public health problems , illicit funds , money laundering , and the list goes on .
We must solve this with a firm , clear directive on gambling and Internet gambling .
I hope that the Commissioner will advise us as to how Parliament should tackle this .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , I welcome the Commissioner 's statement that we must protect minors .
To do that it is imperative to take a long hard look at Ireland 's policy of having no age limit on gambling with the state-run tote .
Children in Ireland are permitted to place bets at greyhound tracks and horse tracks if these are part of that tote .
Other forms of gambling are limited to over-18s .
Video evidence exists of Irish children as young as four years of age legally placing bets with the state-run tote .
It is not uncommon for birthday , Christmas and first communion money to wind up in the Irish state tote and , ultimately , with the Irish Exchequer .
The Chief Executive of Horse Racing Ireland , when asked his opinion of child gambling in Ireland , said that it was no problem and that he wanted to develop the customer of the future .
For years you , Commissioner McCreevy , as Irish Minister for Finance , refused to amend the Tote Act and outlaw child betting in Ireland .
As Commissioner , will you now change your attitude and , at this late date , support restrictions on child online betting , at race tracks , in bookmakers , on airplanes and anywhere else that this insidious practice persists ?
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , from the very first vote in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , we decided to leave gambling activities , including lotteries and bets , outside of the scope of the Services Directive .
It may be that some , as Mr Manders said a moment ago , were frightened of taking a decision .
I am convinced that many felt that the Member States could be given quite a bit of freedom to handle this complex issue in their own way , in tune with the sensitivities and the situations in their countries , according to their own traditions .
It goes without saying that , in this respect , the Member States should respect the Treaty , and we already know the answer of the Court to a number of prejudicial questions that have previously been asked .
I hope , Commissioner , that the questions that are yet to be asked will not immediately prompt you to advise the Commission to start issuing rules and regulations .
Whilst the Commission is , of course , the guardian of the Treaties , and we expect it to take its role seriously , this can also be done with some restraint .
Getting the internal market to operate is necessary and positive in every respect , but this need not be at the expense of the effective protection of law and order , security and the consumer 's mental health .
I hope there will also be room for the Member States which , via state monopolies or not , as the case may be , commit to channelling the passion for gambling , monitor the fairness of the game and to donate the financial gain , as and when they can , for cultural , social and sports goals .
Clear legal rules can certainly help , but legislation is not always the answer .
I am certainly not talking on behalf of the whole of the group , but on behalf of a number of group colleagues who were unable to take the floor this evening .
( ES ) Mr President , gambling is not just another service , it is a dangerous activity .
It is dangerous because people 's innocence and ignorance is being exploited .
In the majority of our Member States , gambling is currently subject to regulation .
I do not understand how it can be possible for supranational bodies now to be planning to impose a liberalisation of gambling services on the Member States , when the majority of our societies do not accept it .
The United States Congress recently banned on-line gambling , and it seems to me that , at the moment , we should follow the US example in the European Union , on the one hand , in order to protect our consumers from mafia organisations and , secondly , in order to protect all those social institutions in each of the Member States that currently rely on legal forms of gambling permitted by national authorities .
I therefore believe that the Commission is right to look into the issue of gambling , but it must deal with it from the point of view of consumer protection and the protection of the institutions currently benefiting from legal gambling in the majority of our Member States .
( DE ) Commissioner McCreevy has also had an extremely tiring day today , and so he will understand our desire to present the matter to him with the necessary clarity and brevity .
In my personal opinion , gambling and the abundance of lotteries have two different elements . On the one hand , there is the truly cross-border market for online providers that can only be regulated at European level .
As Mr Medina-Ortega pointed out , the US has already managed to regulate its market .
Europe , too , can resolve the issue of the online market only by joining with the Member States and introducing Europe-wide regulation .
On the other hand , there is the market in traditional games of chance and traditional sports betting , which tend to take place in written form .
In contrast to the infringement proceedings opened by the Commission - Commissioner McCreevy , in other words - we should proceed according to the principle that , if the Member States are succeeding in preventing addiction effectively by orienting their national monopolies towards a range of services that is as limited as possible and offers the greatest possible consumer protection , they should be given the chance to retain these monopolies in future - under the control and auspices of European law and the European Commission .
It must be ensured , however , that the monopolies that the Member States already have truly pursue just one objective , namely the prevention of addiction , and that Member States do not use them to pursue other objectives , such as aiding the recovery of public finances or promoting sport .
In this context , I would be delighted if Parliament and the Commission together could agree on a regime that , on the one hand , establishes European regulation of the online market and , on the other , maintains the national regulations in the field of monopolies for traditional sports betting , provided these are compatible with the internal market .
( PT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the exclusion of gambling , including lotteries , from the Services Directive appeared to have introduced a measure of clarity to the sector , but we need to go further .
We are aware of a number of complicated aspects involving certain types of gambling and betting . It is therefore necessary to guarantee consumer protection and to ensure effective monitoring of the financial circuits relating to such activities in order to prevent or combat money laundering .
Naturally , we must not confuse the appropriate protection of the consumer with the undue protectionism that any particular Member State may want or may employ .
In any event , however , it should be pointed out that every Member State has the right to regulate the phenomenon of betting for money on its territory until such time as another , European-level legal instrument appears .
In this regard , online gambling deserves special attention from the Commission and immediately from Parliament , as previous speakers have mentioned and as is clear from the debate .
Lastly , I welcome the fact that the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection raised this issue , with the result that we have made some progress in clarifying it this evening .
( FR ) Mr President , I am going to try to be both quick and slow .
This report is timely , and I might add that I consider the remarks made just now to be positive .
Everyone would like the European Union to intervene using methods other than simple case-law .
This issue does , in fact , involve a range of businesses and services : casinos , lotteries and other games of chance via traditional means or via the Internet .
Therefore , this goes far beyond simple online sporting bets , which is the subject of Mrs McCarthy 's question .
While it is normal for these services to apply the principles of the internal market , Commissioner , freedom should not go hand in hand with the law of the jungle !
For reasons to do with the general interest , health , morality and security , these services need to be regulated and controlled .
The Member States must be able to authorise and control public and private operators in the context of fair competition .
The importance of ' cross-border ' games does , however , require us to go beyond the national framework .
In this regard , the recent decision taken by the United States is the demonstration that , if those who play and who make others play cannot be controlled , then it is better to take too many precautions than not enough .
That is why , Commissioner , I consider the Commission 's current approach , which is based exclusively on the Treaties and on the Court of Justice , to be inadequate and dangerous .
It is clear today that the idea that the national laws are compatible with the Treaties is an unsatisfactory one .
Commissioner , you must work alongside Parliament to establish complementary legislation that can organise this extremely important sector , both politically and economically , in a sound and rational manner .
Let this sector develop , but let it do so in complete safety for the people and for the Member States !
( EL ) Mr President , over recent years the system of the state monopoly in the gambling sector , which prevails in the majority of the Member States of the European Union , has been on the receiving end of more and more attacks from mainly private interests .
At the European Union summit in Edinburgh in December 1992 , the European Council decided , given the principle of subsidiarity , not to regulate gambling and to leave it under the sole jurisdiction of the Member States .
The directive adopted by the European Parliament and the Council in 2000 makes provision for the express exemption of gambling from its scope .
The draft 2006 directive on services makes precisely the same provision .
Given the peculiarities of the gambling sector , the Court of Justice of the European Communities acknowledges the competence of the Member States to regulate the gambling market in what they consider to be the best way possible .
Mr President , Commissioner , one of the most important reasons for these decisions is the fact that there is a high degree of risk of addition inherent in the gambling sector , especially of young people , and of crimes being committed , such as fraud , money laundering and so on , and I personally believe that only the state can create the control , guarantee , reliability and transparency mechanisms needed in order to protect consumers .
Finally , I am of the opinion that , once the gambling market is liberalised , the system of support for sports in Europe will collapse , taking cultural and social actions and subsidies with it , such as the fight against drugs , education and support for people with disabilities or special needs who mainly have financial support from the state gambling organisation .
We believe in the free market , but do not occasionally ignore the risks inherent in uncontrolled gambling .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , first of all , for regulatory reasons , we have exempted games of chance and casinos from the Services Directive .
I say this despite being a firm supporter of strengthening the internal market .
We did not want to throw the baby out with the bath water , however .
Secondly , there are many risks associated with games of chance , and so the argument regarding competition law and the internal market should not be the only one used by the Commission in support of infringement proceedings .
Thirdly , a clear definition is needed .
When we talk about ' games of chance ' , what is covered by the term ?
Given the differences in the treatment of online markets , sports betting , machines , casinos and lotteries , a single definition is needed to ensure these are dealt with the same way everywhere , and a single legal framework is probably also required .
Fourthly , I should like to point out to the Commissioner that there are other important fields , too , to be taken into consideration , such as consumer protection , health , taxation , international trade , the problem of money laundering , the prevention of addiction and the fight against crime , including organised crime .
Fifthly , almost all Member States regulate the field of games of chance .
Eleven have special legislative models , and four use the limited-licence model .
Sixthly , in 2004 , state lotteries achieved sales of EUR 63 billion , which is an average per capita net expenditure of EUR 140 .
Seventhly , that means that approximately 33 % of all takings go on good causes and tax .
In the event of liberalisation of the private sector this would be just 3 % .
Eighthly , it is estimated that the industry generates approximately 13 billion jobs in the EU .
Ninthly , the sale of lottery tickets accounts for 195 000 jobs within the EU .
I would ask the Commissioner to consider these arguments when making his assessment .
Mr President , I should like to make one point .
Much attention has been paid in this debate to young people and the effects of gambling addiction on them , and yet more people under the age of 12 are trafficked or forced into prostitution because of drug or alcohol addiction and abuse than the gambling addiction that is the subject of our debate tonight .
Member of the Commission .
There is no specific Community legislation governing gambling .
If and how Member States wish to regulate gambling services at national , regional or local level is therefore a matter for each Member State to decide for itself .
But the general principles of Community law and the Treaty continue to apply and any national legislation must respect those principles .
The diversity of national approaches can lead to legal uncertainty for service providers and their customers , especially where national legislation fails to respect Community law .
Tonight 's debate helps to illustrate once more the diversity of opinion with regard to gambling services .
I am , of course , aware of calls for a specific Community regulatory framework for gambling services .
There are equally strong views opposing such Community intervention .
In my experience , the first requirement in trying to find a solution is to have a clear understanding of the problem and of the policy options available .
The Commission recently published a study carried out on its behalf by the Swiss Institute of Comparative Law .
The study illustrates the complexity and diversity of national regulatory approaches .
Should Parliament believe that , over and above our efforts to ensure the application of fundamental Treaty principles , more should be done to ensure legal clarity , I look forward to hearing Parliament 's detailed views on what precisely the issues are that warrant Community intervention and what policy options would command a sufficient degree of consensus for a meaningful solution at Community level .
In the absence of such a political consensus , legal certainty may ultimately only be provided by the European Court of Justice .
I should like to add just a few more words to this debate .
Mr Harbour put it fairly succinctly when he made the point that there was a great deal of inconsistency amongst many of the Member States , against whom we are now taking some action .
We shall probably be taking action against some more .
If Member States , their governments and their legislatures want to have very restrictive laws on gambling , etc . , they may do so on public policy grounds .
But they cannot do the things that Mr Harbour has referred to .
They cannot spend millions and millions advertising gambling services for their own national operators or their own national , publicly-owned operators .
They cannot allow their own national operators and bar everybody else .
If Member States feel , as some Members of this House obviously do , that gambling is a greater scourge than alcohol addiction , tobacco addiction and all these other addictions put together , then they should ban it for everybody and allow no gambling at all in their Member State .
That is one option .
Then nobody would complain .
The Commission would not take action against them and no one would worry about it at all .
But it is a bit hypocritical for Member States to allow millions to be spent promoting gambling and at the same time allow nobody else to play the game .
In all Member States gambling is regulated to some extent .
The point made by Mrs McCarthy about international standards for online gambling is quite a good idea in itself , but first some form of consensus would be needed among the 25 Member States .
We can start by getting consensus in this Parliament , but I do not think we will .
I am certain that we will not get it in the Council of Ministers .
I have about the same chance of getting consensus in the Council of Ministers and Parliament as I have of winning the lottery this weekend .
Those would be the odds against it .
So there is much to commend what Mrs McCarthy says , and if there was a consensus I would like to go in that direction , but my experience tells me that it would be very difficult .
If you read the executive summary in the recent study , which , if I am correct , comes to 51 pages , and save yourself reading the other couple of hundred pages , it does not come down heavily on one side or the other .
( comments off-microphone from Mr Toubon )
Well , I do not think my honourable friend Mr Toubon has read the report , but you can see from that how complex this problem is and the many different ways it is regulated .
It will show you what a gargantuan task it would be to head down that road .
In my political life I have not been afraid to take on impossible causes and tilt at windmills and run into brick walls , but I think that if we did attempt some kind of harmonisation of this area , what we would end up with , if anything , would be the most illiberal piece of legislation ever to go through any House anywhere in the world , because it is not possible .
I have recognised for a long time that there are great differences of opinion here , long before I came to this conclusion .
I recognise that throughout Europe , and even in my home country , there would be very different views about this .
Some people , I know , think that it is worse than drinking addiction , worse than tobacco addiction , worse than anything possible , but others do not .
I know which category I fit into , but I think trying to get some harmonisation in this area is going to be a long , long process .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
( MT ) Some Member States have unilaterally decided to introduce legislation preventing Europeans from using Internet gambling sites run by companies registered in other European Union countries .
This violates the principle of unrestricted movement of services between Member States , as well as Directive 98 / 34 EC which stipulates that , prior to introducing regulations concerning information technology services , a state must inform all other Member States and the Commission .
Last June , in response to a parliamentary question , I was informed that the matter was the subject of an investigation by the Commission .
May we know the stage this investigation has reached , and whether any measures have been taken ?
I agree that it is time this rapidly developing sector were governed by a legal structure that contained standards and regulations governing this service in a serious manner .
These regulations would protect consumers and minors while , at the same time , permitting serious operators to work freely in all Member States of the European Union .
A new framework strategy for multilingualism ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the report by Mr Joan i Marí , on behalf of the Committee on Culture and Education , on a new framework strategy for multilingualism .
rapporteur . - Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking the colleagues who helped me draw up this report , and especially the members of the Committee on Culture and Education .
I also wish to thank Commissioner Figeľ , who has kept in contact with us , for his positions on plurality and on the issues related to minority languages , etc .
Thanks are also due to all the other colleagues , from several groups , and other people involved in the report , especially the members of the various NGOs for the normalisation of languages who were in contact with us during the preparation of the report .
I would like to mention in particular Vicent Santaló , a member of the legal staff at the Catalan Parliament , who worked with us until his death last summer .
The main aim of this report is to move forward the concept of plurality in languages .
Plurality and diversity are common values of the European Union .
There should be unity among all Europeans in this area , which should have plurality as one of its main aims , because a non-plural Europe is a false and devalued Europe .
This is reflected in a certain manner in languages .
As you know , in sociolinguistic terms there are ' normalised ' languages , which are the fully official languages used in all walks of our lives .
There are also ' minorised ' languages , which are not fully official and cannot be used for every purpose , despite the fact they are the main languages in specific language communities .
There is also a third group , which is that of minority languages .
All these groups must be respected and preserved , and the preservation of language diversity is one of the aims of the European Institutions .
Europeans are not as multilingual as we think .
Unfortunately , many European citizens have only one language - usually their mother tongue - and one of the main goals of the European Union is to have a citizenship able to speak several languages .
In order to achieve that , it is very important for there to be a change in mentality .
Our society was formed under the influence of Jacobinist states .
Most European states are unilingual officially , and this is a remnant of Jacobinism .
However , this is not a true reflection of the facts .
The aim of the European Union is not to maintain this point of view , but to preserve genuine plurality and work towards citizens being able to speak several languages .
We need a European language policy .
That policy should promote multilingualism , improve the language skills of European citizens across the European Union and preserve all languages , whether or not they are official EU languages .
To this end , the budget and European programmes must support not just the main languages , but all languages , in order to improve diversity .
In this way we must make a special effort to support endangered languages .
Every language is good for mankind , and if a language is lost we have all lost something because each language has its own unique expressions .
It is for this reason that we must preserve genuine plurality and true diversity .
In this sense , it is necessary to draw up a full report on the actions still to be developed .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I should like to start by congratulating Mr Joan i Marí for his excellent report on the Commission communication relating to a new framework strategy for multilingualism .
Not only the framework strategy , but also the report has been drawn up in the spirit of diversity and unity .
That should be the leading line in our implementation of policies in this area .
I am sure we would all like to see a multilingual European society in which the rate of individual multilingualism steadily increases until every citizen has practical skills and at least two languages in addition to their mother tongue .
That is the famous ' Mother tongue plus two ' formula agreed by EU leaders in Barcelona in 2002 .
I recently set up the internal multilingualism network in the European Commission and established the High Level Group on Multilingualism .
These are both implementation initiatives under the new framework strategy for multilingualism .
Another priority is to develop early language learning .
If we want to build a multilingual society we have to start as soon as possible .
We have to ensure that language learning in pre-school and primary school is effective , for that is where key attitudes towards languages and cultures are formed .
The new lifelong learning programme will offer a wide range of funding possibilities for projects promoting language awareness , for access to language learning resources , as well as for networks contributing to the development of language policies .
For the first time the education and training programme has , as a specific objective , the promotion of language learning and linguistic diversity .
For the first time also , a transversal action will support multilateral projects and networks in that field .
These are new opportunities open to all the languages spoken in the European Union .
Let me now say a few words on the European indicator for language competence .
That was one of the subjects in another recent communication from the Commission .
The first meeting of the advisory board took place just two weeks ago , at the end of October .
The experts attending the meeting , representing 22 countries , showed much interest and consensus on taking forward the establishment of that indicator .
I am pleased to note that the report by Mr Joan i Marí recognises the Commission 's efforts to promote language learning and linguistic diversity in the European Union .
The report contains a thorough analysis of our framework strategy to create a multilingual society and acknowledges our commitment to achieving the objectives stated in our communication .
I should like to thank the rapporteur once again for his inspiring report , and would stress that the Commission is determined to pursue the ideas and actions set out in this new strategy for multilingualism in our Union .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , the debates on multilingualism and on the protection of regional and minority languages and the use of languages in the European institutions always lead people to adopt firm positions , which are sustained by underlying political conflicts .
This own initiative report , which , let us remember , is aimed at implementing a new framework strategy for multilingualism , has the virtue of extending the debate that was already begun with the Ebner and Bayona report in 2003 and the Portas report in 2005 , on regional and minority languages and on the learning of languages by immigrants .
Parliament is thus called upon to confirm its previous positions or to amend them in view of the changing situation , for fear of contradicting itself .
We tried hard , during the course of our work , to strike a balance that was acceptable to all parties , as was reflected by the outcome of the votes in committee , and , in doing so , we took account of the acquis , and also put the issue of multilingualism into perspective .
I therefore call on my fellow Members to act wisely and not to fight the wrong battle .
Languages must be the link between the citizens of Europe , not the weapon used to create divisions and to sow discord .
My country , Luxembourg , is the only Member State , the only founder country , whose national language is not recognised as an official European language .
Yet , the government of Luxembourg has decided not to request official language status , as it believes that multilingualism is our future .
We were given language and intelligence in order to listen to each other , not to fight each other .
Sixty-five years ago , on 10 October 1941 , the people of Luxembourg had to take part in a referendum organised by the Nazi occupiers , for which they were asked to specify their race , ethnicity and language .
Their response to the three questions was : Luxemburgish .
As punishment , they were forced to enrol in the occupying army and deported to the concentration camps .
The fact remains that , after the war , the generation of victims accepted the fact that German , together with French , was the main language taught at school .
Luxemburgish has successfully developed and is doing well .
As for our future , I hope that Article 22 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which requires the Union to respect cultural , religious and linguistic diversity , protects us from any arbitrariness .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are pleased that a framework strategy has been put in place for multilingualism in the European Union .
Our motto , ' United in diversity ' is a testament to the importance of the diversity of cultures , of customs , of beliefs and also of languages , to the construction of the Union .
The Charter of Fundamental Rights has made respect for linguistic diversity one of our fundamental values .
This principle does not just apply to the official languages , but also to the many regional and minority languages spoken within the Union , including those of immigrant communities .
This rich co-existence of different linguistic communities in Europe sometimes leads to extreme difficulties within the day-to-day working practices of the Community institutions .
Despite the fact that all languages are of equal importance from a cultural point of view , it makes no sense to take the view that the European Union 's institutions could operate if it were using all of them at the same level .
I believe that progress on the promotion , defence and knowledge of this linguistic diversity must be supported by the Member States by means of active policies for promoting and defending languages in education and in the more social realm , including in the media , and the promotion of the learning of at least two foreign languages , with a view to facilitating knowledge of other cultures , promoting mobility and increasing awareness amongst the European citizens .
Finally , within the Community institutions , it must be possible for communication between the citizens and the Union to be carried out in their mother tongues .
Furthermore , in order to make the use of mother tongues compatible with the day-to-day work of the institutions , we must establish different uses for the different languages and it is in this area that we must work towards agreeing on the basic criteria to use in order to reach a consensus on these working languages , without forgetting any element , either cultural , the number of speakers or the status of the languages in their respective States .
I hope that the new Commissioner responsible for multilingualism , Mr Leonard Orban , agrees with this idea and will work in that direction .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( LT ) Ladies and gentlemen , first of all , I would like to welcome the Commission 's first communication dealing with multilingualism and setting major objectives for the European Union 's linguistic diversity : to promote language learning and a beneficial multilingual economy , as well as to provide all EU nationals with the opportunity to familiarise with the Community laws and other information in their mother tongue .
Today , the European Union represents 450 million people from various ethnic , cultural and linguistic backgrounds .
Therefore , the benefits of foreign language knowledge are obvious .
Language helps to understand different lifestyles and opens a door to cultural tolerance .
Moreover , language competence helps in work , study , travel and communication anywhere in the world .
Foreign language learning should start at a very early age , when the human brain is most receptive to taking in new information .
This is my firm opinion as a medical doctor .
Thus far , various surveys show that almost half of respondents admit to knowing only their native language .
Thus , we have a long-term objective that cannot be postponed .
At least 84 % of Europeans agree that each EU national should know at least one foreign language .
Consequently , we have great support from the society , the importance of which is increasingly acknowledged when adopting laws in the European Union .
On the other hand , we must not forget the old European languages , of which my native Lithuanian language is one of the oldest .
I would like to emphasise the importance of preserving such languages in the context of European linguistic diversity .
We should not only learn foreign languages , but also keep in mind another challenge - preserving and cherishing the old European languages by legally ensuring their rights .
I see the multilingual European as an educated person , who is able to live in a country other than his or her native land and who speaks foreign languages for professional reasons , and is willing to undertake further study .
Sadly , quite a large part of the European society still fails to benefit from multilingualism , and the motivation of citizens to learn foreign languages is not very strong .
We should promote that by any and all available means .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to use my one minute of speaking time to express my full and explicit support for the report presented by Mr Joan i Marí .

If the Union wants to be true to its slogan ' United in diversity ' , it must give multilingualism pride of place , going beyond just the official languages .
Just as protecting biodiversity is and must be a central value in our current societies , the protection of linguistic diversity must be seen as a central element of progress , the promotion of peace and development .
Given that many of today 's armed conflicts are the results of violations of cultural rights , linguistic rights and identities , it is urgent that we look upon promoting multilingualism as a tool for promoting dialogue , understanding and peace .
Though this is important in the world in general , it is particularly important in a European Union which aspires one day to move on from being a Union of values to being a political Union .
Promoting multilingualism in Europe therefore means wealth and progress .
Opting for monolingualism , however , will make us poorer .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . -
( The speaker spoke Irish )
I want to thank Mr Joan i Marí for the work he has undertaken .
I hope that the adoption of the amendments he has put forward can provide a basis for a meaningful EU language policy .
As the rapporteur has said , we need to improve language skills and to maintain the whole range of European languages .
Colleagues may be aware that Dublin will host an important conference on 24 November , entitled ' The Legacy of the European Bureau for Lesser-Used Languages and the Future of Lesser-Used Languages in the EU ' .
It is important that NGOs such as the European Bureau for Lesser-Used Languages receive continued funding and that there is project funding for languages as well , particularly languages that are in danger .
I fully support calls for an EU language plan , for project funding for the most endangered languages , for the Ebner report to be implemented in full , for the EU Ombudsman to have an explicit mandate to act in cases of language-based discrimination , and for a working party to be set up that can work towards giving a legal base to the concept of respect for linguistic diversities .
I ask colleagues to support the rapporteur 's amendments .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the draft resolution on the new framework strategy on multilingualism deserves particular attention , as language is the basis of a nation 's culture and a resource that we must make use of .
That is the reason why we pay close attention to all attempts to interfere in multilingualism in the European Union and react to all attempts to restrict it .
It is with satisfaction that we accept the initiative to set up a European language competence index , but on condition that this initiative covers all official EU languages , and will not be restricted in undertakings and in studies to five languages only .
For these reasons , on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group , I tabled an amendment to Article 6 deleting those sections that detract from the idea of multilingualism and which allow the possibility of restricting studies just to five particular languages .
I ask my colleagues to support this amendment , because otherwise this document which is so important and so essential for multilingualism , will not reflect the full intentions and tendencies that inspire us .
( ES ) Mr President , one year ago , in its first Communication on multilingualism , the European Commission set three entirely reasonable objectives : to promote language learning and linguistic diversity , to promote a multilingual economy , with the resulting improvement in work mobility and the competitiveness of the European economy , and to provide all of the citizens with access to information on the Union in their own languages .
Everybody is aware of the close relationship between this Communication and the general European objective that we set at the Barcelona Council in 2002 of ensuring that children learn at least two foreign languages in addition to their mother tongue .
It is precisely this that the report that this Parliament will vote on tomorrow must deal with ; offering the 450 million European citizens a wide range of tools to allow them to learn languages and hence to enjoy the immense social , economic and cultural advantages of participating in our great integration project , a project rich in national histories , languages and cultures , which today represents a dream of unity in diversity , benefiting all of the citizens .
The rapporteur 's opportunistic attempt to use the report to make nationalistic proposals in his own personal interest is entirely inappropriate and entirely undermines the purpose of the Communication .
In this regard , we should welcome the result of the work carried out by the Committee on Culture and Education , which has shown responsibility and good sense by using its amendments to redirect the initial text and its ideologically biased approach .
The rapporteur 's radical intentions are demonstrated by the fact that he has ended up voting against his own report in committee .
Respect for diversity is one of the Union 's principles , but using languages to split up States along ethnic and linguistic lines is an outrage that we in the Group of the European Peoples Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats will always vigorously oppose .
( ET ) Ladies and gentlemen , in the Middle Ages , my home city of Pärnu , like the other Hanseatic cities , traded with Russia , Germany and the Scandinavian countries .
Every merchant had to know the four local languages .
I concur with the idea that pervades this report - Europeans should know two other languages in addition to their native tongue .
Language proficiency considerably accelerated the Estonians ' reintegration into Europe after the Soviet occupation .
The ability to understand one another 's language and culture will help Europe 's sense of cohesion to overcome problems caused by the expansion of the European Union and by immigration .
There is an Estonian saying - the more languages , the more lives .
In the European Union , many people live many lives .
People go to other Member States either to work temporarily or to live permanently .
Many of the Member States ' significant national minorities became established in the post-World War II era of reconstruction .
My mother tongue is one of those European languages that are spoken by one million people .
The report emphasises that small languages must be protected .
I would like to add that they must be protected not only from the major languages of the European Union , but also from major languages from beyond Europe .
Here I refer to Russian .
By offering the motivation to learn in addition to language learning , we would alleviate the problems that have been very clearly identified by second- and third-generation immigrants in Germany , France and the Baltic States .
They are far from the land of their birth , and they are also unable to participate sufficiently in the culture and life of their new homeland due to their poor linguistic proficiency .
In such conditions , the costly efforts to enable official business to be conducted in major languages from beyond Europe are counter-productive , even detrimental .
While language learning is the most important means of integration , it is also time-consuming , and must be embarked on as early as possible .
( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , concerning the new framework strategy for multilingualism , I welcome the conclusions aimed at supporting and respecting linguistic diversity , which is a founding principle of the EU , especially in view of the shortsighted tendency to cut the number of working languages on the foolish grounds of wanting to reduce the amount of money spent on interpreting and translation services .
Yes , support for multilingualism is an important factor in cultural , economic and social integration , but is not , and has never been , the major factor in solving the social differences and problems that unfortunately continue to exist .
I should also like to emphasise and lend my backing to the view that in its language policy the EU must adhere strictly to the principle of solidarity , as it should in other areas .
We cannot allow language policy to become a source of conflict among the EU Member States or the general public , which is indeed a genuine possibility .
. - ( LV ) I doubt whether adding another 60 languages to the 21 European Union official languages will achieve the goal of true multilingualism espoused by the rapporteur , since it is not possible to give equal weight to the role of the Welsh and the Russian languages .
Experience shows that languages which are used more widely and in a more economically active way ' devour ' small ones .
Just let us imagine that Russian were to become an EU official language .
I am almost certain that we would not have long to wait before Latvian and Estonian would no longer be used in general , not only in the European Union , but even in Latvia and Estonia .
Before we tackle multilingualism throughout Europe , we ought to set an example in Parliament itself .
How much motivation do interpreters have to learn the languages of small Member States ?
How long will we have to wait before , when you arrive at Strasbourg , the heart of Europe , the border guard speaks to you in a language other than French ?
I am convinced that we need to begin by strengthening the official languages of the small EU Member States , leaving minority languages policies to the Member States to deal with .
In the future , the European Union will continue to be a union of states and not of ethnic groups .
Thank you .
( PT ) Mr President , leaving aside a number of proposed amendments , which I shall be voting against tomorrow , this report in its current form broadly enshrines appropriate principles , which have been acquired over the years , and in particular since 2000 , which was named European Year of Languages .
Yet the application of some of these principles is dependent on what the subsidiarity rule will allow .
Whilst it is true that everyone has the right to their mother tongue , it remains true that in practical terms applying this principle to the letter , over and above the official languages , would hamper the entire running of the Union 's institutions .
Moreover , we must prevent the use of what are referred to as minority languages for the purposes of nationalist extremism .
The issue of extending the European indicator of language competence is also addressed .
In its current form , it is only for measuring competence in English , French , German , Spanish and Italian .
This system must not mislead us into fostering the widespread learning only of these five languages .
I say this not only on the grounds of the necessary balance and legitimacy but also because the projection of European languages outside Europe is a highly important factor in an era of globalisation , not to mention the historical , human and cultural dimensions of these languages .
The Portuguese language - and you will appreciate why I give this example - is , of all the EU languages , the third most widely spoken around the world behind English and Spanish , and ahead of German , French and Italian . Consequently , as in Written Statement 58 , to which I was a signatory , I welcome the principle introduced in this report of ensuring that the European indicator of linguistic competence covers all of the Union 's official languages , and , should it prove feasible , all the remaining languages spoken in Europe .
Mr President , I should like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Joan i Marí , on his report and its contents .
I am very much in favour of supporting multilingualism and , in particular , the lesser-used languages .
I will not speak in my native language , Irish , this evening .
However , at the beginning of next year , in two part-sessions from now , I will be able to do that with the support of Parliament 's services .
I welcome that and look forward to it .
It gives meaning to the phrase ' unity in diversity ' , which has been used so much here this evening .
The lesser-used languages of Europe are as important , if not more so , than those which are widely spoken because we must support and strengthen them .
That is why I believe we can look forward to unity and cooperation through a common strengthening of our languages .
I would like to express my thanks for this discussion in support of multilingualism in European institutions , an issue that is significant both for individual countries and for our Community as well .
There are several important principles that always define what we are .
As part of our culture , languages are not only a technical instrument , but are also important bearers of our heritage , and as a cultural phenomenon they deserve respect and recognition .
This is a very important responsibility of the Member States in particular .
Therefore , it is essential to take a proactive approach to the teaching and use of languages .
Through the programme , the European Commission has created opportunities for the continued support of multilingualism , including minority or regional languages .
The European Bureau for Lesser-Used Languages ( EBLUL ) has been a partner , offering opportunities for other activities within the framework of the new programme .
The same applies to the language research network , MERCATOR .
Let me remind you that the first piece of secondary EU legislation adopted in 1958 concerned languages .
This was just the beginning , and it is extremely important that languages play their crucial role at this stage of European integration as well , a role that is not only political , but also cultural and , of course , economic and social as well .
In conclusion , it gives me great pleasure to observe that I am to be the first Commissioner in the history of the EU to be responsible for multilingualism as a separate policy and that shortly , subject to your consent , the entire sector will become autonomous , in collaboration , of course , with other sectors .
Moreover , another colleague , the designated Commissioner from Romania , Mr Leonard Orban , will be joining us .
He can be of help not only in promoting this policy but also in ensuring a strong commitment to the development of multilingualism .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , at 11.30 a.m.
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
( FR ) There was a time when all humankind spoke one language and used the same words .
However , according to the biblical account of the Tower of Babel , people tried to build a tower that could reach the sky and put them on an equal footing with God .
To thwart this plan , God multiplied the number of languages so that people would no longer understand each other and would disperse across the Earth .
With this report on multilingualism , Europe is implementing an ' anti-Tower of Babel ' project , insofar as it intends to promote and develop minority languages .
In order to gauge the importance of multilingualism , we really must understand what it is all about .
Cultural and linguistic diversity means showing respect for cultural identity , traditions and religions .
By promoting the integration of a European society in which there are many different types of knowledge , Europe is implicitly acknowledging that language learning is a crucial factor in people 's ability to communicate amongst themselves .
Multilingualism is also an opportunity for the future , and it has become Europe 's duty to safeguard it for its citizens .
Faced with globalisation , which encourages monolingualism , the more linguistic diversity is recognised , the less we will be able to fall back on our identities .
( PT ) Today is a very special day for those European languages , like Portuguese , that are spoken around the world , because the European Parliament is acknowledging the significant role that they play .
Recitals E and F and paragraph 3 , which I proposed , enshrine the major strategic importance that we should attribute to languages like Portuguese within the framework of European multilingual policy , since they have the particular quality of facilitating direct communication with other parts of the world .
This resolution recognises the fact that Europe cannot close in upon itself , but has to deal with the rest of the world and needs to address its ability to communicate globally .
Certain languages are invaluable tools for it to do so .
By recognising the true value of languages like Portuguese that are widely used around the world , the resolution has provided a better balance and greater strategic value .
It paves the way for demands that the teaching and learning of languages with this potential should be more actively promoted ; indeed , they should be promoted as the second , third or fourth languages for people in the EU to learn .
I am grateful to my fellow Members for their support , to the rapporteur for her openness , and particularly to our shadow rapporteur , Mrs Hennicot-Schoepges , for her willingness : her help was crucial in completing this initiative so successfully .
The European Union 's Generalised System of Preferences ( debate )
The next item is the Commission statement on the European Union 's generalised system of preferences .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I am happy to share with you further reflections on the GSP + scheme and the philosophy behind it .
It is an important EU development tool : it contributes to economic progress in developing countries and the reduction of poverty , while taking on board the enduring need for promoting core human and labour rights , as well as sustainable development and governance principles .
One of the key priorities of EU trade policy is to be consistent with and to consolidate the objectives of development policy , in particular the promotion of sustainable development and good governance .
This goal has been given greater prominence in the GSP + scheme , which aims at encouraging developing countries to comply with international standards relating to social rights , environmental protection and governance , including the fight against drugs .
It is worth recalling that the criteria on which the granting of GSP + is based are objective and transparent and have been made public in the regulation itself - this is in line with our WTO obligations .
The success of the GSP + scheme is that it provides an incentive for the applicant countries to ratify key ILO conventions in order to comply with the criteria of the GSP + .
It has played an instrumental role in the case of El Salvador , which deposited the ratification instruments of the missing ILO conventions on 6 September 2006 .
The ILO supervisory committees reported that most of the GSP + applicant countries have made substantial changes to their legal systems in order to comply fully with the rights enshrined in the ILO conventions , which was the precondition for being granted GSP + trade preferences in the first place .
The GSP + system is an instrument of encouragement and support .
It cannot solve everything at once ; its role is to give an incentive , as I say , not to punish , and to maintain the momentum of reform .
The aim is also to integrate the GSP + beneficiaries into the world trading system .
I am convinced that integration into the world trading system will further help these countries to advance towards greater respect for the principles enshrined in the conventions and to lock in essential reforms .
Following the ratification of these conventions , it is clear that actual implementation then needs to be monitored .
Progress in the implementation of the GSP + conditionality is assessed in relation to developments in government policy , to administrative capacity and other institutional , legal and budgetary constraints .
Some of these can only improve over time .
Regarding monitoring , the EU relies in its judgments , in particular with regard to the initiation of any withdrawal procedure , on the monitoring procedures and expertise of relevant specialised monitoring bodies , such as the ILO , for which the EU itself cannot be a substitute .
However , we also have our own role to play in the proper application of the GSP system .
Therefore , whenever the Commission receives information from trade unions or other stakeholders about serious and systemic systematic violations of relevant international standards , it thoroughly examines whether appropriate action in line with the GSP regulation may be taken .
This is well coordinated , with relevant monitoring bodies , and Parliament should be regularly updated on developments .
I would like to stress the important role the European Parliament and parliaments in the relevant countries can play , both in monitoring the situation and in helping to bring forward implementing legislation in the countries concerned and ensuring its effective implementation .
Let me say to Members of this House : your interparliamentary contacts are very valuable for sending this important message and I am ready to engage in an even closer cooperation with you with a view to this end .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the Generalised System of Preferences has proved its worth , as it actively supports countries in their efforts towards sustainable development and good governance .
We trade with these countries and also negotiate with them on equal terms .
We open up our markets to them , which also gives rise to competition - only in the medium term , if need be .
In other words , it is in our own interests , too , to ensure compliance with the rules and conventions of the United Nations and the International Labour Organization .
In this respect , we fully support the Commission 's endeavours .
We also ask , however - and the Commissioner has already indicated that he is prepared to do this - that the Commission keep us informed on a regular basis .
This relates to , firstly , its observations on the implementation of the various regulations in the beneficiary countries , secondly , any sanctions pursuant to Article 16 and , thirdly , a mid-term review of the effectiveness of the GSP + rules .
GSP + should put us in a position to provide support whilst also benefiting from trade with these countries .
At the same time , we should take account of the legitimate interests of our economy and labour market and strike a balance between these two objectives .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I fully agree with Commissioner Mandelson 's statement and , as rapporteur for the report on the generalised system of preferences , I would also stress the importance of GSP + as an incentive to commit the more vulnerable countries to sustainable development and good governance .
I take a positive view of the Commission 's decision of 21 December to grant benefits to fifteen countries that requested it and the steps taken subsequently by countries such as Colombia , Venezuela and El Salvador , ratifying important ILO conventions .
With regard to the functioning of the system , I would like to mention three fundamental issues .
Firstly , the aim of GSP + is to promote , amongst other things , human and labour rights through trade .
This association is essential and must not be squandered .
Trade must provide an incentive in terms of human and labour rights . We must ensure that protectionist tendencies do not undermine this aim .
Secondly , in order to ensure that the system is successful , the number of benefiting countries must be increased .
One of the Commission 's priorities must be to ensure that that number increases significantly , since those countries currently represent just 3 % of the world population .
Thirdly , the effectiveness of the system must be guaranteed , by ensuring that it is applied intelligently , with the participation of the European Parliament .
It is important that the Commission cooperate with the benefiting countries in their efforts to meet their commitments , by means of various initiatives and , in particular , by strengthening the rigorous and regular control and assessment of their implementation , transparently and with the participation of the main social actors and benefiting countries , as stated in Parliament 's report .
Furthermore , the sanctions provided for must be applied in the event of serious and systematic violations of the principles . Those violating them must be punished , but not operators who are fulfilling their commitments properly .
Finally , as the motion for a resolution reiterates , the Commission , before the next review of the Regulation , must carry out a study to assess the impact of the system , to analyse its operation and to lay the foundations for the reforms carried out .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the GSP scheme was designed to help the poorest and most vulnerable in the world trade their way out of poverty .
There is not a fixed list of countries that fit into that category .
Where the GSP is a success , a country may graduate to a new relationship with the EU .
However , not all movement is upward : some countries , through circumstances entirely beyond their control , may now be in a worse position than when the scheme was renewed .
Pakistan is such a country .
Despite the backing of this House , Pakistan was denied GSP + status by the Council , at a cost of 300 000 jobs and GBP 40 million a year .
Tragically , less than six months after the GSP scheme came into force , Pakistan and much of Pakistan-administered Kashmir was devastated by an earthquake that the World Health Organisation claims eclipsed the tsunami in terms of destruction and human suffering .
The major impact of the earthquake in the north-east of the region caused large-scale displacement of Pakistan 's skilled and unskilled labour force .
They have traditionally provided a significant part of the workforce for the whole of Pakistani industry , notably in textiles .
Many were left homeless , without spouses and with children to care for .
Over one year later , they have been unable to return to paid work because they have been waiting for financial grants to rebuild their homes .
As a result industrial wages have increased , driving up the cost of production and dramatically effecting Pakistan 's competitiveness .
Whilst the EU is always very generous in terms of the aid we offer to those countries in need , our pockets are not bottomless .
We must revise the GPS in order to make sure that we not only help the poor trade their way out of poverty , but also help the hopeless trade their way out of the rubble of disaster .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - Mr President , in order to be credible and genuinely effective , we have to demonstrate that the GSP + scheme is working properly .
In other words , the EU must act swiftly and decisively when there are infringements of the social or environmental standards in question .
This is not merely a theoretical or academic discussion , but a very real discussion about real countries .
The case of El Salvador has already been raised .
In fact , El Salvadorian workers have for years seen incredible resistance by their own Government , company owners and the right-wing media to try to avoid , or at least delay , the implementation of core labour conventions , and it is very unfortunate that an EU Member State , Spain , has seemingly supported them in that attempt .
However , the fact that the El Salvadorian Government has recently ratified four key ILO conventions is not the real victory it might seem , because by reforming its civil service laws the Government has actually succeeded in removing large numbers of workers from any possible benefits of those ILO conventions .
That is totally unacceptable , and I therefore formally ask the Commission to initiate without delay an investigation into the situation in El Salvador and to consider a temporary withdrawal of GSP preferences .
I would be happy to furnish the Commissioner with further details from the trade union groups and civil societies in El Salvador .
Colombia is another case of blatant violation of workers ' rights , despite the window dressing of official enshrinement of ILO conventions .
The monthly and often weekly reports of trade union members ' disappearing ' and being killed tell the true story of the blood toll paid by those who dare to assume that ILO rights officially adopted in theory will actually be respected in practice .
We cannot wait until December 2008 before we review these cases .
I ask the Commission to review them now .
( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner , the Generalised System of Preferences , GSP + , is a good system that grants privileges to countries in the developing world in respect of their access to European markets , which is an enormously positive thing .
There , are , however , a number of strings attached .
It is right for Commissioner Mandelson to say that these countries should first and foremost be given encouragement and support .
Nonetheless , situations can arise where it is not enough to provide encouragement and support and where , in addition , there is a real need to tighten up on monitoring and perhaps use the tools available if the conditions in the conventions on workers ' rights , and the like , are not met .
We know that infringements are taking place today , and we therefore want the Commission to tighten up monitoring and , where necessary , use the tools available to temporarily suspend offending countries .
When such steps are taken , we would further desire the involvement of Parliament in the process , so that we can give our views and work together in order to make the system work .
This must happen now .
As many other speakers have pointed out , it is also important to carefully review a few points before we evaluate the system in 2008 , namely : has the system worked in every respect , what shortcomings does it have and what do we need to consider when we renew the system ?
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , by adopting the Council regulation of 27 June 2005 reforming the system of preferences that has been in force since 1971 , the European Union has chosen to simplify and enhance its principal trade instrument for supporting developing countries .
Thus , three systems shall apply from now on : the general system , the Everything but Arms system - which is a tool adapted to the specific characteristics of the least-advanced countries - and , lastly , the GSP + .
The additional preferences granted under this last heading arose out of the firm belief that development can be considered only in close conjunction with the democratic process and with respect for human rights , labour law and the environment .
Fifteen countries are currently benefiting from this mechanism , which both encourages and rewards those developing countries that are most vulnerable and that make the most efforts in these areas .
However , if the GSP + is to genuinely contribute to better governance and to greater respect for the environment , human rights and employment , it must be managed effectively , and that means , firstly , warning countries that are not fulfilling their commitments - of which there are still many - and , above all , making routine threats so as to effectively do away with the preferences granted to those who seriously and systematically violate the ILO conventions and who do not honour their commitments .
Next , it is vital that a regular assessment be carried out to ensure that every country benefiting from the GSP + is honouring its commitments .
The assessment must be particularly exhaustive with a view to the renewal of this instrument at the end of 2008 .
Our credibility and the effectiveness of this instrument depend on what legal experts call the principle of congruent forms .
These preferences cannot continue being granted to countries that are politically incapable of fulfilling these commitments .
The same goes for the future of this policy .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I shall try to save you some money by making three points .
First of all the Commissioner certainly agrees that we need to maintain high standards of surveillance and invigilation and we intend to do so .
We have done so in the case of Belarus and have submitted proposals to the Council accordingly .
As regards Pakistan , granting privileges in trade requires us to keep within the rules that create those privileges and that is what we are doing and what we have done in respect of Pakistan , but I entirely accept the honourable Member 's view that we must do everything we can within those rules to give assistance to Pakistan .
As far as El Salvador is concerned , yes , I entirely accept that having granted GSP + status , we must now monitor , on the basis of reports of international bodies , the effective implementation of the two ILO Conventions in El Salvador , and it is our clear intention to do so .
In accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) , I have received six motions for resolutions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , at 11.30 a.m.
Agenda for next part session : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was closed at 12 a.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting was opened at 9.05 a.m. )
Written statements ( tabling ) : see Minutes
Services in the internal market ( debate )
The first item is the debate on the recommendation for second reading by the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection on the Council common position for adopting a Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on services in the internal market ( 10003 / 4 / 2006 C6-0270 / 2006 2004 / 0001 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Mrs Gebhardt ) .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we are today reaching the end of a debate that has been going on in this House for more than two years , on the subject of the services directive .
I believe that we can be entirely happy with , and proud of , the work we have done on this issue .
I am not , of course , the only one to have worked on this matter .
Many of my fellow Members have played their parts in ensuring a constructive collaboration .
Allow me to just name a few people I would like to thank as a way of thanking all those who ensured such a positive collaboration .
Thus , I would like to thank my colleagues Mr Goebbels , Mr Swoboda , Mrs van Lancker and Mrs McCarthy , as well as Mrs Thyssen from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , Mr Jonckheer and Mrs Rühle from the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and Mrs Jäätteenmäki from the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe .
All of them have made great contributions to our success .
There is , however , one person I would like to single out , and that is the shadow rapporteur from the PPE-DE Group , Mr Harbour .
( Applause )
I would also like to express thanks on behalf of Mr Schulz , who asked me quite specifically to do this yesterday evening , for the constructive cooperation he has experienced , as it was neither easy to create a common text , given the differences of opinion that are represented in this House , capable of achieving a broad consensus and without leading to divisions between Parliament and the citizens of the European Union , nor could it be taken for granted that this feat could be accomplished .
This constructive collaboration can also be seen in the text that we are debating today .
It led to there being a symbiosis between the interests of employees and consumers and those of the economy .
We have succeeded , with this text , in making a real contribution towards putting people more in the centre of politics .
In my opinion , it is essential to our future work in Parliament that we should make it abundantly clear that we are shaping politics around the people , around the citizens of Europe .
The economy is important , stability is important , but the most important thing of all is the people on whose behalf we make policy .
With this common text that we have created we have succeeded , through the removal of the country of origin principle , for one thing , in protecting the rights of workers , namely labour law , social law , consumer protection and other important issues relating to rights , and in ensuring that we have a positive regulation .
It was very important for us to have ensured that the rights of employees were advanced , thereby averting an unhealthy competition between the social systems of the Member States .
By deleting Articles 24 and 25 we ensured that the services directive does not affect or jeopardise the Posting of Workers Directive , and that we were able to work well together on this area .
By removing quite significant elements of the services of general interest from the scope of the services directive , we have ensured that a solution was found to a truly enormous problem . This is in the light of the fact that this services directive is in fact , of course , a directive for commercial services , a fact which means that health services and social services , which have totally different requirements due to the special interests involved , do not fit within the scope of the directive .
We have not , however , merely done something for employees ; we have also ensured that there are gains from this services directive for the economy , the service providers .
We have ensured that the free movement of service providers across borders has been made much easier .
This we have achieved by means , for example , of having actually codified the principle of the freedom to provide services , of having made it crystal clear that protectionist measures in the Member States must be abolished and that single points of contact are available in order to help service providers to move around the European Union .
There are still a couple of points that we need to debate in Parliament and they are points that we have already debated .
I believe that the Commission can provide an important answer to these questions today . Specifically , it can clear up a couple of points that are absolutely fundamental for us , relating , in particular , to labour law , social security entitlements , criminal law and the orientations that the Commission is to provide under the services directive and that the Commission , as far as I am aware , will not be using in order to undertake to provide interpretations of the implementation of the services directive , but rather to ensure that the services directive represents an aid to the Member States .
Interpretation of the texts is a task for the Court of Justice and not for the Commission .
The Commission has understood this and that is something we can very happily live with .
Mr President , I now very eagerly await the statement that the Commission is about to give .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , the vote at second reading on the Services Directive will be a milestone in the history of the European Parliament , not only because of the importance of this Directive for European citizens and businesses , but also because of the leading role Parliament has played in the legislative process .
It is undeniable that the Services Directive is an essential element in our efforts to boost the European economy and unleash the potential of the internal market for services .
The text which is now on the table will provide real added value to the internal market , cutting red tape , removing barriers and improving legal certainty for business and consumers .
It lays solid foundations for a new internal market framework with a positive impact on the freedom of establishment and the creation of new business .
This is crucial for fostering entrepreneurship and for promoting growth and jobs .
Service providers can be confident that they are dealing with fair and transparent authorisation regimes and swift and simple procedures .
They will be able to obtain information and complete administrative formalities through points of single contact in any Member State and , in addition , in electronic form .
This will simplify , accelerate and reduce the cost for the setting up of new business and obviate the need to deal with different levels of authorities .
Equally , the Directive will provide a welcome boost to cross-border service provision .
The new provision on the freedom to provide services , which was at the heart of the compromise in first reading , strikes a fair balance between guaranteeing the rights of service providers to free access and free exercise of a service activity whilst allowing Member States the right to invoke their most essential requirements in certain clearly defined circumstances .
This will definitively improve legal certainty for service providers and consumers .
Importantly , the Directive will be underpinned by obligations on Member States to cooperate among and assist each other , in order to ensure that businesses are properly and efficiently supervised across the European Union while avoiding duplication of controls .
These three elements - simplification of establishment , freedom to provide services and assistance and cooperation between Member States - were always at the core of the Commission 's drive to open up the services market .
The position of the European Parliament has been crucial to finding a broad consensus on these issues .
In this dossier , the European Parliament has shown its maturity and capacity to find well-balanced compromises on very complex issues .
At first reading you clearly took the lead and were able to deliver the broad consensus we pursued .
Getting a consensus in the Council was not easy .
Some Member States had serious difficulties in accepting your delicate compromise on the scope of application of the proposal and the freedom to provide services mechanism .
In the end , and after a vigorous defence by the Commission and the Presidency of the compromise reached in Parliament , the common position was adopted .
It is a common position that respects and reflects Parliament 's political compromise , with only minor adjustments introduced mostly to provide greater legal clarity .
You are aware that the compromise reflected in the common position is very delicate and fragile .
Attempts to reopen the text will inevitably give rise to a new debate in the Council and put in jeopardy the compromise reached .
I call on Parliament to recognise that the common position closely reflects Parliament 's first reading , and to refrain from seeking further modifications through amendments .
The vote in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection on 23 October 2006 demonstrates that this is possible .
At this juncture there are no ' technical ' or ' minor ' amendments .
I am aware that in discussions leading up to the vote in the committee , certain institutional and legal issues have been raised which are of concern to some Members of this House .
In this context , I would like to make the following statements to address the concerns that some of you have raised .
' Concerning the screening of national requirements which Member States apply to services provided from other Member States , the Council has requested the Commission to provide orientations and analysis and the Commission will use its best efforts to abide with this task .
This will not give additional powers to the Commission which may , pursuant to the Treaty , if it considers it necessary , formulate recommendations and deliver opinions on matters dealt with in the Treaty .
The orientations will merely consist of assistance to Member States for the proper implementation of the Services Directive .
They will neither provide legally binding interpretation of the Directive , which is the prerogative of the European Court of Justice , nor will they amend the provisions of the Services Directive , which is the prerogative of the European Parliament and the Council .
The Commission will carry out this task in an open and transparent manner in close cooperation with the other institutions .
It will in particular regularly inform the European Parliament about the results and the follow-up of its analysis .
Concerning the need to consider further harmonisation , in the future review of the Services Directive , the Commission will assess whether , in the field of services , further measures are necessary and , if so , what kind of measures are appropriate .
The Commission will , in particular , examine whether for certain services or certain issues there is a need for additional harmonisation .
The Commission will thereby take suggestions made by the European Parliament , in particular at the first reading of the Directive , into consideration .
Where necessary , and in line with our Better Regulation approach , the Commission will make specific proposals , including proposals for harmonisation , where justified .
Concerning the impact of the Services Directive on labour law , the European Parliament and the Council wanted to avoid that the Services Directive affects labour law or the rights of the social partners to defend their collective interests .
The Commission wants to state unambiguously that the Services Directive does indeed not affect labour law laid down in national legislation and established practices in the Member States and that it does not affect collective rights which the social partners enjoy according to national legislation and established practices .
The Services Directive is neutral as to the different models in the Member States regarding the role of the social partners and the organisation of how collective interests are defended according to national law and practices .
However , Community law , and in particular the Treaty , continue to apply in this field .
Concerning the impact of the Services Directive on criminal law , as is stated in the text , the Services Directive will not affect Member States ' criminal law rules .
This means that in general Member States will be able to apply their criminal law rules not only to service providers established on their territory but also to service providers from other Member States providing services within their territory .
This is because criminal law rules , in general , apply to everybody in the same way , irrespective of whether a service is provided .
However , Member States may not circumvent or prevent the application of the provisions of the Services Directive by making use of criminal law .
Concerning the impact of the Services Directive on Social Services , social services relating to social housing , childcare and support of families and persons in need are a manifestation of the principle of social cohesion and solidarity in society and are provided by the State , by service providers on behalf of the State or by acknowledged charitable organisations .
These services have thus been excluded from the scope of application of the Services Directive .
It is clear that this exclusion also covers services provided by churches and church organisations which serve charitable and benevolent purposes . '
I have arranged for the text of these statements to be handed in to the secretariat for inclusion in the record of this part-session .
I hope that these statements help to accommodate the concerns raised by some .
The Commission hopes that they will facilitate the acceptance of the common position by Parliament .
Before concluding , I note that Mrs McCarthy has tabled three amendments on behalf of her committee relating to the new regulatory procedure with scrutiny .
These amendments result from the agreement reached between the three institutions last summer on the revision of the comitology procedure and can be accepted by the Commission .
Next week it will be two years since this Commission entered office and I became Commissioner for the Internal Market and Services .
The debate on the Services Directive has been at the forefront of attention for much of that time .
I think we should now move to adopting the Directive and start implementing it .
I look forward to hearing the view of this House .
( Applause )
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , Mr Gebhardt , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as earlier speakers have already said , today we are making internal market history .
For almost three years the European Parliament , the Council and the Commission have been engaged in painstaking , ambitious work on the Services Directive .
To be perfectly frank , the work has not always been easy and progress has sometimes been slow .
We can take comfort in the fact that there is a stronger feeling of consensus here in the House today than ever before during the drafting process .
The directive represents a major European reform .
No wonder , then , that there have been numerous obstacles along the road to the agreement .
There have been genuine differences of opinion on its content as well as the occasional slight misunderstandings .
Although today we all want to look to the future , I would nevertheless like to raise one or two matters that arose during the drafting process .
Firstly , I wish to remind everyone of the vote in Parliament last spring , the result of which might be seen as a historic compromise .
Parliament managed to arrive at a compromise , in what was a very challenging political situation , which enabled the proposal for a directive to move on to a subsequent and successful drafting stage .
In this connection , I would like once again to thank the European Parliament for this compromise , especially the rapporteur , Mrs Gebhardt , the Chairman of the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection , Mrs McCarthy , the shadow rapporteurs and numerous other Members who have worked so hard to find common solutions .
Six presidencies of the Council have been involved in the difficult task of drafting the directive .
For Finland , as the country to hold the Presidency now , the situation at present is at once a welcome and demanding challenge .
The Finnish Presidency has been able to take advantage of the results achieved by former presidencies , especially the Austrian Presidency .
The Council 's common position since last spring has given the Presidency a strong mandate to take this matter forward .
A lot of work also went into the Council 's adoption of its common position and it involved a considerable amount of flexibility and a genuine desire for compromise .
I also especially appreciate the fact that the European Parliament has shown sensitivity in the matter of a common decision here too and the added value which comes with that .
The Commission 's role in the drafting process has also been crucial .
When the debate in Parliament and in the Council has been at its most vehement , the Commission has , in accordance with its fundamental role , endeavoured to use constructive arguments to take the drafting process in a sustainable direction .
Commissioner McCreevy today mentioned some delicate issues in the directive , on which the Commission has been required to adopt a position .
Speaking on behalf of the Presidency , I fully support and acknowledge the Commissioner 's message , and the need for a declaration and its content .
The Commissioner 's personal role during the complex drafting process was exemplary in terms of its objectivity and the way it respected the opinions of both institutions .
One result of this lengthy drafting process is that the proposal for a directive has now in many ways changed during the debate .
The common objective and intention to develop the internal market has nevertheless remained unchanged .
The directive will open a number of doors , both to service providers and , at the same time , the receivers of services , be they consumers or businesses .
The Services Directive does not , however , represent an end to the development of the internal market in services .
On the contrary , the directive is a unique step forward in the development of the internal market in viable services .
It has become clear over the last few years that provisions in the Treaty are not enough by themselves to regulate with absolute clarity the internal market in services , which is the real heart of the Union .
I believe that the Services Directive will provide market actors with just the sort of legal security that they have been waiting for for so long .
This is the directive 's greatest added value .
The Finnish Presidency of the Council warmly welcomes the fact that today only some of the amendments are to be voted on .
Of these I would like to mention the three amendments relating to comitology introduced in the plenary debate .
I can confirm the Council 's acceptance of these , and in this respect the Council is able to amend its common position .
With regard to the other amendments , I hope that the common position will remain unchanged .
Mr President , I hope that Parliament will take a final and definite decision on the Services Directive today in the plenary part-session .
Then the objective regarding the agreement shared by both institutions , the European Parliament and the Council , would be realised at second reading .
( Applause )
Mr President , it is my belief that , with the official statement from the Commission , the last legal uncertainties in relation to particular aspects such as , inter alia , labour law and social security legislation , have been cleared up .
I now therefore feel able to recommend to the House that it should adopt the Common Position as presented to us by the Council of Ministers without making any amendments , excepting of course the three amendments relating to the comitology procedure on which we have agreed among ourselves .
I think that we , in this House , have performed very well , and I would like , once again , to thank the Commission and the Presidency of the Council for having accepted our text almost unaltered .
There is one more point I would like to make , however , and it is one that is just a little unpleasant . I would like to recommend to the present and to future Presidencies of the Council that they should desist from the sort of behaviour we have seen from them thus far .
It is not acceptable for the Presidency to constantly repeat during a second reading that it is not possible to discuss the issue further and for it not to accept amendments that Parliament wants because a fragile compromise has been achieved in Council .
A similarly fragile compromise was brokered in this House too , and it is important to ensure that the rights of Parliament , the Council of Ministers and the Commission are given full expression in the course of codecision .
For this reason , the way things have come to pass on this occasion cannot serve as a template for future legislative processes .
I have accepted it this time because 90 % of Parliament 's text was adopted and because we in this House did not suffer any great losses . This will not always be the case , however .
When that happens , the Council must not say ' no ' and insist that no more discussion is possible on this issue .
That is not constructive cooperation and I truly hope that this will be an isolated example and that , in future , we will again be able to enjoy normal cooperation in the codecision process .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , Commissioner , this is an important day for European citizens .
I emphasise that because sometimes when we talk about concepts like the internal market we forget that we are engaging people at the heart of what goes on and in our political work here .
This directive is about improving the standard of living of all citizens in the European Union and encouraging growth and dynamism in the economy .
It is as fundamental as that .
What is so important about this directive - and sometimes we perhaps forget this during our big debates - is that it has actually been the result of painstaking work by the Commission , to whom I would like to pay tribute .
It addresses the deep frustrations that businesses , particularly small enterprises , have faced in exercising their rights under the single market .
That is what this directive is all about .
It is extremely detailed in its provisions .
It has directed at the Member States no less than 40 specific measures to take down barriers and 65 provisions to improve their procedures .
Now it is up to the Member States .
It is they that are going to have to deliver and we are going to be keeping an eye on them to make sure they do deliver .
I particularly want to single out the fact that for the first time we have a specific requirement on Member States to promote the single market in relation to their businesses , to encourage businesses to take advantage of the single market in the services sector and go out and trade crossborder .
The single market is a shared project of all of us .
It is not decided here , it is actually decided out there in the Member States .
We can do our best and this directive is a major step forward in achieving that .
A notable thing about this directive is that it has been good politics .
Why do I say that ?
Because it has been the product of a lot of constructive and detailed argument : long debates and votes in committee , because different sides want to reinforce their position , negotiation and compromise .
It has been good politics , and at the heart of it has been Mrs Gebhardt .
She was generous enough to pay tribute to me and I want to say to her that it has been a pleasure to work with her .
It has been a challenge , sometimes , because she has been a very determined leader in pushing this forward , but I think that what we have done together will be good for European citizens .
However , it is not just we who worked on this , but all the members of our committee , and others as well .
I particularly want to thank my own team on the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , many of whom will be speaking shortly , but we also worked very closely with our Liberal colleagues , particularly in the crucial vote that the Presidency was kind enough to mention earlier on .
They will speak in more detail now .
I want to conclude with my thanks to the Federation of Small Businesses in the United Kingdom and say two things to the House today about the importance of this directive .
The first one is that small and medium enterprises represent nearly 90 % of the services sector .
They are crucial to this proposal .
Secondly , if every small business in Europe created one more job , we would have dealt with the problem of unemployment in the European Union .
( Applause )

on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , naturally , I should like to thank Mrs Gebhardt on behalf of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament - and particularly Mr Goebbels , who unfortunately cannot be here today .
As rapporteur , Mrs Gebhardt has steered the ship of the Services Directive skilfully through many stormy waters .
I should also like to thank my fellow Members from the other political groups , however , particularly the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats .
Although , of course , our differences of sociopolitical view remain , I believe that we have fulfilled our responsibility to present a tangible solution that is acceptable to the European public .

I am particularly obliged to Commissioner McCreevy , without whom this process could not have been structured so well , and to the Council Presidencies - particularly the Finnish , but also the Austrian Council Presidency . I would ask the Council to bear in mind that the Austrian Presidency created a precedent when it invited us MEPs to a Council meeting .
This should not remain an isolated case ; the possibility should definitely be left open in other contexts , too .
I also wish to thank the European Trade Union Confederation for holding such intensive consultations with us and also making it possible to arrive at a compromise on this .
I was born at the point where the former East and West met - between Vienna and Bratislava - and so I am aware of the fears , but also the hopes , associated with an internal market for services .
If nationalism and protectionism are now gaining ground once more in many of the transition countries , and also many of the ' old ' EU Member States , one of the reasons may be that people are overwhelmed by the speed , sometimes even the brutality , at which this internal market is being established .
That is why it was so important to find a way to establish this internal market - which is needed - whilst also doing justice to social considerations .
After all , politics at EU level consists not only in removing the obstacles to an internal market - that is part of the story - but also in creating the political framework conditions for rendering this internal market acceptable to the people .
For these reasons , my group will give the Directive its wholehearted support .
Naturally , we have some reservations - which will be presented later - but , on the whole , my group supports this good compromise that has been reached .
We should have the courage to endorse this compromise today and champion it externally .
Once again , sincere thanks to Mrs Gebhardt .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , I wish to thank my colleagues Malcolm Harbour and Evelyne Gebhardt , and many others , for their excellent levels of cooperation .
In particular I want to thank Commissioner McCreevy , as , without his rational approach to cooperation , there would certainly have been no progress .
Services are a crucial source of growth and jobs in the EU .
During the period 1997-2002 approximately 96 % of new jobs were in service sectors .
It is therefore important that there should be no unnecessary barriers to growth at national level .
The Services Directive is a step in the right direction .
I know that there are people in this House who are dissatisfied , because they think that we have not gone far enough , but there are also those who believe that Parliament and the Council took too great a leap .
This proposal now before us is a compromise ; it is what it was possible to accomplish given the situation .
The European Parliament has been accused of nibbling away at the Commission 's original proposal .
At the same time , however , nobody has bothered to mention the large number of areas to which the directive still applies .
The Services Directive covers such sectors as the construction industry , business services , fitting and installation , trade and distribution , and travel and leisure services .
The spectrum is very wide .
The purpose of this proposal is thus to liberalise services , thereby reducing their cost .
The demand for various services relies on price , but confidence is just as important .
If a service provider does things on time and well , confidence grows and so , then , does the market .
It is not the directive that will determine that : the responsibility lies with the service provider .
The free mobility of the workforce is just as important as the Services Directive for a viable EU internal market .
At the time of enlargement to the east , only Sweden , Ireland and the United Kingdom allowed free and immediate access to their job markets to nationals of the new Member States .
Now that a new round of enlargement is to take place , once again there are Member States which are erecting barriers .
These new potential barriers are very troublesome , and cause problems for the liberalisation of the internal market .
They are a step backwards .
If we are to take a step forwards with the Services Directive , it is to be hoped that progress will be made in the same way as regards the free mobility of labour .
( Applause )
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , Mrs Gebhardt , we are disappointed at the refusal of the three largest groups , the majority of this House , to conduct a proper second reading of the Services Directive today .
Mrs Gebhardt fought to the very end , but this makes it all the harder for us to understand how she can describe as a great triumph for Parliament an outcome she recently said contained some points that were legally imprecise and unclear .
Admittedly , the Council put us under great pressure by stating from the outset that any amendment of its text would result in the failure of the whole Directive - but this was the same Council that stated at its first reading that it had followed Parliament 's text virtually in its entirety .
Sadly , however , it had not followed our text in its entirety , and a lack of clarity has crept into some points , mainly on issues surrounding social Europe .
This lack of clarity relates to the definition and exclusion of services in general and services of general economic interest in particular .
It relates specifically to the exclusion of social services , and it relates to the recognition of the collective agreements negotiated by the social partners .
These are not trifling matters ; they are the fundamental issues that were used by the opponents of the Constitution to obtain a ' no ' vote in the French referendum .
We could have taken the Council at its word when it emphasised time and again after the referendums that the new version of the Services Directive would fully respect social rights .
Sadly , however , this is not the case .
It makes a difference whether I give the example of social services or content myself with an incomplete list , which leaves large gaps in the case of some Member States and thus ends up having to be decided by the European Court of Justice .
It is incomprehensible how this could be accepted in the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
After all , the rapporteur for this committee , Mrs Rudi Ubeda , who is incidentally a member of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , stated in her report on social services that these services differed greatly between Member States and that , consequently , a definition was needed .
How is it possible to exclude in a way consistent with legal certainty a sector that is not properly defined ?
Sadly , however , the committee paid no further attention to this issue , but instead merely reaffirmed its reluctance to cause the Council any problems .
Consequently , in its haste to show obedience , it dispensed with its traditional right to conduct a proper second reading of the Services Directive .
This is certainly no triumph for Parliament ; on the contrary , it is a defeat - one that we shall regret for a long time to come .
Even the Commission statement does not change this .
At best , it is binding on the present Commission , but it is not legally binding , since the interpretation of the law rests with the Court of Justice - as Commissioner McCreevy has reaffirmed today .

on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , in Parliament 's relations with the Council , we are familiar with codecision and conciliation .
Today , with the Services Directive , we can add capitulation to that .
What other word is there for the incredible decision taken by the majority groups to yield to the Council 's urgings by agreeing to withdraw all the amendments examined in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection and to adopt the Council 's common position without opposition , even though it is indubitably a backward step from their own compromise of 16 February this year ?
I would remind you that the European Trade Union Confederation felt it necessary to amend this text on certain points that it regarded as being ' of major importance ' , notably with regard to the ' clearer exclusion of labour law and social services , and clearer respect for fundamental rights ' .
In fact , the Council 's text makes the preservation of labour law in the Member States subordinate to compliance with Community law - a vague wording that refers to the rules on competition .
Some of you are consoling yourselves with Commissioner McCreevy 's reassuring statement .
This really is very odd reasoning .
Dare I remind you that it was in fact Mr McCreevy who , just a year ago , used Community law to justify preventing a Latvian business from recognising collective agreements in Sweden , in the Waxholm affair that caused such a stir ?
On the other hand , the Council has restored to the Commission an incredible level of power to monitor - both before and after the fact - the legislation of the Member States ; it was precisely this power that Parliament wanted to restrict .
Mr McCreevy sees this change as a crucial improvement , and that is perfectly understandable , but what does Parliament see in it ?
Nobody is saying anything .
Finally , the ambiguities and grey areas in the text of the directive - which I criticised at first reading on behalf of my group because , as I said at the time , they leave the door open for uncontrollable interpretation from the Commission and the Court - have already started to be exploited as we feared they would be .
For example , the Commission 's communication on social services sets out an extremely simplistic vision of these services , which , by the way , Commissioner Špidla was keen to stress would increasingly fall within the scope of Community law on the internal market and competition .
Another Commission communication , dealing with the posting of workers , attacks regulations in certain Member States with respect to service providers from other EU countries that it regards as disproportionate .
Here , too , the Commission is leaning on the inexhaustible case-law of the Court .
Where , then , are the safeguards that the directive was supposed to provide against this slippery slope leading the whole of social life into anything-goes competition ?
In general , the President-in-Office put it very clearly : ' the Court 's interpretation will be needed in many cases ' .
Well , my group will not support this massive deregulation exercise .
Above and beyond the issue of services , there is , in my view , the issue of the concept of European integration .
Do we want to use the law to harmonise protective rules and push them upwards , or are we going to accept the harmonisation through the market and competition of standards that will consequently inevitably be dragged downwards ?
Do we want to promote parliamentary and citizens ' democracy , or are we going to allow ourselves to be governed by case-law and interpretative communications ?
A few weeks away from the 50th anniversary of the Treaty of Rome , these are perfectly legitimate questions , and I am willing to bet that many of our fellow citizens will soon be asking them quite forcefully .
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the services sector is responsible for almost 70 % of the European Union 's GDP and is the main source of economic growth .
There are , however , thousands of administrative obstacles to the development of this sector .
The main aim of the Services Directive is to cut this red tape , which would then facilitate the provision of cross-border services on the markets of the 25 Member States .
The European Commission has identified over 90 obstacles which service providers , such as mechanics , accountants and IT specialists , have to overcome in order to carry out their activities in another Member State .
As a rule , these difficulties are deliberately created by countries which fear competition from entrepreneurs from other states and want to protect their own markets at any price .
This is usually at the cost of the consumer , who is offered services that are more expensive and of lower quality .
Even in its watered down form , the Services Directive is a step in the right direction along the long and tortuous road of making the European economy competitive and making life simpler , especially for small businesses .
The years ahead will show whether it will , as Commissioner McCreevy claims will be the case , become a milestone in terms of removing the obstacles to the provision of services on the internal market .
We will only know the outcome when the Member States integrate the Directive into national law in a way which really will minimise these obstacles , which are incompatible with the principle of the free provision of services enshrined in the Treaty , and which are damaging to European consumers and entrepreneurs .
The European Commission should play a significant role in this matter and should act as a guardian to ensure compliance with the Treaties and with European legislation .
Fortunately , we have managed to avoid further corruption of the Services Directive by rejecting , at the sitting of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , all the amendments tabled by the rapporteur , Mrs Gebhardt .
Further watering down the Services Directive , which was ratified by the Council and is a difficult compromise anyway , would not only be harmful for the free services market , but could also result in the entire project being scrapped and in three years of hard work being wasted .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , what Parliament is endorsing today is a directive for lawyers and judges .
It is the judges in Luxembourg who will determine what has been decided .
The rules are very unclear .
I tried in vain to remove the worst of the imprecision by means of three unambiguous amendments .
1 .
The Member States shall be able to require compliance with local agreements by all parties delivering services .
2 .
The Member States shall be able to decide for themselves which services are to be performed under the public aegis , and what is to be decided by the market .
3 .
The Member States shall also be able to levy VAT and taxes on services delivered from abroad .
These are three important questions to which I have not received clear answers .
The June Movement is in favour of there being a common market for services too , and we welcome , in particular , workers and companies from the new Member States , but Danish rates of pay must apply .
Competition must not be on the basis of lower pay , more relaxed working conditions or lower rates of VAT and taxes .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , nine months after it was adopted at first reading , the European Parliament is tying up the Services Directive , known as the Bolkestein directive , by approving the Council 's common position with no amendments .
This is a victory for social democracy , won over to economic ultraliberalism .
With the exception of non-commercial services of general interest , nothing escapes the liberalisation of services : even social services are not completely excluded from the Gebhardt report .
Ladies and gentlemen , you are deceiving the people .
This directive will not put an end to social , fiscal and wage dumping .
Clever , dishonest service providers will continue to exploit national legislation , and to use the weak points in the directive by relying on the sectoral directives .
For example , more than 100 000 construction workers are posted in France on temporary contracts , most of them undeclared .
There is lawful social dumping going on with regard to responsibility , because posted workers remain part of the social security system in their countries of origin .
In such cases , labour law is being flouted legally .
Finally , we are opposed to the mechanisms to assess national restrictions on the cross-border provision of services , as they represent an unacceptable monitoring of the Member States by the Commission , and an excessive level of Community bureaucracy .
That is why we will vote against the Gebhardt report .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have managed to turn a proposal that was far too horizontal in scope , far too radical in its drive to deregulate and unrealistic in its enforcement , into a directive that does exactly what it is supposed to do , namely remove obstacles to businesses that wish to establish abroad and to service providers to enable them to carry out cross-border activities , and thus enable everyone , including SMEs , to avail themselves of their fundamental rights under the Treaty .
Despite the very different starting positions , not only between , but also within , the groups , clearly also between the Member States , and despite many widespread misconceptions about the content and repercussions of the proposal , we managed to produce a balanced and justifiable end product , partly by listening carefully to each other , to the people and by working together in a constructive manner .
Economically and socially , we are providing a better opening of the internal market for the benefit of services , for more growth and for jobs without affecting consumer and other social protection .
Institutionally , we have proved that European democracy works and that Parliament is taking its responsibilities seriously .
Legally , even if the wording leaves something to be desired , we certainly look to add value by affording more legal certainty .
I therefore hope that we will maintain this course when we vote and that we will manage to back the common position by a very broad majority , for it is , after all , a good reflection of the compromise that we ourselves hammered out .
I too should like to express my appreciation for all those who , during the course of those two past few years , have managed to work together , not only those with political responsibility in the three institutions , but also the staff .
Mr President , today , as Chair of the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection , I am immensely proud of the work and commitment of both our rapporteur and the members of the committee in enabling Europe to finally give the go-ahead to open up the market in services .
It was the MEPs and Parliament who found the compromise to save the services law from national deadlock and paralysis in Council .
In the British press , surprisingly , Parliament has been praised for coalescing as ' a serious and effective institution ' .
The article goes on to say that the key to the services law 's success has been forged here in Strasbourg .
I agree with the journalist who says that it is time to pay more attention to the European Parliament .
I want to thank the Council and the Commission for paying attention to Parliament 's right of regulatory scrutiny in the new procedures and accepting our three amendments .
This has been the single most controversial but also the most important piece of legislation in the EU .
Despite our ideological and national differences , we MEPs have managed to find a way to open up the market , to boost jobs and growth and give our citizens the trust and confidence to use and access those services across Europe .
The law has been controversial in cutting red tape and bureaucracy for business , but we need to ensure high quality standards and choice for consumers , while safeguarding employees ' conditions and health and safety .
Parliament listened to people 's concerns and fears , so that the freedom to provide services is not the freedom to undermine consumer or employee rights .
Each Member State must now ensure free access to its territory and it must be equally clear that the right to maintain national rules , to protect public policy , public health , security or the environment , must not mean that legitimate protection turns into negative protectionism .
It must be justifiable and proportionate and must not discriminate against other operators .
Let us look to the future .
The litmus test will be whether we can deliver and open up the market for businesses and give the benefits to our consumers .
We cannot shout about the benefits if we do not deliver .
Our work is not yet done .
We must continue to work together as three institutions to make good on our commitment to deliver .
Certainly I , as Chair of the Internal Market Committee , stand ready to make good on our commitment to assist the Commission and the Council in making sure we respect the rights of consumers and employees and deliver for business across Europe .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have now reached a historical moment , because we in this House , as a political body , have taken a decision of our own about one of the basic freedoms .
We will leave the rest for the European Court of Justice to deal with , because last night , we were anxious - this is with reference to gambling - about tackling the really dirty work .
We will get the judges of the European Court of Justice , who are not elected , to do this instead .
I am pleased that now , at long last , the politicians , the elected representatives of the citizens of Europe , have taken a decision about the free movement of services .
I am particularly indebted to Mrs Gebhardt for ensuring that her group has not tabled any amendments .
I have also noticed that the atmosphere , now that the compromise is on the table , has improved a great deal because this issue was the source of much tension .
In my view , however , this is not about the tension between Poland and France , between the Netherlands and the Baltic States or whatever .
This is about Europe , China and India .
We , as Europeans , must therefore , keep the momentum going where the different peoples are involved .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mr Pekkarinen , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to make two comments .
I would like to emphasise the fact that the eight amendments tabled by our group were adopted by Parliament at first reading by an adequate majority , which clearly demonstrates that the Council 's common position does not fully reflect Parliament 's text .
The second comment I would like to make is this : before we start waxing lyrical about the historic importance of this directive , it would be worth exercising some caution .
I would remind you that this directive will be transposed by all Member States by 2009 at the latest , and that the Commission 's initial assessment report will not be presented to the European Parliament until 2010 .
That , therefore , is when we will see what impact this text really has in the various Member States , at the end of the assessment procedure laid down in Article 39 of the directive .
I would call on those who are promising us a brighter future and talking about millions of new jobs to be cautious : we must not make the people of Europe promises that we might not be able to keep .
I would like to conclude with a few words on the general philosophy that underlies this proposal : our group supported the free provision of services , and in particular of cross-border services .
At the same time , however , we have always stressed that we must have every guarantee with regard to working conditions and the prohibition of illegal labour , and that these conditions must be respected throughout the territory of the EU .
From this point of view , Mr McCreevy , I welcome your statement , but in political terms it only commits the current Commission - and in 2010 , there will be a different Commission .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , from the word go , the Services Directive has been the project of those wanting to see capitalism without any social safeguards prevail in Europe .
The Directive will goad liberalisation , deregulation and privatisation and also wage and social dumping on an unprecedented scale .
Companies will be pleased , but for the majority of people it will be a disaster .
In spite of all the protests and all the opposition , Parliament is to pass this Directive today , and those who stand to gain from it owe particular thanks to those in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament who have done their best to throw dust in people 's eyes with lies and deceit .
The compromise due to be adopted today is not one that keeps alive the remains of a social Europe .
It is a neoliberal hammer designed to obliterate all social aspects .
Those who support it have to do so with their eyes open .
We shall continue to oppose this neoliberal onslaught .
. - ( LV ) It is customary to believe that new laws improve , reinforce and otherwise contribute to the success of the European Union 's activities .
Such is not the case with the draft directive to be debated today .
The previous European Commission based the draft directive on the state of origin principle - a principle which the European Court of Justice has developed and which has been consolidated in the case law of international private law .
The current Commission rushed to place the draft directive , based on the state of origin principle , within the principles of European Union strategic documents , including the Lisbon Strategy .
This key to the opening of the European services market , however , broke off in Parliament 's hands .
The state of origin principle has disappeared from the directive 's text , and the wording of the provisions of its Article 16 resembles the mutual recognition principle - a principle which in practice may prove to be too subjective and unwieldy to open up the services market .
Today the European Parliament will delegate to the Member States full responsibility to decide whether , when and how the European Union 's services market will develop .
We can only hope that this will , in fact , occur .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , on the eve of the referendum in France , the UMP swore that the Bolkestein directive had been withdrawn , and the socialists said that it had been consigned to the dustbin of history .
Not only did both parties lie , but they are now making things worse for themselves in at least four respects .
Firstly , there is the country of origin principle .
We are giving free rein to the Court of Justice , which is the inventor of this concept in its judgments in the ' Cassis de Dijon ' and ' Säger ' cases .
We can hardly imagine that it is going to sacrifice its own creation .
The second point relates to the protection of employees .
Labour law , which is a national competence , is being made subordinate to compliance with Community law , with no treaty and no ratification .
How far are we prepared to go in substituting commercial law for labour law ?
Thirdly , there is the issue of monitoring service providers .
We are putting the Member States in an untenable position by preventing them from exercising any control .
What can they possibly know about the working conditions in a Polish company that they know nothing about ?
My fourth point relates to the services covered .
The scope of the directive has once again been extended , and will now affect some 6 000 occupations , and perhaps even more , given how ambiguous the text is .
In conclusion , I think that , in this compromise that was wanted by all 25 Member States , the Court and the Commission are gaining an enormous amount of power to complete the internal market , without worrying about the social dumping that is crushing our workers and will continue to aggravate unemployment .
The people have been deceived on the accession of Turkey and duped on the VAT affair , their rejection of a super-State has been scorned , and now they have been betrayed on the Bolkestein directive .
Quite frankly , how many of us are now able to look the electorate in the eye ?
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , not least in the light of the widespread interests of the system of small and medium-sized enterprises , especially those of Padania , we feel that the aims - in relation to the Commission 's original project , which was already just as dangerous - of imposing one regulation on all of the Member States of the European Union are still very dangerous , because they lead to cut-throat competition in the services sector , which , let us remember , represents 70 % of the GDP produced within the European Union .
It is reasonable to wonder whether , on such a sensitive issue as this , the remarks made by civil society have really been heard and taken on board , and whether the dangers of social and economic dumping have actually been eliminated from this new , sugar-coated version of the Bolkestein Directive .
Unfortunately , everywhere you look these days , unscrupulous entrepreneurs are competing unfairly , to the detriment of the system of small and medium-sized enterprises , which , unlike these entrepreneurs , work fully within the law .
This is the outcome of liberalisation , which both the Commission and the European Court of Justice wanted .
We are against this bureaucratic centralism of the European Union .
( HU ) Mr President , along with many other MEPs from the new Member States , I did not vote for the Services Directive at first reading last year .
At this vote , however , I will support it .
At that time , I did not support it because I wished to send a warning that in the newly unified Europe it is not permissible to disregard the interests of new Member States when passing important new legislation .
That warning has served its purpose .
Indeed , that is what helped Council to make progress for instance in the much-debated areas of criminal and labour law that hampered free provision of services .
I should like to underline that the new text requires each Member State to review those of its current statutes that prevent the free provision of services .
All these are steps in the right direction .
In the proceedings since the first reading , the involvement of the new Member States and of MEPs was more actively sought .
I am confident that the end of the often difficult and bitter debate about the Services Directive will help the Union leave behind that period of crisis , add new impetus to the internal market and give a chance to small and medium-sized enterprises to create more jobs and contribute to the faster economic growth of the Union .
Yet we also need to learn from this process .
We have to work harder to restore the trust between old and new Member States .
To that end , there must be a stop to the scaremongering that the new members ' cheaper labour and services will threaten the social model of the older ones .
This is unfounded , and is a betrayal of the principle of free competition that forms the basis of the Union 's economy .
The new members opened their markets for goods and capital long ago , and that was not always easy to do .
Now it is the turn of the old members to open their markets to services .
The Service Directive that is about to be born is a step forward .
We would have preferred to take a bigger step , but everyone gave up something .
Now the Services Directive has to meet the tests of practicality and of the European Court of Justice .
I wish it a lot of success in both .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , thanks to the hard work and determination of our rapporteur Mrs Gebhardt , and thanks to the mobilisation of the European trades union movement , at first reading Parliament removed the main dangers from the initial version of the Services Directive , the version put forward by Commissioner Bolkestein .
In particular , Parliament managed to remove from the directive all social services , including social housing , healthcare , audiovisual services , transport and temporary employment agencies .
Likewise , the directive on the posting of workers and labour law could not be affected , thus removing the main dangers of social dumping , and the country of origin principle was also deleted .
Nevertheless , two major problems remained : firstly , not all services of general economic interest were removed from the scope , due to opposition from the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe ; secondly , the new version of Article 16 , whilst removing the country of origin principle , was not clear in establishing the country of destination principle .
These problems have not been solved in the Council 's common position , which , although it has indeed incorporated the essence of the conclusions from Parliament 's first reading , has taken a backward step on several other points , in particular social services and labour law , as the European Trade Union Confederation has underlined .
Everyone has acknowledged the need for clarification of these points , and of others , such as the effects on criminal law , the direction taken by the Commission 's guidelines and the need for future harmonisation , and you have made a statement to that effect , Commissioner .
It would , however , have been more logical , given that the codecision procedure has not been completed , to adopt amendments to clarify these elements within the articles themselves .
Unfortunately , I note that the PPE has neutralised the second reading by rejecting all the amendments proposed by the rapporteur during the debate in the Committee on the Internal Market and Consumer Protection .
In a way , this group has deprived the European Parliament of its right of amendment , and I find that deplorable .
The French Socialist delegation has therefore tabled a number of amendments , because it feels that the compromise is not satisfactory in its current state , and that it leaves the door open to too many uncertainties with regard to the Court 's interpretation .
I think that , when it comes to distinguishing between liberalisation , on the one hand , and social and fundamental rights , on the other , the role of the legislature is to clarify , and not to leave the door open for case-law .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , 50 years ago the founding fathers were already considering the possibility of having the freedom to provide services throughout Europe , in order to create the internal market .
In the service sector , which makes up a major proportion not only of our economy , but also of our employment and our competitiveness , a revamping and revision were not only logical , but essential .
I should like to make two comments .
The first is political in nature , and is that the Bolkestein proposal , which was presented by an old Commissioner to an old Parliament , was unacceptable , and many of us here fought against it .
Today , following the huge amount of work that has been achieved , we are a very long way away from the Bolkestein proposal .
My second comment relates to the background : this text reaffirms the principle of the free movement of services , whilst maintaining the prospect of further harmonisation within the Union .
I am delighted that the current draft incorporates 90 % of Parliament 's requirements , by excluding from its scope non-economic services of general interest , certain social services and healthcare services .
To conclude , I would like to stress that the examination of this text has been an excellent example of the democratic exercise of Parliament 's powers and has allowed it - whatever the view of the extreme right and left of the House may be - to demonstrate its maturity .
( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , there is no doubt that Parliament has done a huge amount of work on this directive and that this text bears very little relation to the directive proposed by the Commission two years ago .
However , as we have just heard in this House , the fact that the European Council changed a number of important sentences after first reading means that the second reading does not go far enough , which is a pity .
Thus employees , our fellow citizens and consumers no longer really see the need for a directive on services .
It is difficult for them to understand today that liberalisation is taking place without there being anything precise on social services and health services .
There is still too much vagueness , too many grey areas , in this compromise proposed by the Commission and the European Council .
( NL ) Mr President , Parliament is about to vote on the European Services Directive , probably for the last time .
It seems like a fait accompli because the largest groups have already given me to believe that they intend to support the compromise and not table any amendments .
They seem to think the directive in its current form is so perfect that they are prepared to waive their democratic right to submit proposals for improvement .
My group is less enthusiastic .
The Services Directive continues to form a threat to the quality of the services and the achievements of workers across Europe .
The text remains unclear and open to different interpretations .
In addition , improvements made at previous reading are now at risk of being undermined by , for example , the fact that the Posting of Workers Directive is being cut down to the bone .
For this reason , my group will be voting against the Gebhardt report .
Mr President , I have been told by some people that this is one directive that UKIP can vote for .
It is about free markets .
It is about helping small companies trade across national boundaries .
It is going to be good for business .
Well , we have been here before , haven 't we ?
Because we joined a common market that led to a single market , and what has the result of all that been ?
Well , it has been regulation , cost and missed opportunities overseas .
Just last month , there was a poll of a thousand British businesses .
Sixty per cent of them said that they want the UK to renegotiate our relationship with the European Union to a simple free trade agreement and no more than that .
But this was not just a cry from a few Poujadists .
I will quote Michael Spencer , the Chief Executive of ICAP and recently voted the most powerful man in the City of London , who said that people in business are fed up with the volume of costly regulation the EU is producing .
In the City , people are becoming more and more sceptical about the value we are getting from it all .
It is clear that British business now recognises that the cost of directive upon directive upon directive produced by institutions like this is now having a negative effect .
The single market is not fit for the 21st century global economy and I believe that it will be British business that leads us out of it .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , if this directive on services is adopted in its current form , which is a poor compromise , we might cynically observe that we have at least partially complied with the Treaty of Rome .
Given that the Treaty was signed almost 50 years ago , this is a rather meagre result .
It is an indictment of politicians that , in the discussions on the directive , fear of international competition and fear over what are referred to as social standards prevailed over visions of a Union prospering from the free movement of people and services .
It is also an indictment of politicians that they have forgotten that competition is one of the instruments of economic development and that social standards are the fruits , and not the seeds , of prosperity .
I firmly believe that by removing one of the pillars of the directive , the country of origin principle , a populist and indeed cowardly move , we have thrown away any chance of decisively improving the citizens ' standard of living .
We have thrown away the chances of improving the provision of services , of cutting prices and of creating new jobs .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my speech will , on this occasion , be devoted to a short assessment and a few tributes .
The European Parliament has joined forces in order to draw up the directive on the internal market in services .
It bears its hallmark .
This is a victory for the European Parliament , a victory over European moroseness , a victory over fixed ideas , a victory for the European model , which is all about balance : the balance between necessary reforms and the preservation of the acquis that bring us together .
The directive actually opens up the internal market in services and makes it compulsory for the Member States to do away with any obstacles to the free provision of services .
This is a major prospect in terms of growth and employment for all .
At the same time , the directive preserves existing Community laws , does not permit any breach of social rights , rules out the liberalisation of public services and takes account of the public interest .
This compromise - as I can testify , insofar as I have followed its development since summer 2004 - stems from the proposals made by my political group and from the agreements concluded within the group between what , at the outset , were differing national and ideological positions .
The statement that Mr Szájer made just now testifies to this .
This directive has its origins in dialogue , which is the very substance of our parliamentary life .
That is why I should like to begin by thanking not only our principal overseer , Mr Harbour , but also Mrs Thyssen , with whom I worked hand in hand , Mr Karas , Mr Szájer and Mrs Handzlik , Mrs Gebhardt , who has mastered the matter from start to finish and who has been so kind as to take me , the inexperienced MEP that I am , into consideration , and Mrs McCarthy and Mr Whitehead , whom I should certainly not like to forget .
Outside Parliament , my thanks go to Mr McCreevy , who has fulfilled his promises to Parliament since the start , and also to Mr Bartenstein , who has played a decisive role .
I did nonetheless hear some incredible remarks made just now . Ladies and gentlemen , it is better to let well alone .
The common position represents 95 % of our text .
Mr President , would we really be exercising our power if we entered into a conciliation procedure , which we know will result in our having no directive ?
The role of Parliament , our right , is , on the contrary , to shoulder our responsibilities .
That is why the French members of the UMP are going to vote in favour of the common position , by choosing what is truly important .
( FI ) Mr President , two years ago I voiced my concern in this House that in some countries the debate on the Services Directive has also brought to the surface feelings of xenophobia and a call for economic protectionism , neither of which are a credit to this Community .
The Prime Minister of Luxembourg recently wondered why we are now more afraid of people coming from the east than of the missiles that were in position there 20 years ago .
We have nevertheless achieved a compromise , through discussion , and one with which we can live , since this directive will finally open up the market in services , albeit only partially .
This directive appears to protect highly educated professionals and exposes less well educated professional groups to competition .
Doctors and pharmacists remain outside its scope , but carpenters and hairdressers are included in it .
Fear and prejudice , however , will be dispelled with time , because practice will eventually overcome theory .
Furthermore , in the future the directive will obviously be made more workable and open as far as all the citizens of Europe are concerned .
We need to learn that we on this continent cannot successfully compete with other continents if we do not even have the courage to compete amongst ourselves .
- ( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would first like to welcome Mrs Gebhardt , who has drafted this elaborate document .
Some of us have proclaimed it a great achievement that we were able to reach a compromise .
I partially agree with this .
Nevertheless , I think that our objective has yet to be achieved .
Our objective is to liberate the market , since its potential is crucial to the economic growth of the Community and to job creation .
Today it is stagnant .
The proposed directive may boost the emergence of new services by laying the legal foundations .
The good thing is that the directive 's second part clearly defines the actions that may not be directed against service providers .
However , I do not agree with the decision to reduce the type of activities list to such a great extent , as the target countries are still given the opportunity to create barriers to service provision .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the liberation of the services market presents an opportunity for choice .
Therefore , we must ensure that high-quality services at competitive prices are available throughout the Community .
The Services Directive should guarantee that .
However , this one does not yet do that .
Mr President , I recognise that this compromise is something of an improvement on the Commission 's original proposal .
I also recognise that it is necessary and desirable to remove the remaining barriers to the cross-border provision of commercial services .
However , I believe that we should , in the process , provide legal certainty - and I mean ' certainty ' - to providers of essential public services and , more importantly , provide reassurances to the many citizens who depend strongly upon locally-provided social services .
Verbal assurances given in good faith , I fully accept , are not what will be used by judges in the event of court challenges in the future .
It is the text of a directive that will be important .
That is why I have signed a number of amendments , such as Amendment 31 , which make it absolutely clear that it would be Member States who define services of general interest in their territory .
I would ask colleagues to accept that this is a reasonable amendment and should be adopted , amongst others .
Mr President , I believe that the Services Directive is one of the most important pieces of legislation we will adopt in this Parliament .
I should like to congratulate Commissioner McCreevy , Mrs Gebhardt and Mr Harbour for all their work .
It is definitely a step in the right direction .
The directive will make Europe more competitive and thereby create jobs and give better value to its citizens .
People are saying that we are pulling the wool over the eyes of our citizens .
On the contrary : if we do not make changes in our economy , as we are doing today , then we really will be pulling the wool over the eyes of our citizens .
Whether we like it or not , it is a fact that we are living in a globalised world and Europe must become more competitive if it is to compete on a global scale .
About 50 % of all world trade is now in emerging economies and if we want to compete with them and hold on to the European social model , we need a vibrant economy to invest in the sort of services that we feel are important for the citizens of Europe .
This directive is a step in the right direction ; it is the sort of reform we must make at a European level if we want to hold on to the values that we believe are right for our citizens .
I very much welcome this directive .
( SV ) Mr President , the Council 's common position is a victory for reason .
Competition within the services sector will be intensified , at the same time as the national independence of the Member States is respected .
That is a good compromise .
The June List is opposed to national protectionism , bureaucracy and the remnants of the guild system in Europe .
Such restrictions impede competition , development and growth within the services sector .
The June List welcomes the fact that the Council , in common with Parliament , chose to reject the country of origin principle .
It would certainly have facilitated increased competition within some services sectors , but the disadvantages were out of all proportion .
The country of origin principle would have forced the Member States to give up national self-determination in some of the most important areas of social life .
It is self-evident that the laws , rules and traditions that apply within a country have come about through a due democratic process and must be observed by all who operate in its territory .
The June List welcomes , then , the Council 's common position on the Services Directive .

Mr President , the abandonment of the country of origin principle and the reduction in the services covered , particularly the omission of social services and non-economic services , makes this directive a more palatable proposition than when it was last debated .
However , I retain some concerns , not least the rush to timetable harmonisation of national legislation on the provision of services , with its inevitable avalanche of regulation and the fear that insecure jobs will result from foreign service providers paying low minimum wages , thus creating worse conditions in host nations , particularly if they are allowed to have temporary status and then escape national host controls .
On one specific point , I welcome the fact that gambling activities will be outside the ambit of this directive .
Their inclusion would have fed the growth of that destructive industry and added to the misery and social instability which it so often spawns .
- ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this year began with demonstrations against the Directive , and is ending with a triumph for parliamentarianism .
We have not stood in each other 's way , we have not allowed ourselves to be used ; instead , most of us have surpassed ourselves and taken on responsibility for the European public .
This European law is a triumph for Parliament and for dialogue , and should encourage all parliaments .
We are legislators , not governments .
We have shown leadership and cut the Gordian knot .
Long may this continue .
Freedom to provide services is a fundamental right ; today 's decision represents an important step in dealing with this freedom .
This decision has also dispelled many prejudices about the EU .
First of all , the Directive is a triumph for the European system of social market economy , in which the market is not played off against social security .
We must realise the four freedoms consistently but , equally , we should involve the public to an increasing degree .
Secondly , we have held dialogue with the social partners .
We have made ourselves part of the negotiations in the Council .
In this connection , I am obliged to Minister Bartenstein and Chancellor Schüssel for taking our side .
This has enabled us to achieve more market , a stronger internal market , and also growth and employment , and to ensure social security .
I should also like to thank all my fellow Members , however , especially those who refused from the outset to support efforts to achieve a qualified majority at first reading , because a compromise is always harder to champion than an individual position .
We have simplified many things , provided legal certainty and presented a model of parliamentary work to the public .
( Applause from the right )
( ES ) Mr President , I think the speeches so far have made the position quite clear : a large majority of this Parliament is going to vote in favour of the text adopted , and there is therefore no reason to fear that the proposal for a directive will be rejected .
It will not therefore be necessary to go to a conciliation procedure .
This is thanks not only to the great work by Mrs Gebhardt , but also to the great work by Commissioner McCreevy .
I would like to congratulate both of them very warmly .
I would like to thank Commissioner McCreevy for his statement on behalf of the Commission on the exceptions for employment , social and criminal law , which , as he has said , were necessary because they are laid down in Union law , but which also clarify the situation .
Despite what some sceptics have said , this represents great progress .
For example , we cannot say , as some Members have done , that we cannot look to our electors .
On the contrary .
On the contrary , my electors are delighted that Parliament has played this role at this time .
Neither can we criticise the excess of legislation .
Without legislation , society cannot be organised .
Those of us with knowledge of what is happening in the developing world , for example - where countries have no legislation - know that legislation is necessary .
Through the legislation that we have adopted , Parliament , the Commission and the Council are going to provide European society with a system of freedom , in the provision of services , which , at the same time , is going to safeguard the high level of working , social and also environmental conditions that we have at the moment .
I believe that the three institutions have made a great effort .
The amendments that are going to be approved in the field of comitology were necessary .
I am also delighted that both the Commission and the Council have taken them up , and we hope that the subsequent development of this Directive , by means of the comitology procedures and by agreement between Parliament , the Council and the Commission , will enable it to be fine-tuned and improved and enable any difficulties that it may present to be cleared up .
In conclusion , Mr President , I believe that this is a great day for the European Parliament , for the Council , for the Commission and for all of the citizens of the European Union .
( DE ) Mr President , the leap taken today by the Brussels grand coalition , largely excluding its members in the new Member States , went nowhere near far enough .
It was in the right direction , but simply fell short .
It is true that the establishment of one-stop shops will help to concentrate administrative formalities , at least .
Another improvement is that small or medium-sized enterprises can no longer be forced to maintain a permanent establishment in another Member State .
When we celebrate in 2006 the fact that restrictions on foreign service providers have to be justified and national measures against them proportional , however , we are actually celebrating the achievement of something that should have been taken for granted by 1994 at the latest .
We have forgotten along the way where and why we started work on the Services Directive - we were aiming to kindle palpable momentum for growth and thus provide real momentum for employment .
The failure follows a familiar pattern .
Alliances of employers and inter-branch organisations rail against change , against competition and market opening .
In a way scarcely seen in any other debate , risks have been exaggerated out of all proportion and opportunities played down .
The organised scaremongering about Eastern European workers has done its worst , and the losers are the unemployed throughout Europe .
Even the Commission has to ask itself why it lacked the courage to defend its protégé against the attacks by demagogues .
It is now called upon to follow implementation in the Member States attentively , so that new burdens are not imposed on SMEs , in particular , through the national back door .
- ( SK ) The directive we have in front of us now only contains a fraction of the original text , as almost all areas , including the main principle of country of origin , have been deleted .
We have cut out medical and social services and services of general interest , as well as all references to the temporary posting of workers .
These are to be addressed separately on a sectoral basis .
However , the question remains as to when and if at all .
An empty directive may do no harm , but at the same time it can do no good .
This directive , I would say , is completely useless and does not resolve anything in its current watered-down form .
The country-of-origin principle means that a small business from Bratislava may apply Slovak law when serving a customer in Vienna .
However , the host Member State will insist on the application of its own legislation if , for example , it is in the interests of public policy , public safety , health protection , environmental protection , etc .
This wording of the directive leaves the application of the original principle to the discretion of officials .
It has been proven that the old Member States benefit from cheap and high-quality labour from the ten new Member States , and our nurses , au-pairs or IT experts have proved their worth .
However , they are afraid that a nurse providing her services as a small business would generate too much competition and are disguising ...
( The President cut off the speaker )

( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I shall not repeat one by one the thanks Mr Toubon expressed to all MEPs , but they echo my sentiments .
I believe , as Mr Karas said , that we have seen a great convergence of the positions of all MEPs , and that MEPs have played a positive part in helping to allay the fears on the part of the countries of origin .
The fact that they have been allayed is at least partly attributable to the opening up of a path towards the completion of the internal market for services .
These negotiations , on which Parliament exerted particular influence , also demanded a great deal of our staff and , as has already been pointed out , Parliament showed itself to be influential and a driving force , but at the same time conciliatory as an institution .
Mr Harbour , our shadow rapporteur , described this as a good day for European citizens .
It only remains to say that the path of reality that this Framework Directive brings to European citizens has yet to be trodden , and the Member States must tread it carefully and constructively , as the Directive lays only the foundations for the future completion of the European internal market for services .
The country of origin principle has become the principle of freedom to provide services .
The internal market must be completed but , as the Bruegel institute recently made clear , it also needs to be highlighted even more strongly by Member States , civil society actors , and even the Commission and Parliament , including for the purposes of public understanding .
This represents another great challenge for us .
Personally , I consider the criticism levelled by some respected Members of this House that too many tasks would be transferred to the European Court of Justice in the course of the follow-up to be rather petty as , in any case , the main responsibility under a framework directive remains with the Member States .
I address to the Minister , as Council representative , my appeal for the Council to face up to this main responsibility , in particular .
( HU ) Mr President , it is good to be a member of the European Parliament today .
It is good , because we can report great results .
It is a great achievement that after the logjam of the Constitution , and before the closing of the fifth phase of EU enlargement , we will have succeeded in creating the free movement of services , likely with a huge majority .
Do you remember ?
A year and a half ago , the case of the Polish plumber was the embodiment of a xenophobia that is condemnable in all its forms .
A year and a half ago , we saw no hope for an agreement between employer and worker , between old and new Member States , between left and right .
It is an enormous achievement that today MEPs are categorically rejecting discrimination .
Today discrimination between old and new Member States is gone .
It is an enormous achievement that we are creating new opportunities for all 476 million inhabitants of the Union .
It is an enormous achievement that we are creating a legal opportunity for those who at present are compelled to work in the black-market economy .
And it is a great achievement that workers with rightful grievances have another option than lawsuits that go on for many years before the European Court of Justice in Luxemburg to validate their rights .
It is an enormous achievement that employers and employees , small and medium-sized enterprises , big businesses as well as consumers will benefit , and come closer to meeting the Lisbon objectives set by us all .
It is a considerable achievement that Parliament has succeeded in formulating the political message of the Directive , and similarly , that between the two readings many have decided to switch to supporting the proposal after all .
If Member States transpose the law properly , ten years from now we will be able to look back with pride and say that we did what our country and what Europe demanded . Thank you for your attention , and congratulations to all participants for their contribution .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is impossible to say everything that needs to be said in the space of a minute , so I shall select what is possible .
Firstly , I am convinced that the adoption of this directive in its current form can help Europe .
The directive helps to get rid of the dead wood and to overcome obstacles and barriers that have hindered unification of the services market and the initiative of professional service companies , both inside and outside national borders .
At the same time , however , the directive provides guarantees and enhances the prospect of a structured , Europe-wide market , where freedom of movement is possible not only for competition , crushed as it is by cost competition and the risk of social dumping , but also for good rules and practices , which are aimed at safeguarding inalienable principles and interests , such as those relating to the guarantee of universal services , of general interests - including in areas of economic importance - of business quality objectives , of environmental protection , of safety and of basic social safeguards .
To conclude , Mr President , I hope that , in future , we will have not just more Europe , but a better Europe .
( PL ) Mr President , let us be honest and say that the Bolkestein Directive was better , as it truly opened up the services market , and that the objections expressed in this House run contrary to the spirit of solidarity in the European Union .
However , this very difficult compromise clearly is of some value , and is better than having no directive at all .
That is a fact .
Are there any causes for concern ?
Well , to call a spade a spade , the large number of exceptions are a problem .
I would hesitate to call this a success , and would also refrain from saying that this is a historic moment .
Let us wait to see what happens in practice .
These exceptions may create a situation where the ubiquitous Polish plumber becomes an unwelcome guest .
To conclude , the Devil is not as black as he is painted , and the Polish plumber is not as terrible as has been suggested , even by some Members of this House .
( PL ) Mr President , the Services Directive is not simply a legislative document about services .
It is not simply a step towards liberalising services making life far easier for European service providers .
The services directive is , first and foremost , proof .
Or proof to all Europeans that we can work in common in a united Europe , and that this brings notable benefits for the average citizen .
It is proof that together , we can achieve important things in the European Union and that , based on our combined experience , it is possible to achieve a widely accepted compromise .
Work on the Directive has proved that we can overcome divisions along national , party and historical lines and draft a balanced legislative document for the 450 million-strong consumer market which serves the interests of both service providers and consumers .
I am satisfied with the current proposal for a compromise , although I had expected a greater degree of openness and I had expected the country of origin principle to be retained .
Many people criticise the Directive for being too liberal , too social .
However , in my opinion , thanks to the hundreds of hours of work that went into it and the involvement of many people , the Directive has become a compromise legislative document for a united Europe where , whilst opening up and liberalising the services market , we are also ensuring that consumers and service providers obtain an adequate level of protection .
In the Member States , including Poland , the Directive provides much hope for better job opportunities , which is something that many service providers and consumers have been eagerly waiting for .
I am convinced that , as representatives of the citizens of Europe , we have done our duty and we can today vote in favour of the Directive with a clear conscience .
It is an important step towards the integration of the single market , although a lot of work remains to be done in order to open it up completely .
It is also a milestone which implements the principles set out in the Treaty of Rome , which we have not managed to implement any sooner , and whose 50th anniversary we will be celebrating next year .
Work on the Services Directive has been particularly important for the new Member States .
During the first reading , we saw many examples of national selfishness , protectionism and opportunism , but we were also able to work out a common denominator that serves the interests of all the European Member States .
( NL ) Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , it goes without saying that I wish , first of all , to extend warm thanks to Mrs Gebhardt and all those of my fellow Members with whom I have worked on this directive for so many months , because thanks to this cooperation , and thanks also , of course , to the mobilisation by the trade unions and NGOs , we now have before us a Services Directive in which labour law , collective labour agreements , social rights and consumer rights are fully respected .
We should be pleased with this outcome .
I am also pleased that quite a number of sensitive areas , namely social services , health services and temping agencies , do not fall within the scope of this directive because they , of course , need stricter rules if they are not simply to be at the mercy of the free provision of services .
I am grateful for the fact that Parliament has closely followed the Council 's common position in this .
Those Members who have said that there are a number of ambiguities in the Council 's common position are , of course , right , Mr President-in-Office , and along with a few fellow Members , I would have wanted to eliminate these by means of a number of amendments .
I still believe that our job as legislator is about producing clear , intelligible legal texts that are not open to interpretation .
The content of these texts , seeing as it touches upon subjects such as the autonomy of labour law and the definition of excluded social services , is not unimportant , and I share the rapporteur 's sense of regret that there was no willingness at all on the part of the Council to put this right with amendments .
Whilst I do believe that the legal meaning of the Commission 's interpretation is limited , I am very grateful to the Commission for its interpretation nevertheless , because I think , Commissioner , that the interpretation has a very strong political meaning - one of commitment by the Commission , about which my fellow Members and I are sure to remind this Commission and its successors .
It is up to us , therefore , to provide more legal certainty for social and health services in future legislation .
( NL ) Mr President , some people have called this a birthday present to mark the Union 's fiftieth anniversary .
If I were to get that sort of present from my friends , then I think I would look for new friends .
Whilst I do not want to take anything away from all the work that has been done , I have voted against for the first time , and I am afraid that I now cannot support the compromise either .
Unfortunately , feelings of fear , conservatism and protectionism have pervaded the whole of this debate .
This compromise adds little to what is already enshrined in the Treaty .
This may , in itself , not be a good enough reason to vote against , but what is is the fact that this directive appears to create grounds of justification for exempting public services from the rules of fair competition .
I find this a very dangerous precedent and moreover - legal clarity was mentioned a moment ago - the definitions used are remarkable for their legal ambiguity .
The reason why I see this debate as being pervaded by hypocrisy is that when Western Europe bought the Eastern European businesses in the early 90s , there was no discussion whatsoever .
Mr President , this is an incredible missed opportunity for Europe .
( EL ) Mr President , the directive we are debating today is a success for Europe , a success for development and a success for the workers .
It is very important that , after a very long period of debate , the right balance has been struck and thus we have , on the one hand , the opening of the services market and the facilitation of investments by eliminating bureaucratic , legal and technical obstacles and , on the other hand , full respect for workers ' rights - as the European trades union accepted in February - and , at the same time of course , exemptions for certain particular sectors .
The OECD , the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development , says in one of its reports that 2.5 million new jobs which will be created thanks to this directive .
It would be a pity , while safeguarding workers ' rights , not to take advantage of this opportunity .
We would be failing in our duty towards the citizens , especially the workers .
The Commission 's initial proposal gave rise to objections and misunderstandings .
It is particularly positive that this procedure is closing with very broad agreement in the European Union .
We have unanimity in the Council and we have an overwhelming majority of members in the European Parliament who support the Council 's common position .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the liberals and the socialists have together all arrived at a common approach and this proves that Europe can still dialogue , compose and arrive at solutions needed for the citizens , specially for the most financially and socially weak .
I think that we should all be very satisfied that the European Parliament had a particularly important role in this successful procedure .
( MT ) Why has the discussion about this directive turned out to be successful ?
For two reasons , I would say .
Firstly , we have not treated workers like numbers ; rather , we have placed workers ' and other people 's rights above all other considerations .
The second reason is that we have removed obstacles to the movement of persons not by playing workers off against each other , but by attempting to make use of this freedom of movement to enhance workers ' rights .
We have not made it easier to offer services on the worst possible conditions , nor have we encouraged workers to do so .
This vote should send out a strong signal that there should no longer be any exploitation , nor any attempt to exploit foreign workers by offering poorer conditions .
Nor should workers in a particular country be pressurised , through this stratagem , into accepting poorer conditions .
Moreover , workers should be given full information about conditions being offered to other workers .
I should like to thank Mrs Gebhardt , Mr Harbour and also Commissioner McCreevy for the excellent work that has been done .
( DA ) Mr President , thank you for giving me the floor .
At last , the preparation of the services directive is coming to an end .
At last we can let out a sigh of relief after more than 12 years of fun and frolics and at last we can look forward to an internal market in services , which may be one that has had a limb cut off , but it is better than nothing .
I would like to use my brief speaking time to put the spotlight on the problems involved in having an amputee of a directive .
Gaming was removed from the scope of the directive .
What happens , however ?
The Commission , with Mr McCreevy at the fore , is in the process of investigating the pools monopolies of no less than 10 Member States .
Health services were likewise excluded from the scope of the directive , yet less than a month ago the Commission put forward an ambitious plan relating to patient mobility .
In other words , the consequences of having a watered down directive are that we get legislation in dribs and drabs rather than getting clear and precise rules relating to services for all the industries and areas of the EU .
I find this vexatious , but I will nonetheless vote ' yes ' today , because if you cannot get what you want you must want what you get .
( CS ) The directive we are adopting today will , I believe , relieve the service industry of the kind of bureaucracy and discrimination that has resulted from the considerable levels of mistrust between countries and from a lack of confidence in national competitiveness .
The debate has shown how deep the chasms between countries have grown .
Today we will build a bridge that represents a hard-won compromise following three years of negotiation between Parliament and the Council .
I believe we should reject the proposals of the Left , which would undermine the foundations of that bridge .
So many types of service have been dropped from the directive that it appears to have lost all meaning .
Yet this is not entirely the case , as it will bring fundamental changes to the rules .
States will have to repeal all discriminatory service industry rules .
Integrated contact points will be set up , which will oversee all formalities for long-term and temporary provision of services in another state .
Authorisation must be transparent and accessible to all .
Refusing permission without grounds for so doing or failing to respond for several months will no longer be possible .
If the authorities fail to answer within the deadline , permission will be granted automatically .
Businesses will be saved time and money because they will not be submitting superfluous documents in the original language or certified copies along with translations .
Nobody will need to obtain insurance in the country of business or to have unrealistic amounts of capital .
Appropriate documents for authorising businesses at home will be accepted .
Mandatory information may also be provided electronically .
It will be prohibited to force businesses to register or set up an office where services will be provided only temporarily .
Authorities will begin to cooperate across borders in monitoring activities and systems will be interoperable .
We could have gone further , but this will make a significant contribution to completing the internal market .
After years of procrastination , a bridge has finally been built across the chasms of European mistrust .
This bridge will lead to free services without discrimination , to the provision of hundreds of thousands of new jobs for Europeans and to improvements in the quality of services .
This is , after all , one of the Union 's raisons d 'être .
To conclude , I should like to thank the rapporteurs , especially Mr Harbour .
( Applause from the right )
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , under the moniker of Bolkestein , or should that be Frankenstein , even the European trade unions protested against the original proposal for a directive inherited from the Prodi Commission .
Now , after more than two and a half years of negotiating and searching for a compromise , I can raise my hand in favour of the proposal before us , and I am a former trade unionist .
Mrs Gebhardt , and those who contributed to achieving the final outcome , must take great credit for the fact that an acceptable directive has emerged from the original mess .
I should like to say that while I am not satisfied , it could have been worse .
I am pleased to observe , however , that with everyone 's good will , this directive will be a success .
The proposal that we have adopted is not without its faults but in life - and especially so in political life - one cannot have everything .
My gratitude for the outcome goes to the European Parliament .
To many dissatisfied Czechs this may seem like window dressing , yet I remain optimistic .
- ( LT ) I believe that today Parliament will demonstrate its maturity in moving the Lisbon reforms forward .
Mrs Gebhardt and Parliament have already done a great deal of work on this Directive since its first reading .
We still remember assertions in the press that the whole Directive had been turned upside down .
Sad , but true .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Commission and the Council have shown their respect for Parliament and , therefore , today we have a text which represents the opinion of more than 90 % of its Members .
We must ensure feedback .
We are the ones responsible to European citizens for the reliability of common decisions and preservation of a true European compromise .
Parliament will set a good precedent and give a sign of welcome to European businesses and consumers .
I urge all Members to approve the directive by a 70 % vote ; it is time to liberate the potential of the sector , which ensures our wellbeing , from a bureaucratic grip and take a firm , even if a small , step forward .

Mr President , may I start with an observation as a francophone , which is that when Mrs Le Pen of the French extreme right and Mr Wurtz of the French extreme left spoke , they both drew exactly the same conclusions .
Perhaps they should get married !
Today we have cause for celebration , a little bit of sadness and a little bit of hope .
The reason for celebration is that we have actually got a services directive , which is indeed a step forward .
I too would like to congratulate both Mrs Gebhardt and Mr Harbour on the work they have done .
I think it should be called the Gebhardt-Harbour directive .
I am also happy that the European Parliament played a very strong role in this , and would like to congratulate the Finnish Presidency , Mr Pekkarinen , and especially Mrs Satu Mäkinen , who has redefined what a tough Finnish negotiator can be .
The reason for my sadness is the following .
I think the atmosphere in which we conducted the debate on the services directive was a little bit poisoned .
It showed traces of nationalism and protectionism , and a hint of xenophobia , much as Mr Lehtinen has said .
We talked about the Bolkestein directive and the Polish plumber etc . , and at many times were working to reduce the scope of the directive instead of pushing it forward .
That may be a little sad , because it meant we had lost a little bit of mutual trust .
Why hope ?
The reason for hope is that we can live with this directive .
I think the key is that the Member States can now start implementing the directive and the European Parliament can follow up this implementation .
I also hope that the European Court of Justice will interpret this directive in a liberal sense .
I would like to end by saying that we should re-establish the trust there has been between the Member States , and remember that in 1957 , 50 years ago , we defined this Union as being based on four freedoms , which are the free movement of services , goods , money and people .
( Applause from the centre and from the right )
( SV ) Mr President , I too want to begin by thanking all those involved and , most particularly , the rapporteur , Mrs Gebhardt , who has done an incredibly good job .
In my one minute 's speaking time , I shall concentrate on labour legislation .
I did think that the wordings from Parliament 's first reading were better .
I thought that the wordings that Mrs Gebhardt tried to get through in the Committee on Internal Market and Consumer Protection were better than what we are seeing today .
I am completely satisfied , however , with what is said about labour legislation , collective agreements and such like , because there is also a statement from the Commission .
I heard Mr Wurtz mention the Vaxholm case , and I know that lawyers specialising in labour legislation in Sweden were extremely critical of Mr McGreevy in connection with that case .
I have spoken with the same lawyers today , and they believe that the Commission statement is quite excellent on the subject of labour legislation .
I share their view and believe that the statement , combined with the report itself , is sound .
In conclusion , I want to say that these matters are important and that what we have here are Parliament 's proposals .
Parliament has seen all its important points of view taken into account .
It is therefore easy to vote in favour of the report today .
( SK ) At this moment we are deciding the fate of one of the most important pieces of legislation to come from the European Parliament .
Together with MEPs from the new Member States , we did not in all political sincerity view the Bolkestein Directive as a ' scarecrow ' but rather as a clear opportunity for the enlarged European Union .
From the very outset of our term in Parliament , we have actively participated in stormy discussions and explained that services market liberalisation is needed in order to create new jobs , increase the rate of growth in the European Union and fulfil our ambition of becoming the dominant player in global competition .
We have tried to persuade our colleagues that the Polish plumber is not a threat but a benefit to the European internal market .
The European Parliament has accepted a compromise that partly liberalises the market but retains protection for it in a number of areas .
Although this is not an ideal solution , one can be content with the fact that the key principle elaborated by the PPE-DE - the freedom to provide services - ensures a balance between a social and a liberal Europe as regards the opening up of the services sector and , at the same time , provides sensible procedures for small and medium businesses , as well as high quality of services and consumer protection .
I would like to express my appreciation for the work of Mrs Gebhardt , Mr Harbour and all the shadow rapporteurs , and I am pleased that the Commission and Council have accepted the compromise achieved by the European Parliament in the sensitive areas .
The good news is that the Council 's Common Position Paper is similar to the position reached by the European Parliament in the first reading .
Ladies and gentlemen , through today 's historic vote the European Parliament may become the architect of the EU 's common market for services .
I expect the Member States to behave with a similar sense of responsibility and to implement the Services Directive in their national legislation in less than three years .
I am sure that the Services Directive will be just the right gift to mark the European Union 's anniversary .
( PL ) Mr President , today , after two years of difficult negotiations the Services Directive will be finally adopted by the European Parliament .
It is a good day , not only for the Polish plumber , but also for European consumers and enterprises .
The service sector accounts for 70 % of the European economy .
That is why it is so vital to open it up to competition and to give companies the opportunity to freely source and provide services throughout the whole of Europe .
Of course , the compromise reached is by no means ideal and does not meet all of our expectations .
During the discussion , there were many misunderstandings and ideological disagreements , there was too much propaganda on the subject of social dumping and too little thought was given to the interest of Europe as a whole .
Rational fear of competition from other Member States has also meant that rational arguments and elements of economic logic were not given sufficient consideration .
Meanwhile , the liberalisation of the services market will result in growth in GDP of all the Member States and is a powerful stimulus for the creation of hundreds of thousands of new jobs .
Although the draft Directive debated today is not perfect , it is an important step forward and I call for it to be adopted without amendment .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if Europe is to support growth and employment , it needs to expand the market and eliminate the excessive bureaucratic red tape that exists in this sector .
However , this must not prejudice workers ' rights or lead to exploitation or social dumping .
Despite the fact that , after a hard-fought parliamentary battle , a series of socially important services have been excluded from the original directive , the text on which we are about to vote remains ambiguous and still does not clearly set the boundary between this directive and labour law and national social safeguards .
Despite this morning 's reassurances , it is for these reasons that we call for the directive , when it is actually implemented , to respect national conciliation practices and not to bypass sector-wide collective agreements .
Above all , we call for the application of the directive to be strictly monitored , so that the rules protecting employee and consumer rights and health and safety at work are not breached .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , back in the last parliamentary term and part of this one , I worked on other directives and initiatives regarding the implementation of the internal market , alongside Mrs Gebhardt and Mr Harbour .
It is only right that I formally congratulate Mrs Gebhardt this morning , because , in addition to the Supplies and Services Directive , we also worked together on the Professional Qualifications Directive during the last parliamentary term .
The directive in question , which , as has been pointed out , is a fundamental part of the implementation provided for by the treaties on the internal market , is also , in the end , the outcome of other legislative activities that we have carried out with Mrs Gebhardt and Mr Harbour .
This fundamentally important directive will certainly bear the name of Mrs Gebhardt , whom I should like to congratulate on the skill with which she has managed , not now but back at the stage of first reading , to bring the directive in question to a successful conclusion in such an important sector as this .
I am not sure whether it is clear to everyone that the legislation that we are adopting is aimed at harmonising the national systems and not at imposing itself on them : this is a concept that , in my view , should be clear to everyone .
While we prepare to take another step on the road to completing the internal market , it must be acknowledged and clearly pointed out once again - having heard a name that no longer exists still floating about in this Chamber - that , in comparison with the national self-interests represented by the Council and with the other kinds of self-interest represented by the Commission , the European Parliament is the institution that succeeds in resolving highly significant issues .
( EL ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the majority in the European Parliament considers that the Bolkenstein directive has not existed since last February .
The initial proposal has in fact been improved and some of its dangerous provisions have been abolished .
This was done after a hard battle by the socialists and the left .
The neoliberal spirit , however , remains in the Council 's common position , in that crucial issues about European workers ' rights are not clarified .
In addition , services of general economic interest are not exempted from the scope and , in the article at issue about the principle of the country of origin , the principle of ambiguity prevails .
The Court of Justice of the European Communities will be called upon to plug the loopholes by creating , as it has done in other sectors , liberal case law which favours undertakings on the pretext of completing the internal market .
We tabled amendments together with the French and Belgian socialists and we shall support any which can further improve the text .
However , over and above the texts themselves , which are governed by this deliberate ambiguity , there is reality and this reality is determined by unemployed , poor , disillusioned workers .
Do not ignore them or , at the very least , do not make fun of them .
( SV ) Mr President , a major step in terms of principle is being taken in the European Parliament today .
As I see it , the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe are perhaps those who have been best able to keep the compromise alive .
I wish to extend a special thank you not only to Mr Harbour , who I think has made a major contribution , but also , of course , to Mrs Gebhardt .
The European Parliament has conjured broad support out of a political conflict .
The Services Directive is desired by many .
I would point out how very strongly the right of establishment features in the Charter of Fundamental Rights .
Sweden 's new government is now trying to simplify the rules in the labour market and make it more profitable to work . Additional impetus is now being given to these efforts by this directive , which makes European markets more accessible .
Companies will now encounter fewer obstacles in one of the world 's largest markets with great opportunities for growth .
According to some estimates , some 600 000 new jobs will be created .
For the Swedish labour market , with 70 % of jobs in the services sector , this means big improvements .
What , however , the Services Directive provides is a basis . It is a first step , and not the last .
Certainly , much more might be wished for , but I believe that the other steps will also be taken when the time is ripe .
The unduly large number of excluded areas - for example , health - are , of course , still covered by the rules of the Treaty , something of which the Commissioner too is , fortunately , aware .
The work in this area continues , then .
I would thank everyone who has contributed .
I would also thank the Commission for its efforts to improve matters for companies and consumers - efforts that will hopefully benefit people by leading to better quality at lower prices in the case of certain services .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate Mrs Gebhardt on her enormous tenacity and political wisdom .
Others have obviously played a key role , but I am afraid that she has carried the greatest burden .
This outcome is a success , given all the circumstances for citizens as workers , consumers and service providers .
The outcome demonstrates that it is possible for effective and fair outcomes to be achieved between 25 Member States , despite all our differences .
Those who ignore that diversity continue to reject this compromise , particularly the kamikaze GUE / NGL Group , which ignores the fact that the principal demand it has been making - the deletion of the country of origin principle - has , in fact , been achieved .
The Council must now stop playing games with labour rights in Europe .
Last week 's farce on the Working Time Directive was shameful .
Give us a working time directive that is workable and working and an effective posting of workers directive .
Unless the Council does that , it will continue to preside over citizens who fear for the quality of their working lives and fear the race to the bottom , and those fears are eating at the heart of Europe .
Mr President , today is a good day for the European Union .
The process to reach an agreement on the Services Directive has not been an easy one .
While no political group in Parliament has got exactly what it wants , we have managed to reach a workable compromise acceptable to the vast majority of Members .
Most importantly , this Parliament is sending a strong signal today to the Commission and Council to move forward and make this directive a reality as soon as is practically possible .
For that reason my group has taken the approach not to amend the directive at this stage , in recognition of the fact that it would not be helpful to reopen the debate in Parliament or Council .
The implementation of the Services Directive will give the sluggish EU economy a much needed kick-start at this stage .
The services area is crucial to Europe 's economic growth and prosperity , contributing nearly 70 % of GDP across Europe .
Businesses and consumers alike should benefit from the creation of a more open common market for services .
At the moment services account for only 20 % of trade between Member States .
The directive aims to remove many of the barriers to cross-border trade and services and to reduce the red tape that businesses , especially small to medium-sized enterprises , encounter when they try to expand across borders into new EU markets .
Europe 's small and medium-sized enterprises with the capacity to grow have been particularly disadvantaged by the costs attached to administration and legal requirements in the past .
They can look forward to the benefits of this directive , which dramatically reduces that burden for future cross-border trade .
This directive is of huge importance to my own country because it is a net exporter or goods and services .
Irish companies and service providers will now , I hope , take advantage of the simplified environment for providing services across the European Union .
The Services Directive will facilitate growth , job creation and increased economic activity in the services sector across the EU , while ensuring social and worker protection .
As Parliament 's last speaker in this debate , I wish the Commissioner well in ensuring that this directive becomes a reality without delay .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission .
For the record , I confirm that the Commission will accept Amendments 40 , 41 and 42 , which relate to comitology and introduce the regulatory procedure with scrutiny .
The Commission rejects all other amendments .
Concerns raised in these amendments have been addressed in the statements I made at the beginning of the debate .
Various Members have commented on legal certainty and whether or not this directive will lead to a long list of disputes that will need to be settled by the European Court of Justice .
I do not share this concern .
There is broad consensus among Member States on this text .
I recall that no Member State voted against the common position .
The vast majority of Members of this House indicate that they will support it in the vote that will take place in a short while .
Given this broad consensus , I do not see why Member States would seek not to respect the directive .
Everyone agrees that we need to give the services sector a boost .
This is exactly what this directive will do .
At yesterday 's debate on the Commission 's work programme , Mr Harbour and others made a very valid point about implementation and the resources to be attributed to that .
At the Commission , we will start to focus immediately on the transposition and implementation of this directive .
Simplifying life for service providers and their customers is hard work .
Member States have three years to implement the directive .
They should start immediately , not because I say so but because their economies need this directive , and the Commission will hold the Member States accountable .
The broad level of consensus that has manifested itself today is the result of a number of important innovations in our approach to lawmaking in the European Union .
Firstly , Parliament took on its role as co-legislator and , instead of taking the easy option of rejecting a very controversial proposal , MEPs rolled up their sleeves and reached agreement on essential modifications to the text that made it acceptable across the political divide .
For me this was an important signal of the maturity of this institution .
Secondly , the Presidency is building on your approach and it worked hard to build on this consensus .
As well as bringing MEPs to the informal Competitiveness Council , which engaged directly in discussions with ministers , the Presidency organised a series of meetings with the social partners .
All of this greatly contributed to the agreement that you will vote on later today .
It is appropriate that it was under the Finnish Presidency that some of these innovations were introduced because that is the motto of the Finnish Presidency .
Finally , two points .
In thanking Mrs Gebhardt and Mr Harbour and everybody else - many MEPs from all sides of this House were involved in achieving the broad consensus that we reached and an enormous amount of hard work was done and great tribute has been paid to the MEPs here - I would also like to note that various Commission officials worked extremely hard to effect the changes and to get from the text Parliament produced at its first reading to the text that went to the Council .
I want to acknowledge that as well .
For those of us who occasionally engage in the odd wager - not that this would be something that most Members of this House would want to do ! - I do not think that one year ago you would have wagered a lot of money on our reaching the position we are going to reach today .
That is thanks to a large number of people , both here in Parliament but also in the various Member States and in the Commission .
I want to pay particular tribute to that .
Lastly , there has been at least one additional , unplanned benefit for me personally : I have got to know a very large number of Members of Parliament across all groupings over the last two years .
This would not necessarily have been the case if I had not had to deal with this very controversial Services Directive .
So I thank you for that .
( Applause )
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would briefly like to thank you for a very interesting and constructive debate .
The European Union 's common goal is to improve our economy in terms of its productivity and competitiveness , and to increase employment .
The establishment of a more viable internal market in services is very important if we are to attain these goals .
I would like to thank you all . I eagerly await the forthcoming vote .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 12.30 a.m.
Written Statements ( Rule 142 )
( PT ) As far as UNICE ( the European employers ' association ) is concerned , the agreement reached in the Council on the Bolkestein Directive is an ' important ' and ' promising ' step forward .
The Directive must therefore be ' correctly and quickly transposed and implemented ' so that UNICE and its national Members - in Portugal , the Portuguese Industrial Association ( AIP ) and the Confederation of Portuguese Industry ( CIP ) - ' will contribute actively ' .
So say the representatives of the major economic and financial groups . They see this ' step ' as a fresh opportunity to exploit the workers and for economic domination .
The Directive will serve to undermine the national sovereignty of Member States as regards defining , protecting and funding public services and as regards defining standards on how services as a whole should be provided .
It will also strengthen the power of supranational bodies such as the Commission and the Court of Justice over the Member States .
The accent will be placed on competition , which will have disastrous consequences for workers ' rights and for the services provided to the people .
This is an unacceptable proposal , which must be rejected .
Lastly , I should like to highlight the role of the social democrats ( the Socialist Group in the European Parliament ) , who , by means of their ' tactical ' chicanery , helped to water down the objectives and the scope of the proposed directive before us . They originally proposed the directive , made ( cosmetic ) amendments to it , only to reaffirm support for what they previously claimed to have rejected .
( HU ) The Directive is undoubtedly an important step that will make it possible to move beyond the theoretical principles of the Treaty of Rome and provide the practical conditions for the free movement of services .
It is my hope that by putting into action one of the four freedoms , it will be possible to eliminate the bad practice whereby Member States have prevented , through numerous methods , the implementation of that principle .
At the same time , in view of the amendments concerning exclusions , it is questionable which areas shall in practice fall outside the Directive on the free movement of services , and whether in its present form it fulfils its original purpose .
I think Parliament has missed a great opportunity to stand up for a proposal that would effectively promote improved EU competitiveness by creating a unified internal market .
On the other hand , I find it commendable that the Directive fully respects the rights as regards collective bargaining and the signing , broadening and implementing of collective agreements , as well as the right to strike and to take industrial action in accordance with the regulations of Member States governing industrial relations .
In sum , I think that although we cannot be completely satisfied with the result , since the list of exclusions and limiting conditions is perhaps too long , the Directive nevertheless covers a wide spectrum of economic activities and will impose a certain discipline on EU members .
I consider it also of great significance that thanks to the Directive , enterprises will be better informed , more knowledgeable and less dependent .
( EL ) The directive on the liberalisation of services promotes the reactionary ambitions of European capital .
It strengthens the monopoly of services markets with particularly unfavourable repercussions on the quality , security and cost of services .
It gives monopolies the facility to enjoy ' low cost ' services from service providers in other Member States .
It takes advantage of the single internal market to reduce the price of labour and exploit it , thereby reaping excessive profits .
It promotes the liberalisation and the penetration of big business into a series of public services and utilities .
It throws into doubt rights which have been hard fought for .
It exerts pressure on the working class in every Member State , by discriminating between workers , in order to reduce employment relations to the lowest common denominator .
It introduces legislative changes at the expense of the working class and its rights .
It accompanies reactionary changes to labour law which are already being processed in the wings of the tripartite association between the ΕU governments , the plutocracy and the reconciled trade union forces .
The Greek Communist Party calls on the working class and the grassroots class to step up their fight against the entire anti-grassroots policy of the ΕU and of the governments of the Member States , to help to change the power ratio at political and trade union level and to make their action more effective , in order to satisfy the modern needs of the working , grassroots family .
( The sitting was suspended at 11.30 a.m. pending voting time , and resumed at 11.45 a.m. )

1 .
A new framework strategy for multilingualism ( vote )
- Before the vote on paragraph 20 :
( ES ) Mr President , in the event of paragraph 20 not being rejected , I propose an oral amendment :
' Otherwise , lesser-used languages and less-recognised languages , particularly in Western Europe , of the new Member States , will be left behind with their linguistic social space taken over by the more widely spoken languages , especially English . '
( Parliament rejected the oral amendment )
2 .
The European Union 's Generalised System of Preferences ( vote )
Voting time
Mr Rack has the floor for a point of order .
( DE ) Mr President , if I have understood correctly , the President should preside over the vote .
He has more than a dozen deputies .
If he is really unable to attend , one of these deputies should at least be present .
No , Mr Rack .
It was I who was responsible for chairing Voting Time .
The reason I was slightly late was that I was at the airport receiving the Emir of Qatar , and there was a slight delay on the journey there and back .
The next item is the vote .
( For results and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Welcome

I would like to welcome Mr Olexander Moroz , President of the Verjovna Rada , the Ukrainian Parliament , who is in the gallery , and the delegation accompanying him .
( Applause )
We wish Mr Moroz a happy stay with us and we hope that he will be able to lead the parliamentary work in his country through the difficult situation it is facing at the moment and towards a democratic , prosperous and stable future in which he will always be able to count on our friendship and support .
I would also like to welcome to the official gallery a delegation from the Algerian Parliament - headed by Mr Abderrezak Bouhara , Vice-President of the National Council - which is currently visiting our Parliament .

We hope that Mr Bouhara 's meetings with members of the Delegation for relations with the Maghreb countries , as well as with other Members of this House , will help to strengthen our many links with the Republic of Algeria and will enable us to make progress in the common quest for peace , prosperity and democracy for the countries located on both shores of the Mediterranean .
( The formal sitting was opened at 12.05 p.m. )
Formal sitting - Qatar
Ladies and gentlemen , your Highness , I would like to welcome the Emir of Qatar , Sheikh Hammad bin Khalifa al-Thani .
I would also like to point out that we have a visit from the President of the Parliament of Ukraine , who is in the official gallery .
It is an honour for us to welcome you today , as the first Head of State of a Gulf country to address the European Parliament .
In fact , this is the first time we have had the pleasure and honour of receiving a Head of State from the extremely important region of the Gulf .
You have been a pioneer in your region 's process of democratisation .
You have promoted a written Constitution , approved by means of a referendum , which guarantees a whole series of democratic reforms , including , of course , recognition of freedom of expression and opinion , the granting of universal suffrage to all adults , men and women , and the creation of a Parliament that will be elected in elections to be held next year .
Furthermore , your Highness , you have played an important role on the international stage .
You and your country .
A small country with just 200 000 citizens , as well as more than 600 000 immigrants .
A country that organised the conference in Doha that launched the WTO round that is still taking place .
It is the only Arab State that is currently a member of the United Nations Security Council .
It is a pioneer in the granting of financial aid and the sending of troops to the peace-keeping force in Lebanon .
Its troops are there together with our troops .
It has provided significant impetus in the search for a peaceful solution to the conflict between Palestine and Israel , being one of the very few Arab States with trade relations with Israel .
You also took an important decision , which has had great worldwide repercussions , ten years ago now , in 1996 , when you authorised broadcasting by the television channel , Al-Jazeera , significantly transforming access to news and information in the Arab world .
That channel now broadcasts in English and contributes to dialogue and understanding amongst civilisations .
Perhaps we too will one day recognise the importance of a channel in Arabic and English and perhaps we will also one day have a European television channel broadcasting in Arabic .
Your Highness , we are extremely interested to hear what you have to say to us this morning .
We wish to hear your views on the development of democracy in Qatar .
We would also like , however , to hear your ideas about how we can promote peace in Palestine .
And peace and stability in Iraq .
And how to reduce the tension with Iran .
Throughout my term in office - which will come to an end soon - I have insisted on the importance to Europe of our relations with the Arab and Islamic world .
I believe that this is one of the most important geostrategic challenges facing us Europeans : our relations with the Islamic world , which must go much further than our relations with our immediate neighbours , the countries of the Mediterranean .
This Parliament is therefore pleased that the negotiations have begun on a trade agreement between our Union , the European Union , and the Member countries of the Gulf Cooperation Council .
Let us hope that these negotiations can conclude shortly so that we can have relations with Qatar and its neighbours with greater strategic and political content .
This makes your visit to the European Parliament today all the more significant and relevant .
Your visit , your country 's visit , is important to us for many reasons , and furthermore it is taking place on a symbolic day , because , also today , the United Nations working group on the Alliance of Civilisations has just presented its recommendations to the Secretary-General , Mr Annan , in Istanbul .
This is a good time for you to be here amongst us in Strasbourg , in the heart of Europe , so that your views and the views of the Arab world can bring us closer together and make it possible for us to move forward into the future in a more united fashion than has been possible in the past .
Thank you for your words , your Highness .
I am sure that they will have helped to create greater understanding of the views of the Arab world , of the Islamic world , on issues which are of common interest , to both Europe and yourselves .
It has been an honour for the European Parliament to receive you .
Thank you very much .
( Applause )
( The formal sitting was closed at 12.30 p.m. )
1 .
Services in the internal market ( vote )
That concludes the vote .
Voting time ( continued )
We shall continue with the vote .
Explanations of vote
The next item is the explanations of vote .
( ES ) Mr President , the European Union 's fundamental motto is ' United in diversity ' .
Since its origins we have been trying to build a common area , and not just an economic area but , above all , an area of life opportunities and freedom .
We are doing so amongst people and nations that have many things in common ; I am not just referring to the strategic , political and social interests that we share , but also to our values , habits and ways of looking at life .
We have a common cultural background based on Greek thought , Roman law , Christianity , the Reformation , the Enlightenment , the Renaissance and even globalisation .
At the same time , however , there is no question that we still have cultural differences and special identities and , in particular , our own languages .
This diversity , though it could be seen as just an obstacle , is in fact a source of great wealth and vitality .
Although it has not been approved , I have therefore voted in favour of the proposal that the European Union Treaty be modified , so that there can be Community legislation in the field of respect and protection for languages , particularly minority languages , as well as the creation of a European Agency for Linguistic Diversity and Multilingualism .
I have also voted in favour of promoting the learning by all European citizens of at least two other languages in addition to their own , since I believe that that is the best way to bring about mutual understanding , co-existence and unity .
( DE ) Mr President , on the subject of multilingualism , I welcome the adoption of this report by Mr Joan i Marí .
Indeed , I voted in favour of it , albeit with a number of reservations , which I still have .
I believe that neither the European Commission nor Members during the vote in this House - the majority , at least - showed sufficient courage on a number of amendments .
Multilingualism is a precondition for tolerance and acceptance , and , in the interests of understanding within the EU , more must be done in this field .
It is a fact that Parliament decided the Commission should study the issue of the creation of an agency and present a report to Parliament on this , and it is equally true that the Commission has been found wanting in this regard .
This omission must be rectified .
The procedure in this House is that a report is presented before the relevant debates are held and decisions taken .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is good news that the new framework strategy for multilingualism has been adopted .
The individual Member States will be responsible for implementing this policy .
Some Member States are currently carrying out changes to their education systems .
The teaching of foreign languages , as a means of both communication and recognising cultural diversity , forms a substantial part of these changes .
We must give unequivocal support to the European Indicator of Language Competence if we are to make the best possible use of individual systems of current language knowledge in educational planning .
The motivation for teaching foreign languages is also increased by the transparency of language examination and certification , which is of benefit to those who have them in their future careers .
The report represents an important contribution towards strengthening the teaching of foreign languages , improving the competitiveness of workforces and enhancing communication between the citizens and the European institutions .
This a further reason why I voted in favour of this report .
( DE ) Mr President , I voted in favour of this report .
Amid all the euphoria about multilingualism , we must not forget the deficits that ever declining results of PISA studies have revealed .
The number of non-nationals in school classes should be limited to 30 % as a matter of course , however , in order to facilitate integration , maintain quality standards and reduce the potential for cultural conflict .
In my opinion , therefore , sufficient command of the local language before the start of normal education and , if necessary , increased linguistic support , for example in the form of an additional year in kindergarten or pre-school , should become the norm in the EU .
( FR ) Mr President , I would add my reservations to those of my colleague , Mr Mölzer .
There are some excellent things in this report , in particular the fact that it points out that English teaching does not need to be subsidised by the European Union .
It includes an extremely ambitious position , which is aimed at making all sixty or so minority languages official languages , but this is somewhat to the detriment of the 21 national languages of the Union , some of which are already , to some extent , under great threat : Latvian , Lithuanian , Estonian , Hungarian and Slovenian are not languages of international communication .
Even the status of Italian , German and French is of some concern .
It is somewhat illogical for the report to propose making savings on the grounds that these official EU languages are not necessarily regarded as working languages in all of the delegations , and this so as to release funds for the benefit of regional languages .
Yesterday , we had the rather regrettable example of the Head of a State that has recently become fully independent , who felt obliged , rather than to speak in his mother tongue , to speak in English , even though he had been a student in Strasbourg !
That does not bode very well , in my view , for the development of multilingualism in the European Union .
I voted for the Joan i Mari report on a new framework strategy for multilingualism , although I have some reservations as regards some proposals and amendments that have been adopted .
I feel that the European multilingualism strategy should cover the teaching and promotion of ' European world languages ' , a term that applies to Portuguese , which is the third most widely spoken EU language in the world ( behind English and Spanish , and ahead of German , French and Italian ) .
Owing to its uniqueness and to the fact that it is spoken by some 200 million people in eight countries spread over five continents , the Portuguese language should be one of the EU official languages . The report fails to acknowledge this , as it ought to .
Portuguese is the most durable link between the continents , as it is a means of communication , the raw material used by great poets and writers , and has a dignity born of eight hundred years of history .
in writing . I will be supporting this report with a degree of reluctance .
It seems to me that the endless addition of further languages to the cocktail of the EU 's official languages is not necessarily of benefit to the efficient working of the institutions .
I agree that it must be possible for MEPs to speak and listen in their own languages , but that is not necessarily true for Commission or Council officials .
We now have the anomalous situation whereby Gaelic will be available for those from Scotland , Spanish for those from Gibraltar , but not Welsh for those from Wales .
Yet , if we are to add new languages , I would plead that amongst these must be the language of one part of my constituency , namely Cornish .
It is a minority language , but its potential speakers are at least as numerous as those speakers of Maltese , an official language of the Community .
in writing . ( SV ) Multilingualism is important for freedom of movement within the European Union .
We have therefore voted in favour of the report as a whole .
However , we have voted against certain proposed wordings , including those concerning language legislation for the EU , the setting up of an Agency for Linguistic Diversity and / or Multilingualism and the establishment of an interinstitutional EU working party charged with bringing about an amendment to the EU Treaty with a view to creating a legal basis for the concept , ' respect for linguistic diversity ' .
As always , the European Parliament 's tendency to grow like Topsy enters the picture .
We would point out that the Member States are exclusively responsible for the organisation of teaching and for ensuring that the content of education systems is fully respected .
Consequently , it is the responsibility of each Member State to make sure that people are given a proper linguistic education .
in writing . - ( PT ) I wish to congratulate Mr Joan i Mari on his important and timely report on a new framework strategy for multilingualism , to which I lend my full backing .
I welcome the proposed measures to promote multilingualism in Europe .
The existence of various languages in Europe is a characteristic that is peculiar to the process of European integration and a key component of European culture .
The learning of various languages , which is the objective known as ' mother tongue + 2 ' established in the Lisbon Strategy , should be encouraged with a view to facilitating communication between people from different countries and to fostering acceptance of the differences between them .
in writing . I voted for this report and warmly welcome measures to protect and enhance the use of minority languages .
However , encouraging multilingualism should not spill over into the excessive ( and unnecessary ) provision of interpretation and translation into regional languages .
in writing . - ( PT ) I voted in favour of the report before us because multilingualism is a subject that is close to my heart and because I feel that the EU should send out a loud and clear message promoting linguistic diversity in its territory .
As regards the European Indicator of Language Competence , mentioned in the report , I shall reiterate the arguments I put forward in my written statement on the issue .
The adoption of an Indicator of Language Competence is needed to redress the lack of verifiable data on the EU citizens ' language skills .
This Indicator must not , however , be restricted to the five most widely spoken languages in the EU .
Among other factors , we must take into account the profile of other European languages around the world . This is a key aspect of the issue , and one which the EU must incorporate into its policy of openness towards , and cooperation with , the rest of the world .
For this reason , my vote in favour of Amendment 4 is a way of emphasising the call for the Commission to set out a specific timetable for extending the Indicator to all of the official EU languages , as I proposed in my written statement .
In the new framework strategy for multilingualism , I welcome the fact that Parliament has taken on board my contribution to the recognition of the strategic importance and global relevance of European world languages .
Around the world , 350 million people have English as their mother tongue ; Spanish is the mother tongue of 280 million people ; Portuguese is the mother tongue of 230 million people , and 125 million have French as their mother tongue .
These figures and the geographical spread of speakers of these languages are indicative of the importance of European languages with a worldwide profile . These languages enhance our capacity to sustain and strengthen direct relations and contacts with other parts of the world , without the need for an intermediary .
Turning to another aspect of the issue , I am aware that those opposed to the European promotion of multilingualism cite cost as one of the reasons for eliminating it or replacing it with one working language , or just a few .
It is undeniable that it costs money .
It must be remembered , however , despite the financial arguments that are trotted out , that of the costs incurred in the construction of modern Europe , this one is in a very good cause , the promotion of our tradition .
Multilingualism certainly costs less than war , and is a powerful cultural activity .
in writing . Multilingualism is an important concept .
We need to recognise the uniqueness of the European Parliament in having simultaneous interpretation in 21 different languages , soon to be 23 .
However , if we are going to achieve the aim of all EU citizens having competence in their mother tongue plus two other languages , we need support at Member State level .
In Scotland , fewer people are choosing to study foreign languages at school and university .
We must reverse that trend .
I am pleased that all 10-year olds in Scottish schools are learning a foreign language .
Their efforts should be encouraged and supported .
The Scottish Executive support for Gaelic medium education should also be commended .
in writing . - ( FR ) The desire to make the granting to certain countries of the generalised system of preferences - that is to say , privileged access to the European market for their exports - dependent on those countries ' complying with the minimal rules of the International Labour Organisation , is a good thing .
However , as is usually the case with this type of resolution , I fear that we are still at the stage of pious hopes .
Despite the clauses demanding respect for human rights and the basic ' social ' rights with which the Europe of Brussels peppers its international trade agreements , I do not believe that it has ever punished any violation of these rights or enforced these clauses .
It agrees to trade with China and has supported its entry into the WTO , despite what we know about the working conditions in that Communist country , about the existence of Laogai camps and forced labour , about the political repression and lack of freedoms , and even about the systematic violation of the right of ownership , by the large-scale counterfeiting and copying that is practised there .
The problem here is one of credibility , and , on this point , Europe has none .
in writing . More trade union activists are murdered each year in Colombia than in the rest of the world combined .
In 2005 , 70 trade unionists were killed , while 260 received death threats , 56 were arbitrarily detained , seven survived attacks in which explosives or firearms were used , six were kidnapped , and three disappeared .
The Commission has taken great pride in touting its credentials in matching GSP benefits with rights standards .
Even the ILO itself has stated that Colombia is not in full compliance with ILO core labour standards , which should be necessary to afford GSP + benefits .
Ratification of an ILO convention is not the same as implementation , as trade unionists in Colombia will readily testify .
I therefore welcome this resolution and the statement made by Commissioner Mandelson during the debate and urge the Commission to review Colombia 's GSP + status .
Otherwise a country which murders its trade unionists will continue to appear to be rewarded for doing so .
in writing . I welcome this vote .
In far too many countries that get GS preferences there are repeated violations of workers ' rights .
The Commission must through regular and transparent evaluation ensure the implementation of the relevant ILO conventions .
( CS ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I should like to explain why I voted in favour of the proposed recommendation for a directive on services in the internal market .
I should first like to say that I am convinced that it is a good thing that after three years of protracted negotiation the European institutions have reached a decision on progress towards liberalising the free movement of services .
This will lead to the creation of more than half a million new jobs and will support economic growth in our countries .
Although the directive in its final form does not correspond entirely to my original idea of the liberalisation of services in the EU internal market , it will still bring added value to all stakeholders , and this is why I voted in favour of it .
It will allow traders and small and medium-sized enterprises easier access to the markets of the other Member States .
The compromise reached in the Council is a very fragile one , however , and there is no point in putting it at risk .
For this reason I did not vote for certain amendments relating to sensitive issues , such as compliance with labour or criminal law , the definition of social services and screening obligations .
These issues will certainly form the subject of future debates .
( HU ) As an MEP from one of the new Member States , I have fought hard for the rights of our businesses and our workers , and have put questions to the Commission on several occasions both orally and in writing concerning the protection and respect of workers ' rights .
In the process , we have often come up against legal , political and economic problems .
We have frequently been accused of social dumping , of lowering the standards for safety in the workplace and other similar absurdities .
By now the majority of the issues - including the SoKo Bunda and Pannonia affairs involving Hungarian workers in Germany - have been resolved , court decisions have stopped the German authorities ' action and there are even lawsuits for damages underway .
The acceptance of the Services Directive today is a giant step in the direction of clarifying the various uncertainties .
It is a compromise , which means no one is really fully satisfied , but it is a good compromise that will advance our cause , namely the achievement of the fundamental freedoms of our Union , the free movement of services .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I voted in favour of Mrs Gebhardt 's report , mainly because I come from a border area , where these difficulties are experienced on a daily basis .
I therefore believe that these are positive measures , which will specifically benefit border areas .
I rather regret the years of controversy that have surrounded the draft Services Directive with which we are dealing today and which , in the end , has received very strong support even in this House , support that I feel is well deserved .
I hope that , in future , pro-active and positive proposals will prevail over controversies .
- ( LT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the freedom to provide services is one of the four freedoms of the European Union guaranteed by the EEC Treaty .
Treaty prohibits restricting the establishment of nationals of one Member State in another Member State and creating barriers to the free movement of services .
Fellow Members , it has been two years since we started working on this document enabling the freedom which has been our fundamental right for as long as 50 years .
The principle of country of origin ( a prerequisite for the free movement of services ) , services of general interest , healthcare , social and other services have all been excluded from the proposal for a Directive .
Lithuania was the only country to abstain in the Council 's voting for the Directive .
I believe that it will not be long before we see that implementation of the Directive will not fulfil our expectations .
Consequently , I oppose this Directive , just as during the first reading .
( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , even though many advances have been made in comparison with the initial text presented by the European Commission , the directive on services in the internal market that has been submitted to the vote today differs from the European Parliament 's first reading .
I therefore voted to reject the common position .
Indeed , services of general economic interest are still part of the scope of the directive , as are some services of general interest .
The scope of the exclusion of social services of general interest is also far more limited .
The fundamental rights guaranteed by the European Charter now only feature in a recital .
Finally , the text remains ambiguous as regards the exclusion of labour law .
While the written statement presented by the European Commission provides some of the necessary responses to these issues , which I consider to be essential , it does not have any legal value , and , in the event of a legal dispute being brought before the courts , the Court of Justice will be unable to take it into account .
It would have been different if this statement had come from the Council , as colegislator with Parliament .
Mr President , the deal brokered here , which has achieved such a large cross-party majority , has shown Parliament at its best .
We have looked at and reviewed Commission proposals , made sure they are workable and politically acceptable across our countries , and got a solution which I am sure will bring huge benefits to the EU economy .
I am particularly pleased with the last-minute adjustment that was made to this deal on the issue of comitology .
It was only a few months ago that we signed an agreement with the Council to give Parliament enhanced rights of scrutiny over the implementing measures that will flow from this directive .
It was unacceptable for the Council initially to say that the new deal would not apply to this directive .
Part of the deal was that it would apply to all new legislative measures which empower the Commission subsequently to adopt quasi-legislative implementing measures .
That has now been accepted , fortunately , as part of the deal , which means that no implementing measures of a quasi-legislative measure flowing from this legislation can come into force if Parliament rejects them .
( PL ) Mr President , I voted in favour of adopting the modified version of the draft Services Directive .
In other words , I was against rejecting it .
I am generally an optimist , and that is why I think that it will contribute to cutting red tape , increasing economic growth and creating new jobs .
Let us be honest , however , and admit that the original version of the Directive , put forward by the European Commission three years ago , was much better and could have made a better contribution to achieving the aims of the Lisbon Strategy .
The current directive has been significantly watered down and it is difficult to describe it as a great success .
It seems that some old Member States are afraid of the free provision of services and of competition with new Member States , using fear of social dumping as a justification .
This attitude is difficult to comprehend , as I imagine that we all want Europe to become more competitive and dynamic .
( DE ) Mr President , I am convinced that the proposal for a Services Directive on which we have voted represents the achievement of a good compromise between freedom to provide services on the one hand , and the need to impose restrictions in the interests of workers and of small and medium-sized enterprises on the other .
Indeed , that is why I have voted in favour of this report .
It is now up to Member States to monitor compliance with the provisions .
Only then will we be able to count this Services Directive a complete success .
I would appeal to the Council Presidency , to the Council - which is now absent - to put pressure on Member States to indeed prepare the appropriate monitoring mechanisms for the implementation of the Services Directive .
in writing . - ( FR ) The adoption by the European Parliament of the Services Directive enables general provisions to be established that will make it easier for service providers to exercise their freedom of establishment and that will facilitate the free movement of services , the high quality of which is guaranteed , and also excludes the risk of social dumping contained within the initial concept of the country of origin principle , which has been removed .
The scope of the directive has been considerably reduced and excludes , in particular , health services , non-commercial public services and certain commercial public services .
Service activities represent 70 % of the European Union 's GDP and offer significant growth and employment potential .
Looking back , I should like to point out that the President of the French Republic , Mr Chirac , was strongly advised to stop the initial text , which was presented , at the time , by the Prodi Commission .
This matter shows the growing influence of the European Parliament , for which this is a great political victory , and symbolises the concept of the social market economy as it is expressed in the draft Constitutional Treaty for Europe .
We must now turn our attention to the Member States , which are responsible for transposing this text into national law in a fair , equitable and sincere manner .
in writing . I voted , as one of UKIP 's MEP 's , for most of the amendments put forward by the EUL / NGL and Greens / EFA , because , within the limits of their understanding of the dangers of supra-nationalism , these amendments nevertheless recognised , and sought to obviate , the harm , which a lack of democratic , national control over the provision of services can wreak upon ordinary people and especially upon the less well off .
in writing . We voted for most of the amendments put forward by the GUE / NGL and Verts / ALE Groups because , within the limits of their understanding of the dangers of supra-nationalism , these amendments nevertheless recognised and sought to obviate the harm which a lack of democratic , national control over the provision of services can wreak upon ordinary people and especially upon the less well off .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the motion to reject the Council common position on services in the internal market .
The vote at second reading was cast on a backwards-looking text in comparison with the vote at first reading .
There remain too many uncertainties regarding the application of the country of origin principle .
The text in no way clarifies the ambiguities that remain concerning the protection of public services and consumers .
Even more serious is the fact that , even though labour law comes under national powers , the Council has just subordinated respect for labour law to Community decisions , insofar as respect for labour law will now be subject to the judgments of the European Court of Justice .
The European Union is turning its back here on its initial ambition to create a united European area .
With the downwards harmonisation of social , environmental and consumer protection rules , the European social model has been jeopardised .
in writing . - ( FR ) The French members of the Socialist Group in the European Parliament have refused , this Wednesday 15 November , to endorse the report on services in the internal market , in other words the Services Directive .
Indeed , despite the very important advances made by the PSE and the Socialist rapporteur , Mrs Gebhardt , at first reading - not least the rejection of the country of origin principle - Parliament has not obtained any guarantees from the Commission regarding a draft framework directive on public services .
With this being the second reading of a text whereby there is no final vote on the complete text , we endorsed the amendment tabled by several groups ( the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left and the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance ) aimed at rejecting the text .
Furthermore , we tabled several amendments aimed specifically at guaranteeing respect for the freedom of the Member States to define what they mean by social services of general interest .
As Mr Poignant pointed out on behalf of the French Socialists , ' the definition , formulation , organisation and actual funding of services of general interest , whether economic or otherwise , must remain a duty of the Member States and of their regional and local authorities ' .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the amendment aimed at rejecting the Council common position on the Services Directive .
The directive is unsatisfactory because it introduces more confusion and legal uncertainty and further weakens the amended proposal adopted by the European Parliament at first reading , which I voted against .
This is particularly the case as regards labour law and the social and public services that have been excluded from the scope of the Services Directive .
Above all , however , the Council text gives the Commission the power to oversee the application of the directive .
While the country of origin concept has disappeared from the text in the text amended by the Commission , it has not been replaced by the country of destination or host country concept .
I find this very harmful , all the more so because it will be the European Court of Justice that settles any disputes that may ensue .
It is therefore a liberal Services Directive that has been adopted this 15 November .
Three years of debates will not have made it possible to avoid a conclusion with dangerous consequences for political and social Europe .
This is a harsh blow to European integration - one that it scarcely needed .
in writing . - ( PT ) The adoption of this directive , which has just taken place , is an extremely worrying development . We are bitterly disappointed at the rejection of the proposal to reject the Council common position that our group tabled and to which we put our name .
What happened today was tantamount to a capitulation , on the part of the two biggest groups in Parliament , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , in relation to their positions at first reading last February .
They did nothing to promote the agreement that they had made and voted for , following the protests and demonstrations in Strasbourg .
They have now returned to some of the most damaging aspects of the original , notorious Bolkestein Directive .
What they are seeking is the liberalisation of services , including in the area of public services , thereby caving in to pressure from the large economic and financial groups , which have seen this ' step ' as a fresh opportunity to exploit the workers and for economic domination .
Not only will it undermine the sovereign right of States to define , protect and fund public services , it will also remove their ability to define funding standards and to protect services as a whole . In so doing , it will strengthen the power of supranational bodies such as the Commission .

We believe that each country should continue to have the sovereign right to make decisions on the public services they want , their public property , their form of funding and organisation , and on the rights of workers and end users .
Despite the significant progress made in relation to the European Commission 's initial text , the text on services in the Union that has been proposed today at second reading does not offer guarantees that are sufficient to prevent any risk of the European social model falling apart .
Certain sensitive social services , such as social housing , family support services and public health services , which were initially excluded from the scope of the future directive at first reading , have thus been reintegrated by the Member States .
The legal vacuum accompanying , in particular , the abolition of the PPO has not been removed , leaving it to the arbitration of the Court of Justice judges - and not to the legislator - to define the future characteristics of European policy via the case-laws that this situation will most certainly generate .
It is clear , in this context , that the Commission 's written statement , which is aimed at clarifying some of the gaps in the text , such as the exclusion of labour law , does not present any real legal value , and that makes its influence and usefulness particularly uncertain .
For all these reasons , I voted to reject the proposal for a directive on services .
in writing . - ( FR ) If the new version of the Bolkestein Directive had not already suffered from serious shortcomings , particularly that of not being fundamentally different from its predecessor , one reason alone would have prompted us to reject it : the suspicious consensus between the Socialist Group in the European Parliament and the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and , what is more , their adoption of the compromise drafted at the Council .
The real revolution would have consisted , among other things , in explicitly stating the priority for a Member State to apply its national law , and particularly its national labour law and its national social , criminal and fiscal laws , in its territory .
That is to say the country of destination principle , as opposed to the country of origin principle .
This would not have prevented service providers from another Member State from being able to offer services in another country ; this would have simply meant there being fair competition with national operators .
The revolution would have consisted in agreeing to the Member States ' being able to introduce conditions regarding access to certain activities , such as the situation of the labour market , or reasons justifying territorial planning .
They do not have this possibility .
After competition with the rest of the world and competition among businesses , Europe is now establishing competition among European workers , whether self-employed or salaried , and thus competition among social systems .
It is heading for disaster .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List welcomes the Services Directive and believes that services companies , irrespective of the country they come from , should not be discriminated against in any EU country .
The key issue in the debate on the Services Directive has been that of whether the country of origin principle should underpin the directive or whether the host country 's legislation should apply in full .
The country of origin principle affects significant , but strictly limited , areas such as construction , installation activities and consultancy services .
We welcome competition in these areas but believe that it should take place on conditions that are fair to all the parties .
We believe that Swedish rules should apply on Swedish territory .
It is therefore gratifying that , in its common position , the Council rejects the country of origin principle .
The Council 's position is mainly a victory for those views that the June List represents .
Competition within the services sector will be intensified .
At the same time , the national independence of the Member States will be respected in that the country of origin principle does not form the basis of the directive .
It is a good thing that the national monopolies on services will not be affected and that national labour legislation , collective agreements , union rights and legislation on social security remain untouched .
The Council common position largely takes account of the fundamental amendments adopted by Parliament at first reading .
The exclusions are clearly explained and relate in particular to fields such as healthcare services and audiovisual services .
The country of origin principle has been deleted , and labour legislation and social agreements in the countries concerned have been respected .
Market access for our enterprises has also been facilitated by the dismantling of many arbitrary barriers .
In addition , Commission opinions have provided greater clarity .
Consequently , the overall result of the negotiations can be considered a success for Parliament , but also for economic and social policy .
Of course , every compromise has its weaknesses , and some of the Council 's amendments are not quite clear , but it would be wrong to question the overall result - which is on the whole very positive - by reopening the debate in the Council .
in writing . - ( FR ) The Services Directive has just been adopted , by a clear majority .
This is to the European Parliament 's credit .
This is a victory for the European Union .
Why ?
Services represent over half of the European economy , and are the main source of jobs .
The free provision of services features among the founding principles of the Union , and the creation of a genuine internal market in services is key to economic growth in Europe , and thus to the creation of jobs .
The text adopted today in Strasbourg commits us to this path , while providing the necessary guarantees regarding the safeguarding of public services of general interest and the continuity of our social acquis and of our labour law .
By excluding the country of origin principle , it prohibits social competition and constitutes an effective barrier to social dumping .
It does away with the unjustified protectionist obstacles , while permitting the Member States to apply their national rules when the public interest warrants it .
The scope of the text has also been reduced , with the exclusion of sensitive sectors such as the audiovisual sector , the health sector , part of the social services sector , the gambling sector and even the notary sector .
This is a good compromise , which will take Europe forward in line with the interests of its population .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted against this directive because I feel that , despite the improvements obtained in the parliamentary debate and under the pressure of the trade unions ' and citizens ' involvement , it remains profoundly liberal .
No prospect of genuine harmonisation , aimed at benefiting consumers and workers , is envisaged in return for the fearsome deregulation of the services sector in Europe , which is mainly aimed at benefiting businesses .
As for public services , while the Commission refuses to make progress on the framework directive on services of general interest , the Services Directive helps to weaken public services , some of which will suffer its effects in the same way as simple commercial services .
Finally , the ' prohibited requirements and requirements to be evaluated ' in Articles 14 and 15 make it impossible or , at least , extremely difficult , to carry out any public regulation in the services sector .
There will be a maximum price for basic services ; a minimum number of employees in order to guarantee the quality of certain sensitive services ; territorial planning , for example for the opening of supermarkets ; and so many rules that were considered until now to guarantee respect for the general interest and that are now regarded as so many unacceptable barriers to freedom of establishment and to the freedom to do business .
in writing . I consider that the closed list of services of general interest is too limited and will leave many services in limbo .
Are they in or out ?
We have no framework directive on these areas , which are essential in combating poverty and encouraging social cohesion and are of particular importance to women .
They are key EU policies .
The Commission statement this morning cannot bind the future Commission which will be holding office when the directive comes into force .
The statement has no legal standing before the ECJ , which will now be making decisions that Parliament chose to duck .
We have seen in today 's vote that the majority of this House prefers not to make clear statements on labour rights and the protection of public services .
How will they explain to their councillors at local and regional level that they are weakening their role in determining the provision of services of general interest and safeguarding the public interest ?
Parliament has achieved positive changes in the original proposal .
We could have done more .
in writing . - ( FR ) Despite a few improvements , despite a few additional sectors being excluded from the scope of application or , rather , of annoyance , of the first version of the Bolkestein Directive , this text , in its new draft , remains fundamentally unacceptable .
It remains an open door to social dumping and to unfair competition among workers .
It does not , in fact , resolve any of the problems raised by the original directive .
It does not exclude public services and does not safeguard the right of the Member States to determine the way in which these services are defined , organised and funded .
It denies the legitimate , economic , social or other requirements that these very Member States can impose on access to an activity , and only acknowledges the possibility for them to invoke ' overriding requirements of the general interest ' , a vague concept that the Court in Luxembourg will take it upon itself to interpret in the most restrictive way possible .
It subordinates respect for the labour law of the Member State in which the service is provided to respect for Community law and , more specifically , for the free provision of services principle laid down in the Treaties , a move that amounts to denying the application of this national law .
Several million Europeans rejected this ultraliberal Europe , which scorns men and nations and prioritises market laws , financial interests and sacrosanct competition .
Listen to them before it is too late !
I voted in favour of the amendment to reject this directive .
The directive is a step back in comparison with the vote at first reading because it leaves the application of the country of origin principle open and in no way excludes public services - SGIs , SGEIs - from this ' free competition ' , with the result that they will become very destabilised .
The European Commission explains that the text does not clearly establish which law will apply and thus that private international law , which is closely related to the country of origin principle , will apply most of the time .
The room for manoeuvre that the Member States have to act on the social field will be extremely reduced .
In spite of the formal progress made , little by little , the liberal reality will impose itself with this text , and our social model will be jeopardised .
in writing . - ( FR ) In an attempt to obtain the consent of the people of France during the referendum on the European Constitution , the ' Yes ' camp , particularly within the UMP , made them three promises : that the Bolkestein Directive would be withdrawn ; that VAT would be lowered for the catering sector ; and that the plan for Turkey to join the EU would be abandoned .
The people of France are finally going to end up with Turkey , the Bolkestein Directive and an unchanged VAT rate .
The compromise on which we are voting today is a seemingly watered down version of the original text , which includes , as a double whammy , full powers for the Commission and the Court of Justice to re-establish the initial text .
How can Mr Toubon say that , by adopting this compromise , he hopes to ' avoid the worst ' ?
The worst would therefore mean there being no directive , but that was precisely the promise made to the people of France in 2005 by the UMP and the Head of State !
in writing . - ( FR ) It is without enthusiasm that I am voting today in favour of the Services Directive .
This text has been far too distorted and manipulated .
Crucial provisions such as those on the posting of workers have disappeared , and I regret that .
We were told that these provisions have been removed in order to prevent social dumping , but there is no truth in that .
Those provisions would have clarified the ground rules and controls within the European Union regarding businesses and workers .
Equally , we very much celebrate and welcome the fact that the country of origin principle - which was accompanied with the necessary safeguards - has disappeared .
Yet , how can we , at the same time , look forward to taking a great step forward for the internal market ?
What do we offer our businesses and our citizens ?
Not , at any rate , the clear rules that they need in the internal market .
Too many lies and fears have marred the debates surrounding this matter , to the detriment of the internal market and the integration of our Europe .
With this directive , we have missed a great opportunity to integrate ourselves more .
Let us learn lessons from it for the future and let us not make the same mistakes .
in writing . I welcome the Gebhardt Report and effectively the adoption of the Services Directive .
Parliament has played a significant role in allowing freer movement of services across EU borders without undermining social services , trade union rights or environmental laws .
Parliament will have to monitor the implementation of the Directive closely to ensure that the commitments made in the Chamber by the Commissioner are adhered to .
in writing . The Services Directive will have a profound impact on the lives of workers and consumers , lowering the standard of service provision and increasing the risks of social dumping .
It gives exclusive prominence to the freedom to provide services across borders , whereas freedoms such as social rights and collective bargaining are excluded or dismantled .
The directive puts downward pressure on wages and provides companies with numerous loopholes which they can exploit to pay less than the minimum wage .
It provides an incentive to service providers to establish themselves in low-wage , low-tax countries , and encourages a race to the bottom in relation to wages and employment conditions .
Regulatory requirements are an integral part of the functioning of all services , and the need for such requirements increases with the amount of private-sector involvement .
The directive challenges the right of Member States and local authorities to regulate services .
Finally , Parliament has capitulated to the Commission and the Council in its refusal to uphold its already inadequate first reading position .
Unfortunately I was unable to vote on this occasion due to the hospitalisation of my son .
in writing . - ( MT ) I voted in favour of this directive for two reasons .
Firstly , we have not treated people like numbers , at the service of the market , but , rather , we have placed workers ' rights above all other considerations .
The second reason is that we have removed all restrictions on the movement of persons , not by playing workers off against each other and thus having a contest that is won by those who offer their services on the worst conditions , but by showing that we want to use freedom of movement to enhance workers ' rights .
This vote should send out a strong signal that no one should continue to abuse foreign workers by offering worse conditions than those offered to local workers .
Nor should it be admissible to pressurise local workers into accepting lower wages and conditions through such methods .
Over and above this , workers should be given full information about conditions being offered to local and foreign workers and should not be left bereft of information .
Lack of information leads to suspicion and antagonism , just as is happening , for example , at the Malta Drydocks .
Savings on expenditure should not be achieved by abusing workers ' rights , but by raising the quality of services .
This is what the directive should accomplish .
The Coalition and the European left as a body voted against the amended Bolkenstein proposal adopted by the European Parliament because it will bring the position of workers under pressure and is a serious blow to social Europe .
The compromise between the European right and the socialists moderates but does not eliminate the neoliberal logic and huge negative social impact of the proposal .
With its ambiguities , it leaves the door open to further unfavourable interpretations , by both the Commission and the Court .
The reworded Commission and Council proposal adopted today by Parliament without any amendments strengthens all these dangerous ambiguities .
The Court of Justice of the European Communities systematically protects the undertakings that provide services in its case law , using the principle of the country of origin .
It always rules against the rules of the host country , with the argument that they hamper the activities of the undertakings in question .
The dangerous relocation of undertakings to countries with minimal social and environmental legislation is strengthened with the adoption of the directive .
The fight by the European left against social dumping will continue even after the vote on the directive , both at national and at European level , in cooperation with the trade unions and non-governmental organisations .
in writing . - ( FR ) I did , of course , vote in favour of the Services Directive .
The fruit of broad compromises , it is an amended , revised and revisited text that opens up the services market in Europe .
I voted in favour of this text , as did the vast majority of Parliament - as did almost four-fifths of its Members .
The opening up of the services market will be positive for our economies ; it will help in the fight against illegal labour and will guarantee better social protection for all European workers .
According to the OECD , the directive is going to create two and a half million jobs in Europe and , until proven otherwise , is going to create jobs ; this is still the best social policy there is !
Demonisation is the tactic used by those who are deprived of it : it is , I might add , amusing to note that , in the Socialist camp , only a last handful of diehards , including the French-speaking Belgians , are still rejecting this compromise , which has been accepted by everyone , including the trade unions !
Parliament and the Council have played their part and proved those who constantly demonise this text wrong .
This text , in its current form , preserves the best parts of the European social model and recognises the specific nature of services of general interest .
The colegislators have put an end to the lies and given Europe a chance of growth !
in writing . - ( FR ) In line with my vote on the Services Directive at first reading , I voted to reject the common position .
Indeed , the Council has not taken up all of the amendments tabled by the European Parliament .
I had to reject the Council common position because it clearly excludes labour law and social services of general interest .
That is why I co-signed and voted in favour of three amendments tabled by the French Socialist delegation providing for the clear and total exclusion of labour law and social services of general interest from the scope of the Services Directive .
Indeed , it is a question of protecting Europeans ' fundamental rights .
These must not be governed by the rules of the internal market .
Although the Commission statement clarifies its aim on several points , it is not enough because it has no binding force .
I finally voted in favour of the amendments aimed at completely excluding services of general interest from the scope of this directive .
in writing . - ( PT ) It has taken 50 years for the EU to achieve the free movement of services enshrined in the 1957 Treaty of Rome .
It is now about to become a reality .
The EU is taking another step in the right direction with the Services Directive , which will facilitate the freedom of establishment and the freedom to provide services in the EU Member States offered by the internal market .
Controversial since its beginnings as the Bolkestein Directive , the final text is rather less forthright .
I believe , however , that this report has struck the right balance between the crucial need to open up the services sector to competition , whilst preserving the European social model .
I voted for this Directive because I feel that Portugal has much to gain , as it will accordingly derive maximum benefit from the internal market .
Adopting the directive was the right thing to do if only because a series of administrative and legal obstacles imposed by the national , regional and local authorities have been removed .
Portuguese companies , and in particular SMEs , will be the main beneficiaries .
Furthermore , the adoption of the Directive will contribute to achieving the objectives of the Lisbon Strategy aimed at more growth , more jobs and greater freedom for consumers to choose services .
Although the Council 's common position on the Services Directive , on which we are to vote today , may be an improvement on the original Commission proposal , a few aspects of it still remain unacceptable .
The document creates legal uncertainty .
It is , for example , left unclear what legislation applies and to what extent Member States can impose national provisions .
The possibility for upward harmonisation has not been included .
Moreover , the review clause leaves the door open to the reintroduction of the country-of-origin principle and to the addition of services currently outside the directive 's scope .
Services of general economic interest fall within the directive 's scope and since there is no framework directive for services of general interest , this directive is at risk of forming a horizontal framework for services of general economic interest .
I also regret the fact that the list of social services that fall outside of the directive 's scope has - having originally been indicative - been changed into a limitative list .
In addition , the absence of any reference to the Charter of Fundamental Rights is disappointing .
I am , finally , particularly disgruntled at this House 's capitulation in respect of the maximum enforcement of the achievements that were attained at first reading .
As a result , the future of a democratic and social Europe is being undermined .
in writing . I welcome the vote today on the Services Directive and support the compromise reached .
in writing . ( PL ) The only benefit of the present compromise on the Services Directive is the fact that its adoption will not worsen the basis on which the services market operates .
That is the only reason why we can support this compromise in today 's vote .
The European Court of Justice will provide the litmus test for this Directive , as it will certainly , be called upon frequently to rule in disputes concerning the Directive 's contradictory contents .
On the one hand , we have the stipulated freedom to provide services .
On the other hand , this Directive does not apply to the fields of vaguely-defined public and social services and temporary work agencies .
It has no influence in terms of regulating labour legislation and collective agreements and its scope is limited in terms of the work carried out by posted workers .
As a result , no real barriers to the provision of services in the EU will be removed when this Services Directive is adopted .
It is a compromise that has been achieved entirely at the cost of the new Member States , who have a competitive advantage on the European Union market , especially in the services sector .
None of the social reasons put forward for introducing these above-mentioned exceptions and restrictions fulfil their declared social objectives .
They are merely evidence of economic chauvinism on the part of the trade unions and other interest groups in the old Member States .
Hitherto , the debates on the draft have been the greatest example of European hypocrisy that we have witnessed during this term .
The European Parliament and , with it , the entire European Union , is pretending to introduce the principles of a common market to the services sector .
In doing so , we are not only fooling ourselves , but our citizens as well .
in writing . - ( FR ) I should like to begin by highlighting the effective work done by the rapporteur , Mrs Gebhardt , who has ensured that the adopted text is markedly better than Mr Bolkestein 's initial draft .
Nevertheless , even though her work was remarkable , I voted in favour of the amendment to reject this directive and of the amendments that I co-signed , together with those tabled by the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance and the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left , because the text at second reading does not go as far as the one at first reading .
Many grey areas remain in the text , and they would have needed to be clarified before we were able to accept such an important text as this , which involves the future of the people of Europe .
Furthermore , certain services , such as services of general interest , have not been removed from the framework of this directive , and this could lead to wayward paths being taken .
I feel that the Court of Justice and the Commission have been given too much influence over the control of the Member States and the interpretation of the directive .
The legislator gives more than its due to the government of the courts .
That concludes this item .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3.00 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Situation in Gaza ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the situation in Gaza .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union is deeply concerned about the violence in Gaza in recent weeks .
During a military operation by Israel , several people died in Beit Hanoun on 8 November , and in a disastrous barrage of artillery fire almost 20 Palestinians , women and children included , lost their lives as they were leaving the area .
In addition , several people were injured .
Military action also caused destruction to the town 's infrastructure .
The European Union profoundly regrets the violence and injury that resulted from these violent acts .
At the same time , the Palestinians have continued to fire Kassam rockets indiscriminately at Israel , at the cities of Ashkelon and Sderot , for example .
These strikes have now also resulted in one death , several injuries and material damage .
The Union has called on Palestinian leaders to do all they can to end these attacks .
The European Union cannot accept the use of violence .
Every country has the right to defend itself , but that does not entitle it to use unreasonable force on a large scale or take the sort of action witnessed in Beit Hanoun .
Israel must adjust the scale of its action to the situation .
It has to comply with international humanitarian law .
Security does not just apply to one side , but to everyone in the Middle East region .
The European Union has called on Israel to cease its military action in Gaza .
The Union has also urged the Palestinian leadership to halt the rocket strikes that have continued to varying degrees throughout the autumn .
The purpose of the strikes is probably to increase fear and insecurity , which is obviously wrongly aimed at the civil population .
The Israelis should no longer be living in a climate of continued fear : they too have a right to peace .
The Palestinians must stop using violence for political ends .
The deepening spiral of violence is threatening to destroy any chances of restarting the Middle East peace process .
Events like those described here only serve to estrange the parties from the opportunities available , especially right now when a peace process aimed at negotiating the establishment of a two-state model is needed .
The aim is still the creation of a viable Palestinian state , one which exists in peace alongside Israel .
The European Union hopes that the events in Beit Hanoun will not discourage the parties and the international community or prompt them to abandon the pursuit of lasting and equitable peace .
The European Union also hopes that the strikes at Beit Hanoun will not discourage the Palestinians from continuing the quest for mutual harmony and the formation of a government of national unity which could fulfil the conditions set by the Quartet .
The entire international community needs a noteworthy party as its partner .
The Palestinians have a right to a government that represents the interests of all citizens .
At the same time , the humanitarian situation among the Palestinians has been a big worry for the European Union .
The economic and humanitarian situation in the Palestinian territories is intolerable .
The situation would be considerably improved if Israel kept the border posts at Rafah and Karni open and improved Palestinian mobility .
What is more , the European Union has urged Israel to recognise as income the customs duties and taxes which they have collected and which belong to the Palestinians .
This could make the Palestinians ' economic situation considerably easier .
The EU itself has tried to help the Palestinians .
More than EUR 650 million has been given in aid through various channels this year , and that is around 25 % more than last year .
The Temporary International Mechanism has been a functional means of aiding the Palestinians , and we hope that Israel and other parties can also make good use of it .
The situation in the Middle East is thus not very promising in the light of the events of recent days , but in spite of this we have to continue to believe in a better future .
The European Union will do all it can to support the peace process .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , thank you for inviting me on this symbolic date , 15 November , which is Palestinian National Day , to speak on the situation in Gaza .
The escalating violence in Gaza recently culminated in the attack by the Israeli Defence Forces on Beit Hanoun on 8 November , which resulted in the death of 18 Palestinian civilians .
In response , my colleague Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner made a statement saying that she was ' profoundly shocked by this particular event ' .
Our thoughts now go to the Uthamina family in particular , who lost six women and eight children , killed in their sleep , and to all the innocent Palestinians and Israelis who have lost their lives in this spiral of violence .
After the attack , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner called on all sides to stop violence and give dialogue a chance .
Palestinian factions should stop firing rockets into Israeli territory .
Whilst we recognise Israel 's right to self defence , this should not come at the price of innocent lives .
The Beit Hanoun attack is the latest in a series of incursions into the Gaza Strip which started on 28 June .
Military operations have caused damage to vital infrastructure , especially in Gaza - including the power plant , major roads and bridges , and government buildings - and killed almost 300 Palestinians , mostly civilians .
In response , the Commission has this year stepped up its assistance to meet increased emergency and humanitarian needs .
In June 2006 , we launched the Temporary International Mechanism , which channels Member State and European Community Budget resources to contribute to relieve the socio-economic crisis in the Palestinian territories .
This Temporary International Mechanism has supported the delivery of basic services to 1.3 million people living in the Gaza Strip and social allowances to 100 000 vulnerable Palestinians .
The operation is now increasing its outreach to 150 000 cases .
The Commission , through ECHO , has allocated EUR 84 million to help vulnerable Palestinian households through the provision of food , water supply and sanitation , healthcare and social protection .
The European Commission is also providing a EUR 26 million package of food aid .
Food and cash subsidies are channelled through the UN Relief and Works Agency to Palestinian refugees registered as special hardship cases , while food packages are distributed to non-refugees via the UN World Food Programme .
The Commission is also a major donor to the UN Relief and Works Agency .
In 2006 we provided EUR 64 million to its General Fund .
It manages health , education and other social services for Palestinian refugees .
In Gaza these services constitute the only element of stability in an insecure environment .
Our efforts can alleviate the humanitarian crisis for the Palestinians . However , its root cause , which is the lack of hope in a peaceful solution for Israelis and Palestinians , must be tackled urgently .
There is an urgent need to return to a comprehensive peace process with a clear political perspective .
The process of reconciliation between Palestinians must be given a chance .
We should encourage President Abbas to continue efforts to form a national unity government , with a platform reflecting the so-called ' Quartet principles ' of non-violence , recognition of international agreements , recognition of Israel as a state and allowing for early engagement .
This will contribute to restoring hope for a viable and independent state for the Palestinians .
That is why the General Affairs and External Relation Council , which met on Monday , has welcomed the Commission 's proposal to provide additional support to the Palestinians as soon as a national unity government is formed .
In order to provide this support before the end of the year , we will have to resort to the emergency aid reserve and obtain the agreement of the budget authority .
The Commission will count on the support of the European Parliament .
In parallel to EU assistance , Israel should release hundreds of millions of dollars of tax and customs revenues , which it has collected on behalf of the Palestinian Authority and which it has withheld since March in response to the formation of the Hamas-led Government .
We should all work together so that on the occasion of next year 's Palestinian National Day , we can celebrate progress towards the creation of a democratic , viable and sovereign Palestinian State .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the situation in the Middle East is at once worrying , dangerous and tragic .
It is worrying because the conflicts have been going on for decades and there is no end in sight .
It is dangerous because tensions between the opposing parties are constantly escalating , and because external powers - such as Syria and Iran - are increasingly exerting an influence .
Finally , it is tragic because ordinary people , particularly large numbers of children , are among the victims .
As we tell all the parties in the Middle East , a military solution is out of the question - we need peace through dialogue and through negotiations .
We also say that a policy of ' an eye for an eye , a tooth for a tooth ' is out of the question , as the situation will only escalate further , with each side responding to an attack by attacking the other with greater force .
We need to break this cycle of violence .
We ask this of both the Israeli and Palestinian sides .
The position of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is crystal clear .
We want to see an Israeli state with secure borders and , equally , a Palestinian state with secure borders .
The dignity of an Israeli is the same as that of a Palestinian , and we must not apply double standards .
We want to see an independent , democratic Lebanese state .
Anyone who calls into question the right to exist of any of these states - there are already Israeli and Lebanese states , and there should be a Palestinian one - threatens to do lasting damage not only to peace in that region but also , the way circumstances are , to world peace .
The EU and others must now make a contribution to peace .
I believe that the EU is very glad to be indeed making such a contribution by stationing troops in the region , although we should have liked to see a European armed forces rather than national troops from the individual Member States .
This is an issue that the EU must consider for the future , however , as a means of making a genuinely European contribution in this regard .
Nevertheless , the mere fact that troops are stationed there represents progress .
The development towards our making a genuinely pan-European contribution - including military - must now continue , however .
It is now the turn of politicians , whose most important assets are confidence and credibility .
When there is something to criticise , we must do so , irrespective of whether it is the Israelis or the Palestinians who are responsible .
With regard to decisions of the Security Council - and I say this as someone who is very pro-American - it is unacceptable that all criticism or condemnation of Israel is vetoed by the United States .
( Applause )
I would say in all seriousness that this is not the way to achieve credibility nor , in particular , to build confidence in all the partners concerned .
I believe that the EU 's opportunity lies in its credibility on this issue , because we recognise the right to exist of both the Israeli and Palestinian states and want to see peace in Lebanon .
If , with the massacre in Beit Hanoun - supposedly owing to a technical error - Israel caused these terrible consequences , an apology is not sufficient . Its policymaking in future must ensure it does not constantly react according to the ' eye for an eye , tooth for a tooth ' principle .
( Applause )
I have just been informed that a woman has been killed and a minister 's bodyguard has had both legs blown off today by Qassam rockets .
This has to stop .
We have to say this to both sides , and we have to be credible .
We Europeans must not turn a blind eye , but instead must take responsibility .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , this is not the first time Parliament has discussed the situation in Gaza , and it is unlikely to be the last .
It is the first time , however , that a discussion has revealed the formation of an opinion in this House that will entail a change in the EU 's relations with one of its partner countries , namely Israel .
Mr Poettering 's remarks show that we need a discussion across the group divide on what position the EU should take with regard to this development and , above all , to the role of Israel and the Israeli Government in developments in that region .
I have no expectations of terrorist organisations .
What do we expect from terrorists ?
The answer is terror , contempt for mankind , the unspeakable suffering these criminals have caused in the world and continue to cause every day - of which Mr Poettering has just given an example .
What expectations does a common system of law such as the EU have of such people ?
The answer is ' none ' .
They are not suitable partners for us . They are not the people on whom we should and can pin our hopes when it comes to building peace .
Yet we should have expectations of a democratic country based on the rule of law .
Israel , that wonderful country , the country founded in response to the lowest point in the history of mankind , has a right to our absolute solidarity in the region .
Anyone who so much as attempts to threaten this state or call into question its right to exist will face opposition from all Europeans .
There are no limits to our solidarity with Israel .
Nevertheless , as a democratic country based on the rule of law , Israel must be open to questions .
It must be possible to ask a democracy built on the same fundamental values as ours how something like Beit Hanoun can be described as a technical incident .
My expectations of a democratic legal culture are that the parties responsible for this ' technical incident ' should be held accountable for their actions .
( Applause )
Regrettably , Parliament 's summer recess was interrupted by a technical incident such as this in Cana .
I am still left wondering who was responsible for that .
If there is collateral damage from developments in the region , Israel must take care that its legal culture is not among it .
It goes without saying that Israel has to defend itself and be able to do so , and that we have to lend the country a hand .
Events in Lebanon serve the interests of Israeli security .
What Europeans want , for there to be a stable Palestinian state , serves the interests of Israeli security .
All our endeavours - be they financial or diplomatic , or now military - serve the interests of Israeli security .
What the EU , a common system of law , cannot accept , however , is meeting lawlessness with lawlessness .
That is unacceptable .
What is also unacceptable is for us to stay silent when a party that judges citizens by their ethnic origin , as Mr Liebermann 's party does , joins the government of a country such as Israel .
That is unacceptable .
( Applause )
It is the Israelis ' sovereign right to elect a party such as this , but it is also our sovereign right as Members of this House to condemn such a policy .
No social democrat anywhere in the world has anything in common with Mr Liebermann .
The only opportunity for a solution in that region is the renunciation of violence .
Dialogue is the only way .
The parties must try to look beyond all the violence and all the painful experiences and to talk to each other .
There have been some good attempts : let us remember the efforts of Yitzhak Rabin , who was Chief of Staff of the Israeli military forces , but still knew that dialogue is the only way of overcoming war and conflict .
Dialogue is no guarantee of success , but what is certain is that , without it , there is no chance for peace .
Thus , we expect Israel , in particular , to give priority to political dialogue rather than further militarisation .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I have lost count of the number of times we have debated the Middle East in recent months , but I do know that , since our debate in September , 150 Palestinians have been killed in Gaza , 70 in the last week alone .
The atrocity in Beit Hanoun , where 18 Palestinian civilians were killed , is as indefensible as it is inexplicable .
In a spiral of violence where there is armed aggression on both sides , it is often hard to tell what is attack and what is retaliation , but there is no doubt in my mind that David Grossman was right when he said last week that the behaviour of Israel 's leaders is the conduct of scoundrels .
My colleague Mr Davies was recently in Gaza .
He reports as others do that Gaza has become a prison , with daily reports of extrajudicial executions , of lives disrupted and rendered miserable , disproportionate retaliation - especially since Operation Summer Rains , the Qassam rockets have killed 14 civilians over two years .
The IDF response has killed 126 people in the last month , of whom 63 were not involved in fighting .
The time is over .
We cannot wait any longer .
The international community cannot continue to condemn while waiting to solve the situation .
It is a disastrous strategy that leaves the stage to others .
We must relaunch the talks and the negotiations .
We must waste no time in deploying international and military observers in Gaza .
We must reinvigorate the commitment of the Quartet , and I hope that the US will reinforce its role by assisting in the negotiations as a test-case of a new multilateralism .
Palestinians must understand that the use of terror will never earn them the recognition they seek , and Israelis must understand that they are losing recognition by their incessant flouting of international law and disproportionate military action against civil targets .
At Yitzhak Rabin 's memorial service , Mr Grossman spoke of a country hypnotised by insanity , rudeness , violence and racism , of a state squandering its goodwill , squandering its own people , especially its young .
The same Israel has recently used army bulldozers to destroy the graves of British soldiers killed in Gaza in 1917 and on 31 October sent F-15 fighter planes to dive at French soldiers serving with the UNIFIL force in Lebanon .
How many enemies do the Israelis want ?
How long do they believe they can sustain themselves in a state of unresolved conflict ?
It is time for reasonable people on both sides to come together , perhaps to relaunch the Geneva Process , and it is time for the European Union to do what it can to promote , encourage and support that process .
( Applause )

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , I was with Mr Davies , Mrs Morgantini and other Members in Gaza two weeks ago on the day that the Israeli army began the siege of Beit Hanoun .
It was the beginning of a campaign of extrajudicial executions , of massacres and of the destruction of civil property .
Israel , the occupying power in the Palestinian territories , constantly violates human rights and international humanitarian law with complete impunity .
The use of excessive and indiscriminate force against civilians and civil property , the destruction of installations supplying electricity and water , the blowing up of public buildings , the restrictions on freedom of movement and the consequences of all these actions for public health , diet , family life and the psychological state of the Palestinian people constitute a blatant collective punishment which is itself a blatant violation of the Fourth Geneva Convention .
Admittedly , there is no excuse for the constant launching of Kassam rockets against Israel , but nothing can justify subjecting a whole people to a draconian punishment like that imposed by Israel .
In such circumstances , the European Union must stop giving its backing to Israeli policy .
In particular , it must assume its full responsibilities when it comes to supervising the Rafa crossing point and no longer simply bow to the will of the Israeli Government .
The EU must use the tools available to it within the framework of the Association Agreement , and in particular the human rights clause , in order to ensure that violations of human rights and humanitarian law do not go unpunished .
It must demand the reimbursement of taxes collected illegally by the Israelis .
Dialogue with the future government of national unity must be reinstituted as quickly as possible , and direct aid to the Palestinian institutions must be resumed .
Finally , the European Union and the Member States must do all they can to have the International Court of Justice 's opinion on the illegal construction of the Wall applied .
A meeting of the EU-Israel Association Council must be called as a matter of urgency .
Consideration will have to be given to reviewing the Agreement if the violations continue .
Finally , the European Union must play its full part in organising an international conference to promote peace in the region .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , ' Why does the political leadership continue to reflect the positions of the radicals and not those of the majority of the electorate ?
How has that happened ?
How can we stand by and watch today , as though hypnotised , the flood of madness , brutality , violence and racism in our country ? [ ... ]
Our political and military leadership lacks substance .
[ Dear Mr Olmert , ] for once , really watch the Palestinians , not through the sights of a gun or from behind the closed barriers of a check-point : you will see a population that is no less tortured than ours , that is defeated , oppressed and hopeless .
Perhaps for that reason , the majority of us have reacted indifferently to the harsh blow dealt to democracy by the ministerial appointment of Avigdor Liebermann , a potential pyromaniac who has been made head of government services , with responsibility for putting out fires . '
Those are obviously not my words : I am not an Israeli or a Palestinian .
They are the words of David Grossmann , who lost a son in a pointless war , a war that was also caused , of course , by the Katyusha rockets , but that resulted in the deaths of thousands of Lebanese and Israeli citizens , including the son of David Grossmann .
Mrs Wallström said that today , 15 November , is Palestinian National Day .
What happened on 15 November 1988 ?
The declaration and acceptance on the part of the Palestinians of a Palestinian State based on the 1967 territories : thus recognition of the State of Israel .
However , there was no such move by the Israeli Government , which has never recognised either the 1967 secure borders - since it continues to build settlements - or the Palestinian State .
I am tired : in my seven and a half years ' term of office in this Parliament , I have heard the timeworn phrase ' two peoples , two States ' repeated over and over again .
Every effort must certainly be made to ensure that there are two peoples and two States that can peacefully coexist .
But why continue to repeat empty clichés , given that the Palestinian State is not actually being built and that political decision-making , helped as it is by the madness of Palestinian extremists , is not helping the Palestinian State to grow , but , rather , is helping to continually wear away its land ?
I went to Gaza last week - and I regret that Parliament 's official delegation did not go - with 12 MEPs : we saw what it means to live inside there , in that open-air prison ; we saw what it means to use weapons that no one yet knows about and that are perhaps tried out on the torn-apart bodies of the young people killed by bombs that were falling and demolishing houses ; we saw it , just as you must see it !
That is why we can no longer just talk about ' two peoples , two States ' : we must take decisive action .
I believe that there is a crucial need for an international peace conference with all of the parties involved .
We really do need to organise it , though ; we need to act !
The Palestinians would not need our EUR 650 million if the Israelis paid the taxes that belong to the Palestinians : let us make sure , just as we force others to do - and obviously not through the use of weapons - that Israel fulfils its ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( Applause )
on behalf of the UEN Group . - Mr President , the international community has taken its eye off the ball in relation to the ongoing crisis in Gaza .
It has been distracted by other Middle East events such as the war in Lebanon , Iraq and Iran .
We must all renew our efforts to find and encourage a peace process in Gaza .
Compromises have to be made by both the Palestinians and the Israelis to end the conflict , which is destroying so many lives on both sides .
I welcome efforts from Hamas and Fatah to form a unity government in an effort to end the international embargo on Palestine .
I urge Hamas , under the new Administration , to recognise Israel or accept a viable two-state solution to the Middle East conflict , which I believe is the only way forward .
I condemn the rocket fire by Palestinian militants from Gaza this morning , which killed an elderly woman and wounded another person in the Israeli town of Sderot .
I also condemn the deaths of the 18 civilians in the shelling of Beit Hanoun by the Israeli defence forces last week .
But an eye for an eye leaves everyone blind .
While I recognise that Israel has the right to defend itself against attack , many of us saw the documentary on Gaza yesterday and listened to our colleagues who had recently visited the region .
I was shocked by what I heard and saw : the sheer brutality that has been inflicted on Palestinian civilians .
Both sides have to realise that the only solution is to sit down and talk .
Dialogue is the only way forward .
Courageous leadership is needed on both sides .
We are only too aware in Ireland of the cycle of violence caused by such conflicts .
We also know only too well the enormous benefits that can accrue to everyone when violence ends and real negotiation and dialogue take place .
We must all strive to build confidence .
The EU has increased assistance to the Palestinian people this year and has called for the immediate payment by Israel of withheld tax and customs revenue .
It also continues to seek the release of the captured Israeli soldier and of Palestinian legislators detained in Israel , as well as the reopening of the Gaza crossing points .
The EU has an obligation to protect civilian lives .
At this time , it is in a stronger position to act as an honest broker than Britain or America .
Reasonable people must stand up and do something about what is going on .
Evil will continue to prevail if we do nothing .

on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( NL ) Mr President , seven Palestinian rocket attacks on Israeli territory this morning resulted in the sad statistic of one fatality and one seriously injured in the town of Sderot .
Those carrying out the violence claim that this is revenge action for last week 's blood bath in Beit Hanoun , in any event not on behalf of the seriously affected Athamna family from Beit Hanoun .
Quite the reverse ; they underline - and you can see it for yourself in today 's Israeli press - that there has been enough blood shed .
Sadly enough , this Palestinian spirit of reconciliation meets with no response at all from various prominent representatives of Hamas .
Over the past few days , they have stressed most emphatically that the new Palestinian Government is not required to recognise the Zionist enemy .
Can the Council and the Commission shed light on this repeated Palestinian political controversy between Fatah and Hamas ?
At the same time , I should like to know their reaction to the statement made by Mohammed Shabir , who has been proposed as Prime Minister of a Palestinian united Cabinet : ' I shall make my position clear after the appointment ' .
Have you been in contact with him yet ?
The Quartet is reported to be meeting in Cairo today in order to relaunch the peace process .
I expect the explosive situation in Gaza will be high on the agenda .
After all , the Council and the Commission will not be unaware of what the Chief of Shin Bet , Israel 's Security Agency , told the Knesset , to the effect that , if the radical political and military tide in Gaza does not turn , Israel will have no choice but to mount a large-scale military operation .
Shin Bet 's Chief , Mr Diskin , also shared that since Israel 's withdrawal from Gaza , no fewer than 33 tonnes of military explosives , large quantities of weapons and between USD 50 million and USD 70 million in cash have been smuggled into the Gaza Strip .
Egypt , in particular , has cried off , although this is in contravention of the specified military agreement with Israel .
In summary , the European Union must take the Quartet meeting as an opportunity to remind Egypt , and , in fact , the rest of the Arab world , of their responsibilities .
Gaza should not turn into the much-dreaded Hamasstan .
( IT ) Mr President , I have just come back from Palestine .
I set off without any prejudices or preconceived ideas , but the situation I found was worse than I had expected : it is a powder keg ready to explode , and it will have a domino effect throughout the area .
Nine months is the length of time that wages have not been paid because of the blockade on money transfers , with the result that public offices are locked up , schools are closed , and hospitals are only accepting the all too frequent emergencies .
Eleven thousand is the number of Palestinian political prisoners in Israeli jails , including 400 children and 41 members of parliament elected in polls that the international community accepted were free and transparent .
Nineteen , including twelve minors , is the death toll of the clashes of the last few days , which in fact started the day after we left .
Nine hundred and twelve kilometres is the length of the gigantic wall that is tearing the country apart and separating entire families , for reasons that have little or nothing to do with security .
Nine hundred thousand olive trees , some of them centuries old , have been destroyed to make this impressive but useless structure .
Eighty-seven per cent is the poverty rate in Gaza , where all outside links have been cut and importing or exporting goods is impossible .
One thousand three hundred and fifteen metres is the width of Gaza 's militarised border , which can only be crossed on foot , even by the elderly and children , after interminable checks : it is an incredibly grim crossing , like something from another time .
Even so , as you wander the streets there is still a glimmer of hope in people 's tired eyes .
Europe still has a chance to redeem itself , if we start again from where we left off and pick up the thread that has recently been broken .
Let us work towards a fair and just solution providing for two peoples and two states : security for the State of Israel , the recognition of which is not up for discussion , and rights for a free and independent Palestine .
Time is up : either we adopt a strong , incisive initiative now , or otherwise we must accept full responsibility for having been unwilling or unable to do enough .
( Applause )
( ES ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , I believe that we should draw two conclusions from the debate that we are holding this afternoon .
The first of them has been mentioned by the President of my group , Mr Poettering , who said that we must be consistent with the positions we have taken in the past and , just as we have condemned the indiscriminate attacks against innocent Israelis , we must also condemn this disproportionate attack by Israeli forces , which has caused civilian deaths , particularly amongst women and children .
Unfortunately , Mr President , in spite of the Prime Minister 's apologies and the investigation to be carried out by the Israeli Government , these people will not be brought back to life .
Mr President , in the formal sitting this morning we were reminded that these problems of recurrent violence in the Middle East can only be resolved by means of a fair and all-encompassing solution .
I am struck however - and I am glad that the Presidency-in-Office of the Council is here - by the regrettable fact - and the Belgian Prime Minister , Mark Eyskens , reminded us of this - that , for every one hundred times that the European Union votes in the United Nations , on sixty occasions each Member State does so in its own way .
Mr President , the European Union will not be a major player on the international stage if it acts in that way .
I believe that everybody in this House recognises Israel 's legitimate right to defend itself , but it would have been no bad thing for the United Nations to have condemned this tragic event .
I would therefore call upon the Presidency-in-Office of the Council to work to ensure that , if the European Union wants to be a major player on the international stage , it can speak with one voice , at least on the international stage and , in particular , in the United Nations , where our Member States should not act in the lamentable way they did in relation to these tragic events that we are condemning .
( FR ) Mr President , more than 300 people have been killed in Palestine since June .
The diplomatic term for this is ' disproportionate response ' .
Wherein lies the disproportion ?
It lies in the fact that ten Palestinians have been killed for each Israeli during this second intifada , and 100 to one since the Lebanese war .
There is therefore a lack of proportionality . The fact is , however , that each of these deaths is pointless .
At present , the highest international bodies - both the UN and the Quartet - appear paralysed in the face of the United States .
Europe should therefore do what it has done in Lebanon and adopt a position that is strong and unanimous , as is today 's joint resolution by Parliament .
It should therefore use all the political tools at its disposal , including the Association Agreement with Israel , in order to put an end to the violence .
This violence condemns all Palestinians to death , but it also condemns Israeli democracy .
It puts an end to democracy in Israel , whose government has just allied itself with a xenophobic partner which supports ideas of ethnic cleansing .
Let us be at least as brave as those Israelis who invoke justice and international law in writing to us today of their horror at the massacres in question .
I am thinking in particular of the courageous signatories of the manifesto published by the main Israeli human rights organisations , which are demanding an end to the stranglehold placed on Gaza .
That is why I call for the blockade on Gaza to be lifted and for aid to Palestine to be resumed , as well as for support to be given to the government of national unity that is about to be formed .
This would be a victory by moderates against extremists on all sides .
I am also concerned about the Israelis possibly using new weapons of destruction in this dirty war - weapons whose use has already been suspected in Lebanon - and I call for an international inquiry to be launched in this connection .
I support the idea of an international peace conference , bringing together all the players in the Middle East including Syria and Iran and , in common with the editorial in the newspaper Haaretz , I call for an international intervention force to be sent to Gaza .
Finally , I would urge the European Union to seize every opportunity for peace in this explosive situation .
Death and famine are emphatically not fertile ground for peace .
We do not bear every responsibility in this crisis , but we do have responsibilities .
I would venture to say that , by interrupting aid to Palestine prematurely and by putting in place an intermediate mechanism that has taken some time to be implemented , we have helped bring about the prevailing chaos in Palestine .
To each his particular task , certainly , but we have mistakes to remedy and responsibilities to assume .
Mr President , I , like many others present today , was with Mrs Morgantini in Gaza just a couple of weeks ago as this latest round in the current crisis was kicking off .
We witnessed the systematic , deliberate and very sophisticated and effective brutalisation of an entire people .
Gaza is a prison without hope .
Any moderate Palestinians are blocked at every turn as they try to develop a systematic Palestinian state that might be successful .
They are being blocked by the Israelis , and we must place the blame appropriately .
The only result of all this can be violence forever more , and we can only treat the symptoms for so long .
We saw well-meaning EU officials - we have heard today about the Temporary International Mechanism - and the EU is indeed doing a number of things to tackle the humanitarian symptoms of this disaster .
However , as the Commissioner said earlier , the roots of this situation are political and the solution to it must be political .
The association agreement must be brought onto the table and sanctions considered , or we will be treating the symptoms of a humanitarian disaster forever more .
We are not without weapons and must use everything we have at our disposal .
( EL ) Mr President , ' Europe ' , ' peace ' , ' human rights ' , ' Palestine ' , ' Gaza ' : a vocabulary that we use which is rich in words .
The reality is full of war , misery and pain and here we keep talking , passing resolutions , and repeating ' human rights ' and ' peace ' .
All we do is to keep talking .
How many crimes and how much death is needed for Europe to stop acting as Pontius Pilate ?
In Palestine , it is not just people that are dying ; hope is also dying and yet I believe that human suffering is not something you get used to .
The visit by the European Parliament has been postponed for technical reasons , or so they say .
Someone needs to explain to us what the technical reasons were and who is responsible for them .
Maybe certain parties did not want us to go ?
And if we do not react , we shall again be accomplices to the crimes being committed , not today , not yesterday but , to our knowledge , for decades .
Words need to become deeds at long last .
Within the frameworks of international law and without there being any intention to hurt the man in the street , sanctions need to be imposed on Israel .
When , at long last , will the state of Israel be content to return the money it has kept to its rightful owners in Palestine who are dying of starvation ?
The Palestinians are not terrorists , nor are they begging for charity .
They are a people fighting against third party interests for their dignity and survival .
They are a people who , in the face of the hypocrisy of the international community , the occupation and terror , are fighting for their continuing existence .
( DE ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the most important point with regard to these issues is that people on both sides are suffering at the hands of politics .
The second point is that , seen in an international context , the Middle East conflict has now reached such proportions that it is at the heart of efforts to safeguard world peace and also of threats to such peace .
Both of these are reasons why the conflict must be resolved quickly and the Quartet must appear there together in full and make exacting personal demands rather than each member just drawing up papers on its own .
We must recognise that Israel has left Gaza and that what is happening there is partly an internal conflict between Palestinians , accompanied by terrorism , which is escalating almost into civil war there .
In addition , Israel as a state has to respond to terrorist organisations that are not the responsibility of any particular state .
This explains why we have difficulty judging the situation .
It is no excuse , however , for actions such as the bombardment of civilians and their houses , because Israel , too , has to understand that the only chance for it to enjoy peace and lasting security , as for a viable Palestinian state , consists in breaking the cycle of violence .
For this reason , Israel must consider whether its strategies are really the right ones to adopt .
After all , what has Israel gained from the war it waged in Lebanon in revenge for the capture of individual soldiers that ultimately resulted in the pro-Syrian forces taking power over the chain Iran-Syria-Hezbollah in Lebanon ?
In what way have Israel 's interests been served by that war ?
A kind of responsibility should be seen here , too , and the new consensus government in the Palestinian territories that has come into being recently may represent a means to make a new start , in order to ensure world peace and give the people in the region a future .
Mr President , Gaza is a prison camp for 1.3 million Palestinians , sealed tight by Israel .
The occupants are being starved ; their health and education infrastructure is being destroyed ; their economy is being laid waste ; and they are being massacred .
As many as eighty - not just eighteen - men , women and children were killed last week , most of them civilians simply going about their daily business and trying to get on with life .
This is all being done by a State which claims to be the only democracy in the region .
What a shameful expression of democracy .
Israel is now also pulverising these unfortunate people with experimental weapons .
We have no word from the Commission or from the Council as to what they are doing about investigating that matter .
Launching Qassam rockets will not bring freedom for the Palestinian people , and I condemn such launches .
However , it is also clear that Israeli firepower and Israeli oppression of the Palestinian people will not bring a secure future for Israel either .
Only negotiations on a two-state solution will bring that security , and I would appeal to all concerned to start those as soon as possible .
( FR ) Mr President , following the massacre in Qana in Lebanon , we have seen a further massacre of civilians , this time in Beit Hanoun .
The Israeli Government has expressed its deep concern at this new tragedy , describing it as a technical error .
However , we know already that this acknowledgement will not be enough to prevent the massacre of other innocents in the future .
In order to put a stop to this interminable escalation , Europe must rouse itself from its inertia and finally take strong initiatives to bring about a sustainable peace quickly .
Firstly , we must remove our financial stranglehold on the Palestinian territories , a measure one might have thought designed specifically to increase the violence and bring about chaos there .
Next , a military force needs to be interposed as soon as possible between Israel and Palestine , as was done between Lebanon and Israel with the FINUL .
If such a force is effective in Lebanon , it will be so in Palestine .
Above all , we must finally demand that a Palestinian State be created , with safe and recognised borders .
With the results of the mid-term elections in the United States , a window is perhaps being half-opened today .
The American administration will , I hope , redefine its policy in the Middle East .
In the new strategy that is taking shape , Europe must initiate a new dynamic for peace in which it finally embraces its own political role and ceases merely to be a source of funding .
We must never forget that the conflict between Israel and Palestine is not just a conflict like any other .
There is an international dimension at stake .
The moment has come , and there is no time to waste .
Let us be courageous and assume our responsibilities before it is too late .
( EL ) Mr President , the sortie by black-clad mothers rescuing their children in Beit Hanoun , as shown on the international media , was the chorus of the modern tragedy being lived through by a Palestinian people seeking its liberation .
However , there can be no liberation for the Palestinian people while the dangerous and deadlocked strategy of the United Nations continues in the area , while the dangerous and deadlocked policy of the civil-military leadership of Israel continues .
Unfortunately , today we have heard the Commissioner talking as if the European Union were an international non-governmental humanitarian organisation .
However , the European Union , Commissioner , is a political organisation with international obligations and a duty to defend democratic principles and international humanitarian law .
The European Union , once again , has demonstrated the huge strategic deficit on the question of Palestine .
Mr Solana should have been here today to see the results of the decision by the Council of Ministers in February , when they imposed economic sanctions on a Palestinian people which expressed itself democratically in the elections .
These deadlocks in the European Union are being paid for today , politically and humanitarianly , by the Palestinian people .
Mr President , the Israeli Government and the army have apologised for the tragic ' technical mistake ' that resulted in the killing of 19 innocent civilians , mostly women and children , at Beit Hanoun .
The issue is not whether that apology is acceptable or not ; it is that the use of such powerful force so easily and so frequently is bound to result in ' technical mistakes ' , particularly when the threshold of consideration for human life is so low .
Israel and Palestine will never find peace and tranquillity if they carry on being trigger-happy .
The Palestinians will never succeed with Qassam rockets and suicide bombers .
The Israelis will always invite more Qassams and more suicide bombers when they respond so disproportionately and so powerfully .
No side can win unilaterally .
Unilateralism is dead and buried in Lebanon .
Thinking positively , let us take stock of Prime Minister Olmert 's call to President Abbas for talks without preconditions , progress in the formation of a national unity government between Fatah and Hamas , a government of technocrats - with Prime Minister Haniya abstaining from its leadership - and implicit acceptance by Hamas that they should sit at the same table with Israel .
It is time for the Quartet to act and for the European Union to cease being a passive member of it .
Finally , I hope that the result of the American elections will make the American Administration review its policy and role in the Middle East .
( FR ) Mrs Lehtomäki , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I , for my part , am delighted with the almost historic consensus obtained by the various political groups within our Parliament - a consensus that enables us to send out a clear political message .
It is transparently obvious that the strikes by the Israeli army cannot by any stretch of the imagination be referred to as a ' technical error ' .
One gets the feeling that they are , rather , one more collective punishment inflicted on the Palestinians , who are being blamed for the political choices made following the last legislative elections .
I cannot but lament the similarity between these strikes and the methods used against the civilian populations of Southern Lebanon during the war in the summer of 2006 , with cluster bombs being used in both cases .
Admittedly , the Israeli population is also the target of murderous attacks .
One is , however , entitled to expect a democratic state like Israel to behave in accordance with international law - something that cannot be demanded of terrorist organisations .
Faced with this situation , the European Union must assert itself as the driving force of the Quartet and be in favour of reinstating the Road Map .
The new political order in the United States , the prospect of a government of national unity being formed in Palestine and also , and above all , the voices of protest raised in Israeli society are hopeful factors in terms of the re-launch of the peace process .
Mr President , last week 's incident in Gaza , when an IDF shell mistakenly struck Beit Hanoun causing the death of 19 innocent Palestinians , is clearly tragic .
The Prime Minister of Israel has apologised and ordered a full investigation .
Israel , it must be recalled , withdrew from Gaza in good faith , but the Palestinian Authority failed to establish law and order there .
Instead we have witnessed a degeneration into chaos , internecine warfare and repeated Qassam rockets being deliberately fired at innocent Israeli civilian targets , such as the woman killed today in Sderot , with no apologies from the militants , such as Hamas , and the militias effectively using human shields as Hizbollah did in Lebanon by firing rockets from civilian areas , thus inviting retribution which resulted in the tragedy of Beit Hanoun .
Furthermore , these Hamas-controlled militias have yet to release kidnapped Corporal Shalit .
Yesterday it was announced that a new government of national unity has been formed under independent technocrat Mohammad Shbair , but its spokesman , Fawzi Barhoom , denies that Hamas will now recognise Israel and instead disappointingly stated that the new government will recognise the terms of the ' Prisoners ' Document ' , a declaration signed this year by Palestinians held in Israeli jails that implicitly - but not explicitly - recognises Israel by calling for a Palestinian state on the West Bank and Gaza .
It remains to be seen if this will suffice to dismantle the TIM and resume full PA aid , and reassurances on ending terrorist violence will have to be forthcoming too .
I will be reluctantly supporting this resolution , but cannot support its call for a multinational UN force to police the occupied territories , as the track record of UNIFIL in Lebanon remains unproven .
I fear that , as we speak , Hizbollah is busy rearming itself and looking for a pretext to start yet another war against Israel .
Neither do I call for an immediate cessation by Israel of all military action whilst it is still being attacked , as argued by my Liberal colleague Mr Davies .
Mr President , when I look at our policy towards the Palestinians I can see our stick but where is our carrot ?
The Palestinians are losing any faith they had left in a solution and in us as part of the international community .
We are faced with two peoples who are craving peace and quiet in their lives , and we cannot rely on old rhetoric any longer .
We all know where the solution lies .
We need to acknowledge that the two sides are not making it on their own .
A call for negotiations - no matter how justified - will not be enough this time around .
I want to ask the Council and the Commission : are you willing to consider bold ideas ?
Let the Palestinians define their state with the Green Line as its border .
Let us then recognise it , let us use all our weight to get the Quartet to recognise it as well and let us then force Israel to accept it .
Only then will steps to increase trust and confidence have any chance to succeed , because there can be no peace without justice .
I say this as a friend of Israel , convinced , as I am , that we should not just save the future of the Palestinian state , we also need to protect Israel from itself .
This is our responsibility .
( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Gaza is the nub of the nub of the problem : it is the nub of the Israeli-Palestinian crisis and of the crisis in the Middle East .
It has engendered terrorism 's major offensive ; the failure to solve the Israeli-Palestinian problem has given rise to 9 / 11 , the growing strength of Al Qaeda and the Middle East crisis .
That is why Europe needs to play a major role and involve countries like Syria , whose role must be seen as separate from that of Iran .
Of course , none of us means to exonerate Israel for what has been happening in Gaza in recent days - the Israeli armed forces have to accept some of the responsibility - but it would be a serious mistake to point the finger just at Israel for the crisis as a whole .
We must not forget what is going on , with missiles being launched from Palestinian territory often with the backing of terrorist and extremist organisations , because there are some who do not want to thwart the peace process .
Europe needs to play a constructive , decisive role to advance the peace process and must defuse any act by either side that might be provocative .
Its role has to be balanced : it would be a disaster if Europe took sides against Israel and considered that it was to blame for everything that has happened , because we would not resolve the situation like that .
We have to commit to establishing a Palestinian state and make every effort for Israel to feel secure within its own borders , so that no Israeli family feels forced to send one child to school on one bus and another child on a different bus every morning , because they do not know which of the two will return home .
We have to stand very firm on that , and make Hamas realise that there is no room for military and terrorist action , and Hezbollah that there is no room for it to play a political role in the peace process .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , thank you to the Members of Parliament for this very valuable debate .
The Council shares the view so powerfully put forward in this discussion that this is a time for policy .
It is a time for policy and we have been of the opinion the whole time that this crisis cannot be solved militarily ; instead , what is needed is a comprehensive political solution .
We need a solution that proposes a two-state model and that will require the people in the region , including ordinary people , to accept this goal of coexistence properly , and to commit to it at all levels of society .
The hope has been powerfully expressed here that the European Union will do what it can .
On behalf of the Council , I can assure you that the Union and the Presidency will do whatever it can .
The European Union 's potential and strength in a solution to this crisis lies in the fact that the Union is a credible player in the eyes of all parties .
You cannot find this kind of strength just anywhere .
For the Union to be able to continue its work and its role as a credible player in a solution to this crisis , it must be able to sustain a united and consistent policy , and the question of how to foster this coherence is a daily challenge .
We are taking robust action to ensure that the Quartet also has a leading role to play in resolving this crisis , and we will aim to support the Quartet 's active involvement .
It is also vital that , in order to find a comprehensive solution , we are able to persuade the countries in the region to commit to an involvement in this process .
The next occasion on which the Middle East question will be on the agenda in our multilateral forum of cooperation will certainly be next week at the EU-Russia Summit , and then at the end of November at the Foreign Ministers ' meeting of the Barcelona Process at Tampere .
We will also work hard to get the Quartet to convene in December .
This is an important issue and a serious , long-term problem right on Europe 's doorstep , so we have to pool all our resources to find a comprehensive , long-term and lasting political solution .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , escalating violence in Gaza only increases civilian suffering and fuels extremism .
As I have said , the Commission has stepped up its assistance for meeting emergency and humanitarian needs .
That is a useful contribution , but the solution lies elsewhere .
The only way forward for Israel and the Palestinians is the negotiation of a viable two-state solution .
The international community - as many of you have already said - has the duty to revive a credible peace process .
The European Union should play a leading role in that respect and , through its participation in the Quartet , encourage any ideas aimed at furthering peace in that area , including an international conference on the Middle East process .
In accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received six motions for resolutions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
The European Union must do everything in its power and use every instrument at our disposal , including the EU association agreement with Israel , to end the violence in Gaza .
The ongoing violence condemns the Palestinians to a slow death and risks setting the whole of the Middle East on fire .
Death and famine are not fertile ground for peace .
We need an end to the Israeli blockade of Gaza , resumption of aid to Palestine and support for a government of national unity .
I fully support the idea of an international peace conference bringing together all the actors in the Middle East , including Syria and Iran .
We need an international force in Gaza as a matter of urgency .
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention ( BTWC ) , cluster bombs and conventional weapons ( debate )
The next item is the Council and Commission statements on the conference for examining the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention ( BTWC ) , which will take place in 2006 .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , issues relating to weapons of mass destruction and arms control have in recent years been central to the European Union 's Foreign and Security Policy .
Multilateral action on arms control and disarmament has nevertheless had to face enormous challenges in previous years , and the results achieved have been modest .
There is an urgent need to alter this trend .
The Third Review Conference of the States Parties to the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons is currently taking place in Geneva .
Both this conference and the Sixth Review Conference of the States Parties to the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention to be held in late November and early December are an opportunity to show that the international community is able effectively to respond to the challenges of arms control and disarmament today .
The civilian population is all too often the victim of the use of weapons covered under the Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons .
The clearance of explosive remnants of war is an ever-growing burden for the international community .
The universalisation of Protocol V to the CCW on Explosive Remnants of War and its effective implementation mean that we all have to make an effort .
The European Union welcomed the entry into force of the Protocol at the Review Conference .
The Protocol on Explosive Remnants of War was drafted in response to the humanitarian threat caused by unexploded ordnance , including cluster bombs , to civilian populations in the aftermath of a war .
The recent events in southern Lebanon bring to mind the dangers caused to the civilian population by explosive remnants of war , especially cluster bombs , and the difficulty and expense of clearing them .
This problem has to be addressed without delay .
Therefore , the EU has proposed that the work of the CCW Group of Governmental Experts should be continued in 2007 .
The Group 's current mandate includes the development of preventative measures to improve the design of certain types of munitions , with a view to minimising their risk to humanity .
In addition , several EU Member States have individually pledged to start negotiations on a legally binding protocol which would respond to the risks to humanity arising from cluster bombs .
The EU Member States , however , do not have a shared view on how to deal with the rather restricted area of cluster bombs within the framework of the CCW .
This morning at the Review Conference , it was agreed that the Union 's position on cluster bombs would be endorsed , and the decision was taken to propose the establishment of a think-tank of experts , whose purpose would be to prepare recommendations for future action to deal with cluster bombs within the CCW framework .
In the course of the five years of negotiations on anti-vehicle landmines , the EU has consistently made mention of the fact that our objective is a legally binding protocol which endorses international humanitarian law and brings added value to it .
Agreement on the protocol at the Review Conference , however , seems unlikely .
For more than 30 years now , the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention has served as the normative and legal cornerstone of biological disarmament and non-proliferation .
Today , biosciences are one of the most rapidly evolving branches of science , with infinite potential for both good and bad .
The BTWC has to be capable of being adjusted to scientific developments and responding to any possible challenges that go with them .
The Review Conferences are an opportunity for this .
The European Union has made thorough preparations for the Sixth Review Conference of the BTWC , in accordance with the objectives of the EU Strategy Against the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction .
These objectives include , in particular , making the BTWC apply worldwide , promoting the national implementation of , and compliance with , the Convention at national level , and reinforcement of the Convention .
In February this year , the Council adopted a common position on the Sixth Review Conference .
The Union 's position is a balance between a realistic and an ambitious approach , nevertheless insisting on a comprehensive review of the Convention and practical improvements for its implementation .
As an add-on to the common position , the Union has drafted thematic working documents on several topics .
In addition to joint action , the EU agreed on an Action Plan on the BTWC .
In it , Member States committed to taking measures to strengthen the Convention , such as an announcement of any confidence-building measures that have been taken .
These concrete measures will make the main aims of the EU 's common position on the Review Conference of the BTWC more plausible .
The Third Review Conference of the CCW has a good , though not perhaps optimal , chance of success .
We hope for a successful outcome , however .
The Sixth Review Conference of the BTWC also stands every chance of a successful outcome .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , weapons of mass destruction are potentially the greatest threat to European security and , in terms of the ability to inflict mass casualties , the weapons of most concern are clearly nuclear and biological .
While we all carry with us the collective memory of the horrors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki , there are no equivalent common images for biological weapons .
Mass death from biological agents , or diseases like the plague , appear by contrast to be part of ' ancient history ' or science fiction .
We must hope that it stays that way , but we cannot be complacent .
Consider the following .
Firstly , unlike nuclear weapons , biological weapons are not dependent on limited supplies of weapons-grade uranium and plutonium .
The rapid development and dissemination of biosciences is bringing weapons capabilities within reach of those who could do us harm .
The danger that humans , animals or plants might be attacked by biological agents is a real one .
Secondly , official reports suggest that terrorists are seeking bio-weapons .
If terrorists were to start biological attacks across Europe , many lives would be at risk and our lifestyle could change dramatically .
Thirdly , biological weapons have been used in the recent past .
The anthrax attacks in the United States in late 2001 killed few people but caused significant , wider social and political disruption , and the perpetrators remain at large .
How protected are we today ?
All use and possession of biological weapons has been prohibited since the Biological Weapons Convention came into force in 1975 .
However , this Convention is the weakest of the regimes addressing weapons of mass destruction .
It has no provision for verification of compliance or implementation , and , unlike the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and the Chemical Weapons Convention , there is no central institution with oversight .
Furthermore , there are fewer parties to the Convention than to either of those two treaties .
Our security would be enhanced , therefore , if the effectiveness of the Biological and Toxic Weapons Convention could be strengthened and its implementation improved .
State parties should be encouraged to address these weaknesses at the forthcoming review conference later this month .
Good security starts at home .
My colleague , Commissioner Frattini , is well aware of the need for action .
The Commission is examining potential responses through a common framework approach .
National responses to biological threats are clearly insufficient .
Alongside the work on strengthening public health and medical surveillance and response , we will be issuing a Green Paper on European bio-preparedness in spring 2007 .
Disaster and disease do not respect borders .
The issue of bio-threats is one where internal and external policies are inextricably linked .
Much can be achieved through better international collaboration and coordination .
We will aim to share best practice on bio-preparedness : by helping to protect others , we will better protect ourselves .
I would also like to say a few words on a very different type of deadly weapon .
Unexploded cluster ammunition represents a threat to human security and sustainable development .
Such munitions kill innocent people every day and 30 % of those killed are children .
They represent major challenges , both politically and to daily life in former war zones .
A review conference is currently under way .
It will see Protocol V to the convention , on ' Explosive Remnants of War ' - i.e. failed explosive ordnance , ammunition or sub-munitions from cluster bombs , - enter into force .
The implementation of this protocol , intended to eradicate the threat that such legacies of war pose to populations , will be a welcome step forward .
The events in Lebanon this summer highlighted the issue , particularly in view of the high failure rate of the cluster sub-munitions employed .
Helping Lebanon in the difficult task of clearing these deadly remnants of war is important and we have contributed some EUR 5 million to the task .
We also support the need to focus more attention on strengthening and ensuring compliance with international humanitarian law in this area .
Commission assistance and cooperation in humanitarian disarmament - that is to say mine action , clearing the explosive remnants of war and fighting the illicit spread of small arms - all have a positive impact on improving human security .
They contribute to the sustainability of our development policies .
We are grateful for the support of the European Parliament in these efforts .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , with the Conventional Weapons Convention taking place this week and the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention next week , it is important that the EU 's voice is heard .
One main area that concerns me - the Commissioner talked about it - is the use of cluster bombs .
We have seen the widespread use in recent conflicts : Iraq , Afghanistan and Lebanon , to name but a few .
Because they are not covered by the 1997 Treaty on Landmines they are used with impunity , but they still have the same devastating effect , with civilians being killed or maimed for years to come .
According to the report ' Fatal Footprint ' , published this month by Handicap International , the Israeli defence force delivered at least four million bomblets into Lebanon between July and August this year .
Worldwide , civilians constitute 98 % of all recorded cluster bomb casualties .
That is one of the reasons I call on the Council and the Commission to endorse the growing movement for change within the international community and the moves by countries , amongst them Belgium and Norway , to establish national legislation to ban cluster munitions from their territories and armed forces .
I would also like to applaud the Red Cross for its campaign and call for a ban on the use of cluster bombs , for stockpiles to be destroyed and for clearance programmes to be stepped up .
As far as biological and toxic weapons are concerned , we must put more pressure on the United States Government , which has refused to countenance a legally binding verification protocol .
That is damaging the future of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention and its credibility .
We must also make sure that a permanent secretariat is set up to oversee the Convention 's implementation .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner Wallström , ladies and gentlemen , death comes in the aftermath of war , and , rather than these cluster bombs falling from the heavens on their own , we have to be aware that they are dropped by Europe 's allies and that those same allies continue to manufacture and export them .

You say that cluster bombs and unexploded munitions represent a challenge to former war zones , and that is where I have to contradict you ; on the contrary , they are not a challenge to former war zones , but rather a challenge to the European Union , which must make sure that none of its Member States produces , exports or uses such weapons , and which must no longer permit its allies to do so in the way that the Americans , or the Israelis in the most recent war , have done .
It was with this in mind and considering the European Union 's inability to take action that we , a fortnight ago , wrote a letter to the Finnish Presidency - and when I say ' we ' I mean not ' we Greens ' but rather the coordinators of the conservatives , the socialists , the liberals and I myself - with an urgent appeal for a European position in favour of an outright ban to be tabled at this conference , which represents an historic opportunity for the prohibition of cluster munitions .
You made it plain to this House that you were either unwilling or unable to do so .
You say you are going to set up a working party ; well , I am sure you are familiar with the saying that , setting up a working party is what you do when you do not know what to do next .
It is also the cynical way to go about things when one bears in mind the fact that , day in and day out , the lives of civilians , police officers and UN troops sent by us to crisis-hit regions are being put at risk by what is left of these weapons .
I would therefore like , once more , to urge you in strong terms to now seize the initiative and - since you are able to do so - ensure that the national parliaments of the EU 's Member States describe these cluster munitions as what they actually are , namely as a form of weaponry worthy of being outlawed and one that Europeans must renounce once and for all , refusing to use them or accept their use in any war whatever .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , my group is of course in favour of a general , worldwide ban on the production and use of biological weapons and on trade in them , and we hope that the forthcoming Geneva Conference will decide to strengthen the relevant international conventions .
I am pleased to note that the European Union is in the forefront on these issues , and I hope that the Commission will do everything humanly possible to achieve a worldwide ban on these horrific weapons .
We have to acknowledge the fact , however , that the main stumbling block to achieving such a ban has a name that we all know : George W. Bush .
The President of the United States is personally responsible for the US political boycott of the Geneva negotiations .
He has , in fact , decided to pull out of the talks .
Instead , the United States has made the build-up of their biological arsenal and the use of white phosphorus and depleted uranium a strong point in their aggressive and unacceptable military policy .
Similarly , they have neither ratified the Mine Ban Convention nor signed the Third Protocol to the Certain Conventional Weapons Convention ( CCWC ) , and they have also revived the Star Wars programme .
This attitude by the United States is a threat to world security .
The European Union needs to overcome its inertia and make putting pressure on the United States a key point in the Geneva negotiations .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , Mrs Lehtomäki spoke of the European Union 's action plan in relation to the Review Conference of the Biological and Toxic Weapons Convention .
Yet again , the European Union falsely assumes the attributes of a political state empowered to determine policy on what are military and defence measures , which are the proper responsibility of sovereign nations .
The EU has never had to militarily defend its citizens and let us hope that it never has to , for a variety of reasons .
Meanwhile , countries like mine , Great Britain , which are serious military powers , have to discharge that responsibility .
Cluster bombs do indeed need greater international regulation , especially in regard to the so-called dumb bombs , which have no self-destruct mechanism .
Britain is also a leading power in research into defence against biological and toxin weapons , and given the current terrorist threat by fundamentalist Islam , Britain has to maintain its independence and freedom of action in this sphere .
( NL ) Mr President , the manufacture and use of biological weapons used to be the preserve of states .
These days , progress in biotechnology is such that ever fewer resources are needed to produce dangerous viruses , bacteria and poisons , and the consequence of this is that terrorist organisations , too , can resort to biological warfare .
In March of this year , Interpol pointed out that there are serious indications that al-Qaeda is preparing to commit acts of biological terrorism .
The scale of the destruction that could result in that way far outstrips that of the attacks in New York , Madrid and London .
It is impossible to conclude agreements with terrorists in the same way as states do with one another .
It is of vital importance that police forces be further trained in order to prevent and control biological terror .
Some legislation may well need to be adapted in order to make it possible to check sensitive scientific research .
There is still a need to give attention to the exchange of information between intelligence services within the European Union , but also with our partners in the United States , Russia and in all other nations that want to discharge their responsibilities in the fight against terrorism .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( IT ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Socialist Group in the European Parliament wholeheartedly supports this draft resolution , because it sees it as a decisive step in the strategy to oppose the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction that was adopted by Europe in December 2003 , and also because it makes reducing the biological weapons threat a top priority .
At the same time , another important initiative is that we are calling on all countries that have not yet done so to abide by the legislation banning biological weapons , not least in order to achieve that universality that is an integral and binding part of international law .
Within this basic framework , there are in any case measures designed to ensure that the Convention is effectively implemented , although in the most recent analysis the United States failed to comply with these measures .
I should also like to stress the importance of the appeal made in the resolution to finalise a specific Protocol 6 unequivocally banning the manufacture and use of cluster bombs , despicable weapons even used in humanitarian wars to get round the Mine Ban Convention .
At the same time , Europe needs to show that there is a direct link between trends towards proliferation , which must be strenuously repressed , and the failure to disarm .
The West will have greater moral authority to oppose the proliferation of any kind of weapon if : 1 ) the United States stops opposing the adoption of inspection measures and the banning of cluster bombs ; and 2 ) the disarmament process is resumed even within the nuclear club .
What has happened today is therefore an important step , but it is merely the first on the long road towards a ban on all weapons of mass destruction .
( ES ) Mr President , like so many other instruments that regulate arms at world level , the existence of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention is a necessary , though not sufficient , tool in the fight against human irrationality .
There is therefore only one acceptable option for the sixth review conference which is to begin on 20 November : to strengthen that instrument , particularly with a view to developing genuine verification mechanisms , and to promote its universal application .
Furthermore , with regard to cluster bombs , I can only vigorously support the call for the Convention on Inhuman Weapons to be provided with a sixth protocol . In my view , it should even be provided with a specific and complete treaty , which unambiguously prohibits the production , storage , transfer and use of this kind of weapon , as in the case of anti-personnel mines .
In view of the indiscriminate nature of cluster bombs and the enormous impact they have on the civilian population , the use of those weapons must no longer be tolerated in any way .
The case of Lebanon , which is currently under investigation , is just one example of many that illustrate the reason for this .

( PT ) In recent years we have witnessed the erosion of the most important legal instruments for combating the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , and the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention is no exception .
We are more vulnerable than ever to devastating terrorist attacks .
The main ideas contained in this resolution , on which notable consensus has been reached across all political groups in Parliament , are decades old and applicable to other conventions , too .
These ideas can be summed up under three headings : universalisation , application and verification .
The notorious cluster bombs and anti-personnel mines must be combated .
These immoral arms must also be outlawed .
These bombs spread death indiscriminately and the fact that they have a low rate of immediate explosion means that they continue to kill innocent people many years after conflicts have ended .
The recent war in Lebanon , in which Israel left the country mined with thousands of cluster bombs , should give us the impetus to ban , once and for all , the manufacture and use of all kinds of cluster bomb , as we have done with anti-personnel mines .
Perhaps merely adding a new protocol to the existing Convention against certain conventional weapons is not enough ; perhaps the time has come for a specific convention .
This does not matter , provided the EU takes action and the human race joins forces to eradicate these heinous weapons .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Union and the Council are very concerned that people in conflict zones are injured or die when the conflict itself has ended .
This is patently clear in the case of Lebanon today , where unexploded bombs are a real problem for the civilian population .
The Presidency is pleased that the Protocol relating to unexploded ordnance has entered into force .
In the future we will be working to ensure that the harm caused to the civilian population by munitions remains minimal .
As for international cooperation on cluster bombs from here on , we will continue our efforts to find a common position in the European Union and make headway on this .
Finally , I wish to say that Mrs Beer and her colleagues will be receiving an answer to their letter to the Presidency in the very near future .
Vice-president of the Commission .
Mr President , the informed debate that has taken place on these issues is one more strand in the argument against war and another argument for prevention and hopefully being able to avoid the use of these weapons .
As you know , under the common foreign and security policy , these are not areas in which the Commission takes the lead .
However , we are part of the solution when dealing with the aftermath of war .
The human suffering , unexploded munitions and humanitarian problems which result from wars around the world are a challenge for us .
The Commission will of course continue to support the clearance of such weapons , working with the international community and NGOs .
The war in Lebanon lasted a few days , but the human suffering will continue for many years .
In accordance with Rule 103 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure , I have received six motions for resolutions .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow , Thursday .
European initiative in the field of civil protection ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the oral question to the Council on the European initiative in the field of civil protection by Mr Florenz , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Food Safety , by Mr Galeote , on behalf of the Committee on Regional Development and by Mr Daul , on behalf of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development ( B6-0442 / 2006 ) .
Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Madam Vice-President of the European Commission , the experience acquired over recent years from dealing with natural and man-made disasters has revealed that there are shortcomings in the capacity for national intervention and , consequently , increased expectations of Community assistance , assistance which will need to have the attributes of effective intervention in the field of prevention and rapid response .
From this point of view , an early warning and response system is needed , based on the following four components : identification and assessment of the risks , constant monitoring of the risks , a warning and communication mechanism and , lastly , preparedness , in other words the ability to respond and help .
Allow me to refer briefly to certain parameters of particular importance which characterise such an effective civil protection mechanism , as referred to in the exceptional Barnier report passed by plenary and in the report which I presented to the Euro-Mediterranean plenary .
We need a lookout system , intervention units from the participating states , response guidelines and the relevant information for citizens , best practices for dealing with situations and mutual consular assistance in determining contact points between Member States .
It goes without saying that , without the necessary funding and the fundamental participation of the Member States , the entire endeavour will remain in abeyance .
The question , therefore , Madam President-in-Office , is whether the Council has the will to respond to the demand and , of course , to secure the necessary cooperation of the Member States .
I believe that , in the relevant decisions , the need to respond to the demand and expectations of the citizens will ultimately prevail , dictated first and foremost by the increase in and frequency and intensity of natural disasters which result in loss of life as well as financial and environmental damage .
In addition , we must always bear in mind that promoting cooperation between the Member States in the field of civil protection will gradually consolidate a European conscience in the citizens and will be a visible example of the solidarity which must distinguish the European Union .
author . - ( ES ) Mr President , without going into the underlying causes , over recent years several countries have been suffering serious natural disasters .
Particularly in the summer , we have suffered fires , floods and the effects of a particularly severe drought .
We frequently see how the affected regions of the Member States , sometimes of the most developed ones , lack sufficient resources to deal with these phenomena themselves .
Nevertheless , it sometimes seems that we are more conscientious about offering our solidarity when the damage is done thousands of kilometres away than we are when it is done in a Member State .
Despite all of this , the Council appears to be sticking to a passive approach .
Some people will say that no more money should be spent , but it is not a financial issue , and one example of this is that you , representatives of the Council , are not making any progress on the reform of the European Solidarity Fund , which will not cost a single additional euro from the Community budget .
Sometimes we are in no position to criticise .
Plenary approved the sending of a delegation to the most affected regions at the beginning of September , and , Mr President , Parliament 's Bureau is still tied up with regulatory issues that it has to sort out before it can give the green light to that delegation .
We shall not lose heart , however , because nobody believes that we should not provide resources for a common effort that will make us more effective when it comes to helping people .
The principle of subsidiarity will be respected as well .
There is no intention of impinging on the sovereignty of any Member State .
There is a report , for which Mr Barnier is responsible , on the table in the Council , which provides a good basis for this work .
I would like to know whether the Council intends to pursue this issue .
The European Parliament will undoubtedly give its enthusiastic support , and Europeans will be grateful for that .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , Madam President-in-Office of the Council , no region can cope unaided with natural disasters , whether these be forest fires , earthquakes or floods .
Fighting them , and , moreover , coping with their aftermath , goes beyond the capacities of regional authorities , and so the regions affected are reliant on solidarity , primarily on aid from neighbouring regions and support from the national level , with which responsibility for civil protection and disaster prevention lies .
I would like to make it clear that we have no need of new powers at European level , which would duplicate structures and waste money on administrative apparatus .
I also find somewhat problematic the idea of using European money from the structural funds or even money intended for rural development .
European policy for rural areas looks towards the future ; it supports the nation states in their regional investment strategies in international competition .
There are those who are now demanding that these valuable resources be put to work in preventing forest fires and compensating their victims , and , on that front too , I have to say that it does not seem to make much sense to use European taxpayers ' money for such things as firebreaks .
As we all know , the European Solidarity Fund is there to deal with really major disasters , for those very situations in which individual countries are unable to cope with natural calamities , but I would demand that this fund be more flexible in its use of money .
I also call for more binding rules on the international coordination of crisis interventions , initially bilaterally between the states concerned and in exceptional cases at the European level too , but , please , let there be no new European superstructures in the civil protection field and no more wasting of valuable European resources on tasks that really should , in the main , be left to the nation states !
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in drafting its answer , the Council has gone on the assumption that the honourable Members wish to know how the Union 's civil protection services are to be developed and taken forward by the Council .
Their introductory speeches have now confirmed that our assumption was correct and that this is indeed the issue .
The primary goal in the work of the Council is to establish better coordination to ensure that assistance interventions function more efficiently .
The Council will rely on this in existing structures , such as the civil protection monitoring and information centre that operates in association with the Commission and the Secretariat-General of the Council of the European Union .
The second goal of the Council 's work is to provide assistance quickly wherever it is needed .
The Member States themselves have the main responsibility for providing assistance in emergencies .
With reference to a Commission proposal for establishing a financial instrument for emergency services and rapid assistance interventions , the Council is examining whether , with certain conditions in place , a proportion of the Community budget appropriations allocated for EU civil protection operations could be used for the hire of transport and equipment .
All this shows that the Council considers it very important to strengthen the European Union 's preparedness in the area of civil protection .
Mr President , the fact that this is the third time in recent months that we have discussed this issue demonstrates the enhanced sensitivity of the European Parliament .
I have pointed out on another occasion that it is a paradox that we have a common policy for farmers , the environment and regional development , but have no policy for the natural disasters that affect farmers and regional development and the environment .
This is a paradox in the functioning of the European Union to date .
Furthermore , I consider that indifference on these issues is also strengthening Euro-scepticism .
The image of the European Union would be much more positive if there were a European mechanism and if the European Union were present after any natural disaster at the problem faced at that moment by the citizens .
We need to understand this .
I do not think that particular thought is needed in order to adopt this perception .
We do not want substitution of the Member States .
Of course the Member States will also continue to be present , but what we want is for there to be coordination .

Minister , it was the Council that called on Mr Βarnier , a distinguished European and successful Commissioner , to table a proposal to you , not us .
You noted the Council proposal in June and , since then , the proposal has remained without there being any development .
You need to tell us something .
I know that you do not merely represent your country here ; you represent 25 countries and you must coordinate between yourselves , really coordinate .
Months have gone past .
Must we wait again for disasters as happened in Germany in 2002 before we do something ?
At that time , the disasters were the reason we set up the Solidarity Fund .
We cannot proceed in this fashion .
You need to say something clearer at some point and you have time up to December to raise the matter and to follow up the Barnier report .
You owe it to yourselves , because you called on him to draft that report , and you owe it , above all , to the citizens of Europe .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PT ) Madam President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , as times change , so do needs .
The climate is no longer what it was dozens of years ago .
All year round , parched dry days alternate with days of torrential rain .
' Climate change is not science fiction ' , said Kofi Annan today as he opened the Climate Change Conference in Nairobi .
Insurance experts have predicted that natural disasters will cause EUR 2.3 billion 's worth of damage in 2040 .
Climate change lies at the root of natural disasters throughout the world that have left a trail of destruction and death in their wake .
Global warming is one of the major problems of our times .
It is necessary to raise awareness among the citizens and encourage them to take part in the prevention of these disasters , although responsibility for managing the response to natural disasters rests primarily with the country affected , with the Union playing a supporting role .
The Community civil protection mechanism must be strengthened with greater resources and more wide-ranging powers .
This indeed was what you said , Mrs Lehtomäki , but what actual form will this process of strengthening take ?
What is the Council thinking of doing to enhance the European Civil Protection mechanism ?
Does the Council support the idea of creating a European Strategic Coordination Centre responsible for gathering and disseminating information on emergencies and for making rapid reaction resources available for combating the different types of disaster ?
What does the Council intend to do with the Barnier report , as mentioned earlier ?
These are the questions to which we would like answers .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FR ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , if there is one area in which all Europeans expect effective Community responses , it is that of large-scale natural disasters .
Everyone has seen how , whenever major disasters such as the tsunami occur , there is a quick response on the part not only of individual countries and NGOs but also of our fellow citizens who , through their gifts of money , clothes and time , are able to join forces and take action .
However , we have also seen , when each of these disasters has occurred , that what was missing was proper organisation .
We are indeed confronted by inadequate organisation .
That is why , together with my group , I am in favour of implementing preventative actions and of putting in place the capacity to respond very quickly to the consequences of tragedies .
In this connection , I should like to draw attention to the quality of the Barnier report , which states the problem well and proposes solutions that are constructive not only - my fellow Members have already emphasised this - in terms , as one would expect , of efficiency but also of subsidiarity .
At this stage , I should like to point out where this report scores .
Although no one questions the fact that it is for the various military organisations , fire services and other players of various kinds to exercise their responsibilities in full , it has to be acknowledged that only the European Union is in a position to ensure preventative and responsive coordination .
Finally , I should like to emphasise that the European Union has thus had the opportunity to demonstrate at a global level that the word ' solidarity ' is not devoid of meaning but may be translated as ' practical action ' .
If , when disasters similar to those of the past occur - and there is , unfortunately , a danger of their doing so in 2007 - the European Union has a presence on the ground in order to offer a response to human suffering and to mitigate the material , technical and ecological disasters , it will be viewed by the world as a more unified and much more practical enterprise .
For this reason too , it is important for the Presidency successfully to carry out this operation as early as at the beginning of 2007 .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - There are indeed two aspects .
There are disasters , natural and man-made , and there is terrorist attack .
Allow me to speak from the perspective of the UK , where we have experienced both of those within the last year .
Last December , at an oil-storage depot near London , we had the biggest fire in peacetime Europe .
In July there was a serious terrorist attack in central London , with three tube trains bombed below ground and a bus above ground .
In each case we coped . And it is more than just a question of subsidiarity .
We do not want to become dependent - and neither should anybody else .
So , I have a question .
What do you mean by ' European Consulates ' ?
Are these to be imposed upon national systems , over and above them ?
Another question : the European Civil Defence Force referred to in the Barnier report - what is it going to do ?
Is it an armed unit ?
If so , under whose control ?
Based where ?
Could it be deployed without national government request or permission ?
Finally , the Constitution included a European policy on the prevention of natural disasters and on civil protection .
A further question : is this an attempt to introduce parts of the dead Constitution into new legislation ?
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it has become very clear from this debate that the Council , Parliament and surely the Commission too share exactly the same goals .
Firstly , we have to be able to establish effective arrangements for coordination in the field of civil protection .
The other goal that we share is that assistance should go wherever it is needed efficiently .
It is worth bearing in mind that a high level of cooperation will be needed to achieve these shared goals .
We do not necessarily or automatically need new structures , and we should not imagine that something will run well merely by creating a new structure .
Cooperation is therefore paramount , and is a keyword here .
Furthermore , when we speak of certain natural disasters we have to remember , particularly when they occur outside the European Union , that there are a lot of players other than the European Union in the field .
In such situations , the Union needs to be part of a wider internationally coordinated operation .
The need for coordination in the field was very evident when the tsunami disaster struck , when there were dozens , even hundreds , of players in the field at the same time .
Mr Barnier 's proposals are now being considered and digested by the Member States .
They are very ambitious , and right now the work of the Council work is focussed on finalising decisions on the financial instrument , leading to a common civil protection instrument .
Work is also nevertheless continuing with respect to Mr Barnier 's proposals , and he has been invited to present his ideas at the Justice and Home Affairs Council on 5 December .
The debate is closed .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
( IT ) This umpteenth and timely question on the sensitive matter of EU civil protection capacity puts the spotlight on one of the most convoluted and controversial sectors that the Member States have ever had to deal with .
As I have said before - I have talked to the Commission on a number of occasions and expressed my views in this House - since the civil protection sector is a matter for the individual Member States , it inevitably comes up against very different laws , types of professional training and practices .
For that reason , I have for some time supported the idea of capacity building and strengthening the coordination of the national intervention forces , with the aim of rendering the various national legislations more homogeneous .
In my view , such action has to be delegated to a special European Civil Protection Agency , on the model of the US Federal Emergency Management Agency .
Recent experience has taught us that , if you look beyond the willingness shown , for example , when the horrific tsunami hit part of the Indian Ocean in 2004 , the European Union 's emergency management is , I am sorry to say , utterly inadequate .
( FR ) The strategy developed in the excellent Barnier report with a view to making the most of the very considerable efforts made by Europeans in the field of emergency aid could supplement the Community civil protection mechanism instituted in 2001 , whether the crisis were internal or external to the EU .
I particularly approve of the proposal aimed at basing this force in the EU 's seven outermost regions , which give Europe a human and territorial presence off the African coast - the Canaries and Madeira - in the Indian Ocean - Réunion - and in or close to the Americas - Guiana , Martinique , Guadeloupe and the Azores - not to mention the overseas territories in the Pacific : French Polynesia and New Caledonia .
We must follow the example of the French Red Cross , which has created overseas-based teams for responding to humanitarian crises .
These are capable of rushing to the area concerned in less than 24 hours , setting up emergency hospitals and providing tents , medicines , water supplies , telecommunications and logistical support .
In order to give practical expression to the ' Europe of projects ' , the European Union must take initiatives inspired by a clear , comprehensible and strong political will .
Enhanced civil protection on the part of Europe would involve a federative dimension , strongly identifying the action concerned as European , and , in accordance with the principle of solidarity dear to our Community , would represent a source of pride for our fellow citizens .
Framework for European Regulatory Agencies ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the Council and Commission statements on the framework for European regulatory agencies .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Union and its citizens need effective agencies that work transparently .
As you know , in order to promote this objective , on 28 June 2004 the Council adopted conclusions on the Commission communication on the operating framework for the European Regulatory Agencies .
In these conclusions , the Council focussed attention on the Commission 's intention to put forward the proposal as a legally binding instrument , which would define the Regulatory Agencies ' horizontal operating framework .
It was the Council 's opinion that the proposal should deal with such issues as the establishment , work and monitoring of regulatory agencies , to ensure , in particular , that there would be consistency , transparency , good governance , credibility and cost-effectiveness , and that their activities would be lawful .
Afterwards , in February 2005 , the Commission drafted an interinstitutional agreement on the operating framework for the European Regulatory Agencies .
The proposal stated that the purpose of the interinstitutional agreement was to reinforce the horizontal framework for the establishment , structure , work , evaluation and monitoring of the Regulatory Agencies .
When the draft was being considered at working group level , however , the Council , in April 2005 , took the view that there could be no agreement on the issue in the form of an interinstitutional agreement , at least in terms of its content .
Nor was it considered possible to admit any legal basis for the Regulatory Agencies , because there is none in the Treaty for a legal act of this kind .
In Council discussions , various models were proposed for moving forward in this matter .
There was no agreement , however , on how this could be achieved .
During our Presidency , we have pondered various options for establishing an interinstitutional agreement on the Regulatory Agencies .
We have been paying particular attention to the content of the Commission 's proposal and the matter of a legal basis .
The time has never been ripe , however , for a completely new proposal by the Commission .
So fresh talks on the matter have also been impossible to organise .
It is nonetheless clear that there is a need for more discussions on both the content of any forthcoming Commission proposal as well as its format .
It is important to remember that any horizontal operating framework in respect of the agencies must also function practically .
There needs to be a guarantee that there is a real need for their establishment and work , with a proper analysis of the cost-effectiveness of the project .
The Finnish Presidency is very aware that the European Parliament has focussed its attention on this matter on several occasions .
In its draft for an interinstitutional agreement , the Commission stressed that the Regulatory Bodies would have a public service function to perform .
They would improve the implementation and application of Community rules everywhere in the European Union .
Thus , it is not just a question of the creation of a legally binding framework to enhance the work of the Union .
We need to show the general public that the Union is trying to step up progress on issues that are important to them , credibly and cost-effectively , and in this case with the help of Regulatory Agencies .
Vice-president of the Commission .
Mr President , the Commission still considers that an interinstitutional agreement seems the best solution for a framework for regulatory agencies .
Only this legal instrument has the advantage of involving the three institutions from the outset and allows all three to agree good rules of governance applicable to regulatory agencies .
The recent creation of a number of new agencies , with more on the way , makes the case for progress still stronger .
We now have 21 agencies under the first pillar with 2 more on the way : the Gender Institute and the Chemicals Agency to be created under the REACH regulation .
We all seem to agree on the desirability of action .
If the problem is the instrument by which we should move forward and the proposed interinstitutional agreement is questioned , then the Council needs to explain what alternative it proposes .
The Commission is prepared to consider alternatives but needs to know how the Council would like to take this matter forward .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( EL ) Mr President , the function of European regulatory agencies is closely linked both to multi-level European governance and to the European strategy on better lawmaking .
The state of interinstitutional inertia which this issue has reached leads me to address the following questions to the Council and to the Commission :
First , do the basic terms and criteria for the operating framework of the regulatory agencies need to be defined or not ?
Secondly , the number of regulatory agencies appears to be on the increase , thereby exacerbating fragmentation and a lack of transparency and uniformity .
Will the Commission and the Council help towards rationalisation , transparency , democratic control and a horizontal approach to regulatory agencies ?
Thirdly , the Commission has postponed its initiative .
The European Parliament has also , in turn , formulated its positions ambiguously .
Should the institutional diplomacy of silence on the part of the Council be interpreted as the postponement of the matter ad calendas grecas ?
Fourthly , does the Council - and we expect a clear answer - consider the Commission 's draft interinstitutional agreement to be a live text ?
Fifthly , is the Commission prepared , should the Council take action , to reassess its draft and to restore it with new wording , so that it can form the basis for an interinstitutional agreement ?
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , this state of affairs is , indeed , completely unsatisfactory .
There are 21 European agencies and a confusing plethora of models , all of them impenetrable to the public and Europe 's citizens , even , indeed , to the bodies - such as this Parliament - representing them .
It is no good example of good and proper government that it should no longer be possible to gain an insight into what goes on in them .
As long ago as 2003 , we warned that new arrangements would have to be made for these agencies , and we said so again in 2005 ; another year has now gone by , and nothing has happened .
Things cannot carry on like this .
The presidency really must make the effort to establish consensus in the Council as to how it may join with the other institutions - the Commission and Parliament - in putting together an agreement on the administration and accountability of these agencies .
As has been said , we are dealing here with things that the public are interested in ; the Food Safety Authority , the Medicines Agency , the Chemicals Agency , the Environment Agency - all these have to do with things in which the people out there are interested , and if nobody has a clue as to who is responsible or how they work it is hardly surprising that people find European politics frustrating .
I have to tell the President-in-Office that what the Council is actually doing is forcing Parliament to have recourse to sharper weapons , for she will have seen how the Committee on Budgets did not release the funds for the new agencies , even though we actually want them .
The funds for the human rights agency , the Agency for Gender Equality and the Chemicals Agency , rather than being released , have been put in reserve in what is almost an emergency operation aimed at compelling the Council to clarify matters once and for all , and I hope that she will succeed in getting things moving on this front .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I think it is fair to remind ourselves what would be the position without the existence of these regulatory agencies performing a vital supervisory function at the federal level .
If they were not to exist , the Commission would need to grow one vast centralised bureaucracy and appoint an army of prefects and inspecteurs de finances to patrol the Union .
But we should develop a far less spontaneous and more coordinated approach to setting up the agencies .
They should become an example of modern European governance : consultative , transparent , autonomous and accountable .
Parliament itself should exercise a greater degree of self-restraint here and retain a dispassionate scrutiny , so that we are able to exercise our authority for the discharge .
I agree with the Commission that an interinstitutional agreement is sorely needed , but if it is blocked I would ask the Commission to consider a regulation on the basis of Article 308 .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , first may I say thank you for the comments which the Presidency has received on this issue from the various teams .
As I said in my opening speech , this autumn we have thought about and tried to find different alternatives to this interinstitutional agreement .
The particularly crucial aspects of the Commission 's proposal are its content and the issue of a legal basis .
It is absolutely essential that we create a regulatory environment and an operating framework that function successfully , rationally and cost-effectively , where it concerns practical matters as well .
We clearly need continued debate among the Member States to hone this project , and we shall endeavour to promote and fine-tune this debate throughout our presidential term .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , this could be the right moment to repeat the common set of good governance principles that the Commission wanted to include in an interinstitutional agreement to oversee and help the functioning of these agencies , because it would give a definition of these agencies and would create rules on their creation , structure and functioning , including issues of transparency , evaluation and control .
In all this discussion about the format , it is important to remember the content .
We in the Commission are ready to explore the option mentioned by Mr Duff of considering a regulation under Article 308 .
We are open to exploring that option .
However , as far as the decision-making process is concerned , the European Parliament , for example , would only have a consultative role in the content of the future regulation .
That is why our preference was for an interinstitutional agreement .
Finally , I can only express our hopes for a dialogue on these issues .
We shall continue to look for the most appropriate , effective and cost-effective method to deal with these necessary issues to try to establish some common rules and a common set of good governance principles for the agencies .
( The sitting was suspended at 5.20 p.m. and resumed at 5.35 p.m. )

As I explained earlier , the sitting was suspended because Parliament 's work was running ahead of time for the first time in this legislative period .
A Baltic Sea Strategy for the Northern Dimension ( debate )
The next item is the report by Alexander Stubb , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on a Baltic Sea strategy for the northern dimension .
This Presidency also takes note that you are desperate for a Mediterranean holiday .
We shall ask the Italian delegation to invite you down .
President-in-Office of the Council .
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament plenary part-session is this week discussing several issues to do with the sea , as it is now with the Baltic Sea strategy .
The Presidency is delighted that regional issues are being discussed as part of a wider whole .
On Monday you held a debate on the EU marine environment strategy and directive , which again are a component in the EU 's maritime policy now being prepared .
The parliamentary conference on the Northern Dimension planned for next spring is a welcome example of Parliament 's interest in Nordic issues .
Baltic Sea issues affect the eight Member States of the Union that border the Baltic , as well as Russia , very directly .
Norway and Iceland are also involved in Baltic Sea cooperation as members of the Council of Baltic Sea States .
An important shipping waterway , the Baltic Sea is important for all EU countries .
Broad , horizontal cooperation is therefore needed both within the Union and between the EU and Russia and other partners on issues of the environment , energy , traffic , training , justice and home affairs and matters of health .
The Union 's common maritime policy presently being drafted will also serve to strengthen this cooperation .
To achieve concrete results , there will also have to be more effective use made of the Union 's internal funding programmes and external relations instruments .
Furthermore , there will need to be opportunities for cross-border cooperation , which is also supported by the new Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument .
The rapporteur 's speech makes mention of the Northern Dimension , and it is proposed that the Baltic Sea Strategy is part of it , but the Northern Dimension is also a component in the EU 's external relations policy .
It covers the operating sectors in the Four Common Spaces adopted by the EU and Russia , as well as environmental , social and public health issues .
The Baltic Sea is one of the target areas for the Northern Dimension , along with northwest Russia , Kaliningrad and the Arctic regions .
One of the aims of the Finnish Presidency is the review of policy under the Northern Dimension on the basis of the decisions taken at the Northern Dimension ministerial meeting held in November last year .
The new Framework Document for the Northern Dimension was negotiated this year between the EU , Russia , Norway and Iceland .
The Framework Document and the Political Declaration connected with it are to be adopted on Friday next week in Helsinki .
We believe that the new , jointly agreed policy is likely to strengthen the commitment of partners to the Northern Dimension and to provide a firm basis for practical cooperation in the Baltic Region .
We also hope that a reinforced Northern Dimension will help clarify the work and division of labour associated with the diverse network of cooperation in the Baltic and Arctic Regions .
The Baltic Sea 's ecological state is worrying , and calls for urgent action in accordance with the principles of sustainable development .
The European Union , individual countries and international financial institutions have pooled their resources within a framework of environmental partnership under the Northern Dimension .
Several governments , organisations , in particular HELCOM ( the Helsinki Commission ) , and other players are working to rescue the marine environment of the Baltic Sea .
Northern Dimension environmental partnership projects mainly focus on northwest Russia , but their impact benefits all the countries in the region .
As a result , the Baltic Sea is , fortunately , already a crucial area for the Northern Dimension .
A key instrument in the future for improving the state of all European seas , the Baltic included , will be the EU 's Marine Strategy Directive .
Its aim is the achievement of ' good environmental status ' by the year 2021 .
It is an ambitious goal , and efforts to attain it must be started immediately .
The Finnish Presidency will try to find political consensus on the directive in the Council in December .
The Partnership in Public Health and Social Wellbeing also functions within the framework of the Northern Dimension , and this is aimed at preventing contagious diseases and lifestyle illnesses as well as reducing social problems .
A new element in the Northern Dimension is also being drafted in the shape of a Transport and Logistics Partnership .
The importance of viable transport communications and efficient logistics for economic growth and competitiveness is underlined more than ever when our economies are interlinked .
Right now the European Commission is drafting a new and wide-ranging European maritime policy , one which takes account of the economic , political and environmental values associated with Europe 's seas and coastal areas .
The Baltic Sea is one important sea area in Europe , and special attention should be paid to its special problems .
That is also true when it comes to developing the EU 's maritime policy .
This evening 's debate certainly serves this purpose .
The EU 's maritime policy will be a good opportunity for cooperation among the Member States .
This is necessary , as the special characteristics of the northern and Arctic regions and exploitation of the region 's potential will require joint research projects and technological development on the part of the EU Member States .
In cooperation with third countries typical of the region , existing international agreements and organisations are made use of .
The large number of challenges in the Baltic Sea area , such as marine conservation , safety at sea , fishing , sustainable use of coastlines and the development of the region 's maritime sector , all call for effective , horizontal cooperation .
The Baltic Sea area is a splendid opportunity to test the EU 's maritime policy now being drafted and make it beneficial to the entire Union .
The Baltic Sea issue is important , and it is a positive sign that serious attention is being paid to it in the European Union and here in Parliament .
I just have to say that some of the rapporteur 's ideas , these Ten Commandments , are already a reality .
It is beneficial and vital to the Baltic question that all the countries in the region are involved in the programme of cooperation and that they are genuinely committed to resolving the challenges that they share .
It is this kind of joint commitment that we need to strive to accomplish in cooperation on the Baltic Sea .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , the Commission is most grateful to Mr Stubb for his report , and welcomes the opportunity for a debate .
There is no mistaking his commitment and determination .
The Baltic Sea is a very important sea for the European Union , since eight of the nine countries with a Baltic shoreline are EU Member States .
It is a meeting point for the European Union and Russia .
With this in mind , the new Northern Dimension Policy Framework Document , to be adopted later this month , will have as its priority areas the Baltic and Barents Seas , Kaliningrad and the Arctic .
The new Northern Dimension policy will be the regional expression , in the North , of the EU-Russia Common Spaces , with the full involvement of Norway and Iceland .
The Northern Dimension will also have its own priorities : health and social wellbeing and the protection of indigenous peoples in the High North , as well as particular emphasis on the environment and culture .
A common new Northern Dimension policy implies that all the partners will be bound by the same goal : its success .
Accordingly , cofinancing will be the rule , particularly in a context of an increasingly wealthy Russian Federation .
The Northern Dimension should not only be project-oriented , it should ensure a continuous policy dialogue on the various challenges and opportunities .
The four Northern Regional Councils the Baltic , Barents , Nordic and Arctic Councils are important actors in this dialogue .
The Commission is grateful for the attention Parliament has paid to this policy , and particularly for its resolution of 16 November 2005 ahead of the Northern Dimension ministerial meeting .
The Commission also commends the Parliament 's initiative to call for the first conference of a Northern Dimension Parliamentary Forum early next year .
As for a Baltic Strategy within the Northern Dimension that we are discussing today , the Commission will bear this report by Parliament in mind during the discussions at the Northern Dimension event at which the new policy is to be adopted and which will be held back to back with the forthcoming EU-Russia Summit in Helsinki in the presence of the Prime Ministers of Norway and Iceland .
The Northern Dimension is an EU external policy , but it is clearly important to improve the inter-relationship between EU internal policies and the Northern Dimension .
That is why the Commission gives such priority to cross-border cooperation , which is one of the main value-added elements of the Northern Dimension .
This is indeed a field where internal and external policies necessarily meld together .
The Baltic Sea is now a Northern Dimension priority because we are concerned about its fragile environment and the increasing traffic through its waters , as is correctly highlighted in the report .
There are other less tangible threats to the citizens of the Baltic Sea region , including the fight against organised crime , human trafficking , transmissible diseases and unhealthy lifestyles .
All of these require our close cooperation with Russia , as well as with Norway and Iceland .
Furthermore , we see great potential for economic cooperation across the Baltic Sea with Russia .
These are all important objectives to which the Northern Dimension can make a great contribution and which will be elaborated upon in the future .
EU internal policies , with their own tasks and their own instruments , will of course also make a major contribution to meeting these challenges in EU Member States in the Baltic Sea region , and these should be debated in the appropriate contexts .
The Commission looks forward to using the new Northern Dimension policy to provide added value in a forum embracing Russia , Norway and Iceland in order to meet the many challenges facing the northern part of our continent .
In this context , the Commission welcomes the report by Parliament and will certainly convey the importance of the Baltic Sea region .
I will try to integrate relevant elements of this report into the implementation of the new common Northern Dimension policy .
Draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Industry , Research and Energy . - Mr President , I would like to focus on three of the issues raised in my committee 's opinion .
First , I would like to stress our view of the importance of further exploitation of offshore wind energy in the Baltic and the demonstration of different types of wave energy concepts .
Secondly , I would like to emphasise the importance of developing further cooperation with Russia .
We want to cooperate on energy matters that ensure respect for the principles of reciprocity and transparency and we want to encourage Russia to ratify the Energy Charter Treaty and the Energy Charter Protocol on transit .
We have a concern about the supply of gas from Russia to Europe .
Thirdly , we invite Northern Dimension member countries to be aware of the importance of two EU programmes in our committee 's area of responsibility : Galileo and SESAR , because we believe that the commitment of northern dimension parties to both of these would reinforce sustainable growth and competitiveness in the region .

on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - My prepared speech has been brilliantly summarised by Mr Stubb , the rapporteur , so I should simply like to put two questions .
First of all to the Minister , Mrs Lehtomäki , would she accept that , as the debate has already underlined , circumstances have completely changed since Finland first devised the Northern Dimension ?
In other words , there are now eight EU Member States , not four , around the Baltic Sea , not all of which see the Northern Dimension in the same light .
The reason , for example , that the EU-Russia embellishment process has been stalled , as we know , is that Poland has a reserve over Russia 's refusal to ratify the Energy Charter .
So would she accept that it would be very helpful at the Council of Ministers , at the preparatory phase of the Northern Dimension discussions and negotiations , first to have an internal EU discussion involving the eight EU Baltic States ?
Secondly , I am very grateful to Commissioner Wallström for her comments and for agreeing to incorporate much of the report into the Commission 's thinking about evolving and developing the Northern Dimension into the future .
But she did , I think , neglect to refer to the budget .
It seems to me that this is not a question of Parliament coming cap in hand , begging for support .
We are , after all , an arm of the EU 's budgetary authority ; it therefore seems to me logical and coherent that , if this is going to be an important element , there would be mechanisms and systems whereby , just as in other parts of the EU - EuroMed for example - we have a dedicated budget .
We should give serious consideration to this and not brush it under the carpet .
My final point is addressed again to Commissioner Wallström , and concerns communication , which is her brief .
It seems that this is an exercise which can bring a real message of accomplishment and achievement to the citizens of the EU , to show that a region dislocated completely by the Cold War can now have harmony , prosperity and stability restored .
So I think this debate should be taken out into the field , to the public , to show a real success story for the EU .
( Applause )
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( LT ) The Baltic Sea Strategy for the Northern Dimension is certainly a significant document .
It reflects the merit of Alexander Stubb , the rapporteur , and the entire Baltic European Intergroup who have worked hard on it .
The storms of the Cold War have caused larger damage to the Baltic coast than to any other sea coast in terms of political , economic and ecological damage .
We can feel it even now , when the Baltic Sea is becoming an internal sea of the EU .
The intervening Russian coast provides a great opportunity to cooperate with this country .
The region , with its population of 85 million , is one of the economically and socially strongest in the EU ; the welfare state model is implemented in many areas here .
However , differences in the standards of living among these countries are shocking , and the increase of social exclusion in some places is threatening .
This Strategy should help to overcome such trends .
Particular attention has been paid to environmental protection , economy and transportation .
All three elements of this triad are highly dependent on energy and energy security , which is violated when any one country exerts excessive potential or ambition .
Therefore , the countries in the region need a common energy market .
Even more attention should be paid to efficient energy use and to renewable energy resources .
Discussions and specific actions concerning nuclear energy are inevitable .
At the beginning of December , a power bridge will link Estonia and Finland and it must be reinforced with similar bridges between Lithuania and Sweden , and Lithuania and Poland .
The Strategy urges more rapid and firm networking of highways , railways and seaways in Northern and Central Europe .
Poland is right at the main crossroads .
If Warsaw fails to pay more attention to these projects , they will remain on paper for a long time .
The Baltic Sea is shallow and very vulnerable ecologically .
More than 60 tanker accidents and 400 illegal oil spills at sea are recorded every year .
The sea absorbs the unprocessed wastewater of a population of over a million living along the coast .
Therefore , seacoast protection zones must be established and extended , and more restrictive environmental protection standards must be applied than the ones presently provided for in the EU directives .
The European Union would like to have not merely a good but also a reliable neighbour in the Kaliningrad Region of the Russian Federation .
Georgiy Boos , the governor of the region , is treating Kaliningrad as a Russian window on Europe , as well as the EU 's on Russia .
We would like this window to be wide open to fresh winds of cooperation .
A wider opening of this window , or an opposite process , would manifest the direction that Russia is moving in .
The proposal to assign a separate budget line for funding this Strategy would demonstrate the affinity and innovation of the Baltic region .
I am convinced of its worth , since it may and must become a laboratory for new ideas , projects and innovations which are equally significant on a larger scale .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - ( FI ) Mr President , the Northern Dimension is being strengthened in a way that is gratifying .
Here in the European Parliament we presented an initiative last year on a Baltic Sea Strategy realised within the framework of the Northern Dimension , and now we have a special report on it .
It covers cooperation between the EU and its Member States , on the one hand , and cooperation with Russia , on the other .
The Commission and the Council have themselves negotiated agreements with Russia , Norway and Iceland , whereby the Northern Dimension of the Union 's external relations policy will be a policy common to these countries and the Union .
These agreements are to be signed at the end of November in Helsinki .
The Commission should draw up a proposal for a Baltic Sea Strategy , as requested by Parliament , as soon as possible .
The Strategy should cover all areas of policy and both internal and external policy .
Its preparation and implementation will require the input of all the Commission 's Directorates-General , and it should be financed out of all the relevant budget lines .
The Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe does not think it wise to have a separate budget line for the Baltic Sea Strategy .
We are now amassing budget funds for neighbouring regions in the shape of the new European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument .
No good purpose will be served in splitting it up into new budget lines , and it would not increase funding for the Baltic Sea area ; in fact it would more likely have the opposite effect .
It is of course a sexy notion that Mr Stubb has frequently spoken about , but we have to consider things from the point of view of substance , and not image .
The next step could be that the European Parliament might draft a new comprehensive report on the Northern Dimension that would take account of the Baltic Sea report now being discussed , on the one hand , and the agreements concluded with our neighbouring countries , Russia , Norway and Iceland , on the other .
I would finally like to thank Mr Stubb for his excellent levels of cooperation in drafting this report .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( LV ) Ladies and gentlemen , I would first of all like to congratulate Alexander Stubb on his excellent report .
The enlargement of the European Union to take in the Baltic States created an objective need for a revised Northern Dimension instrument .
The accession of the new Member States is opening up unprecedented opportunities .
The Baltic Sea region may become the most dynamic and competitive region in the world , and this will be a huge benefit for the entire European Union economy in helping to make the Lisbon Strategy a reality .
The Northern Dimension must become a permanent instrument , identifying the Baltic Sea region as a priority .
It is very important to strengthen its internal pillar .
If the states in the region create a common energy market and promote the use of renewable sources of energy as well as energy efficiency projects , they have an opportunity to reduce their energy dependence on Russia .
In the formulation of new energy projects it is very important to involve all the European Union Member States that are stakeholders and to carry out an international environmental impact assessment , so that we may avoid a recurrence of the current situation with the potential construction of the North European gas pipeline .
The development of cooperation with Russia is one of the Northern Dimension 's important tasks .
The Baltic States have a significant history of relations with Russia and accumulated experience that may produce good results .
At the moment Russia - which in terms of resources is one of the richest countries in the world - is in some curious way still receiving assistance from various European Union programmes .
The principle of parity and cooperation should replace such an approach .
In order for the Northern Dimension to be able to carry out its tasks , it needs a stable financial basis .
On this point , our views differ from the previous speaker , and we think that a separate budget line is necessary , to add to the existing resources from various sources .
This would make it possible to develop highly necessary infrastructure projects , such as Rail Baltica , a Baltic motorway and others .

- ( LT ) The Baltic Sea , as it has been previously mentioned today , is the inner sea of the European Union bordered by nine countries , eight of which are Member States of the European Union with the ninth being Russia , specifically its Kaliningrad and St Petersburg regions .
One third of the EU population lives in these eight Member States , contributing one third of the gross domestic product of the European Union .
Till now , the Northern Dimension was mostly targeted at the Russian regions ; therefore , supplementing it with the Baltic Sea Strategy would enrich the Northern Dimension with additional specific content .
The Baltic Sea region leads in competitiveness compared with three other EU regions : Central Europe , the British Isles and the Iberian Peninsula .
Over the last few years , the Baltic Sea region has taken the lead over other European regions in terms of such indicators as wellbeing , productivity growth and scientific innovation .
The key advantages of this region are a good physical infrastructure , qualified labour force , low level of corruption and strong research sector .
Nevertheless , the poorly implemented competitive potential of the region must be noted .
Since not a single country here has a market of sufficient size to develop necessary competitive pressure ; therefore , the solution is clear , that is to increase the integration of the region .
The European Parliament should approve an article of our resolution suggesting ( start of quote ) : ' in pursuit of transparency and consistency ( ... ) , to assign the Baltic Sea Strategy a separate budget line , most likely under the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument , where , along with the current funding of the Northern Dimension , additional funds would be provided ' ( end of quote ) .
Apprehensions about the European Commission declining to pursue this idea are groundless .
It is much more important to persuade the EU Member States , especially those outside this region , to support this Strategy , since better integration of this region presents potential not only for the whole EU becoming more dynamic and competitive , but also for resolving other EU issues , such as energy security , common energy policy and better relations with Russia .
( PL ) Mr President , the European Parliament 's resolution supports the Northern Dimension policy and defines the North Sea region as a priority area .
Since enlargement in 2004 , the Baltic Sea has virtually become an internal sea , the ' Mare Nostrum ' , of the European Union .
The Baltic region could become an example of the most dynamic economic region in the European Union , evidence of the development of a European economy based on cutting-edge technology , an economy that is modern and competitive on a global scale .
In this context , we must stress the need to protect the Baltic Sea ecosystem , which is extremely vulnerable as the Sea is shallow , its waters circulate slowly and pollution levels are high .
Particular attention must be paid to promoting innovation in the field of research and raising the issues of culture and civil society .
The Baltic Sea , which links the European Union , Russia , Norway and Iceland , should become an example of an area of peace and security .
I would particularly like to highlight the opportunities which exist for transforming the Kaliningrad rayon into a pilot region , with better access to the internal market .
These opportunities have been discussed in joint talks between the European Union and Russia .
Cooperation in the Baltic Sea region could point the way forward in this part of our continent , and mark out a way towards cooperation with Russia and other countries .
Mr President , of course we congratulate the rapporteur on his report and the points of interest it has raised , but I would not be fulfilling my role as President of this Parliament 's Delegation for Relations with Iceland and Norway if I did not express some regret at the absence of a report or a resolution that expressed the full sweep of the Northern Dimension policy .
I regret that fact because I feel that we are , therefore , neglecting the big geopolitical issues that face us in the High North that find their focus in climate change , in energy supply , in marine resources .
Of course those issues concern the Baltic hugely , but they also concern the Arctic and the High North . And if we want to bring our partner countries , Norway and Iceland , with us , then we have to reach out and not be inward-looking .
We have previously striven , as a Parliament , when we have talked about this issue , to bring the Northern Dimension away from just a ministerial level of policy .
We have striven to bring it back to parliamentarians , into the ownership of parliamentarians across the region .
I hope we will be able to do that in the meeting we seek to host at the beginning of next year .
But let me emphasise again : the Northern Dimension should not be just about us .
This year the Commission concluded a very important agreement with Greenland .
It may be a small thing , but it shows that the Arctic window is open and should remain open , and that there should be activity beyond our borders .
Next year is International Polar Year .
I hope that we will raise both our vision and our eyes to the High North and give it the focus and the attention it deserves next year within the Northern Dimension policy .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur on having prepared a good report on the future of the Baltic Sea .
When we discuss the specific characteristics of the region , however , we should not forget important factors which have shaped its character , which include historical factors , such as the stocks of chemical weapons from World War II that remain at the bottom of the Baltic Sea .
There is also the matter of a delicate ecosystem , additionally threatened by an increased volume of sea transport and planned investments , such as the construction of a northern gas pipeline , which could lead to an ecological disaster .
Before undertaking such activities , it is vital to carry out a very careful analysis of their potential influence on the natural environment .
It is also important to set up a consultation procedure with the interested parties and be prepared to amend any planned work if it turns out that it may have a negative impact on the ecosystem of the Baltic .
Ecological issues and national interests in the region also have to be taken into account when building the planned marine highway .
We need to ensure that there is equal access to Baltic sea ports and the benefits the motorway will provide .
It is also important to ensure close cooperation between the Member States in the building energy networks , and solidarity amongst the European Union Member States in their relations with Russia .
At the moment , Poland is blocking any agreement with Russia , until Russia opens its doors to our meat and agricultural products .
The European Union has responded by saying that the West has no intention of freezing for the sake of Polish sausages .
We remember the expression ' we don 't want to die for the sake of Gdańsk ' , and we all know how that story ended .
( Applause )
- ( LT ) Mr President , the report being discussed is an important step for the whole European Union .
A change in the political thinking of the New Age is coming to the fore which could be characterised by the concept of ' discovering the Baltic ' .
The Baltic Sea consists of water , its coast and bottom , just as other seas .
The Baltic waters are shallow and the worst polluted among all of Europe 's Atlantic seas .
The bottom of the Baltic Sea is already dead in many places , and whether a new Dead Sea will emerge in Europe depends on us .
This process was accelerated by many German chemical weapons submerged here at the end of World War II , including bombs and canon balls with dioxin , mustard gas and other ' souvenirs ' which are starting to pose hazards after 60 years of corrosion .
This constitutes a threat of tremendous catastrophe , both to the water and the coast .
The coast is particularly attractive for its white sandy beaches and pine forests ; the Curonian Spit is part of the UNESCO World Cultural Heritage registry .
Its beauty is a creation of nature and people ; now , people are likely to destroy it and nature is unable to defend it .
The eastern coast of the sea is populated by ancient nations not willing to submit to ecological catastrophes caused by post-Soviet capitalism .
Today , I would like to emphasise not only the responsibility of Gazprom , but also of the German Government , for the outcomes of the Russian-German agreement concerning the so-called Northern Gas Pipeline , if repositories of lethal poisons at the bottom of the Baltic Sea are affected during construction .
The European Union , which blessed the funding of the pipeline without any investigation or warranty , should take even greater responsibility for the manifold negative outcomes of this alleged ' good business ' , meaning responsibility for the outcomes of economic discrimination and the political disintegration of Europe , as well as the ecological and demographic outcomes of potential disasters .
It is good that we will adopt this initial European Baltic Strategy document and are beginning to realise the responsibility .
( ET ) In January 1990 , Finnish prime minister Kalevi Sorsa held a Baltic Sea Parliamentary Conference with the objective of developing new directions in regional cooperation in the new political situation .
Unfortunately the representatives of the Baltic States were forced to spoil the conference , since we could already clearly see Russia 's malevolent behaviour , which was tangibly expressed in the attack against the television tower in Vilnius a few days later .
We then used the platform to call the world 's attention to this danger , and other objectives received less attention .
We did , however , present a strategic plan on behalf of the Green Party .
In rereading this , I noticed that , despite the drastic political changes that have taken place , this has not improved the environmental protection of the Baltic Sea itself .
One of our recommendations was to put an end to all oil transport on the Baltic Sea .
Instead , the volume of oil transport rose threefold .
The Russian newspaper Независимая газета ( Independent Newspaper ) yesterday printed an article on the Baltic Sea gas pipeline .
The article claims that a proposal will now be made to the Baltic Sea states for the performance of the necessary ecological studies .
That is excellent , but unfortunately in the wrong order .
Attention was first devoted to political , then economic and only then to ecological conditions , as a form of decoration , as it were .
The end of the article is also noteworthy - the opponents of the gas pipeline plan to torpedo the whole operation using ammunition sunk during the Second World War .
The 6th Gas Pipeline in Urengoy apparently suffered the same fate , which was allegedly the sole reason for the collapse of the Soviet Union .
I would like to bring to your attention to the fact that all of the conditions were favourable for the timely performance of an ecological assessment in the Baltic Sea , as well as the environmental protection organisation HELCOM and eighty years of academic cooperation .
In sum : our delegation approves of Alexander Stubb 's approach , and wishes to thank him warmly for this .
We also believe that , in accordance with Stubb 's three pillars , there is no need to include the Arctic in the Baltic Sea strategy .
In our opinion , it would be worth opening - for planned work with the Baltic Sea environment , and much more - a new line in the European Union budget for this sea , which is unique in the world .
( SV ) Mr President , as one of those who first mooted , and then helped to found , the Baltic Europe Intergroup network , I have for two years had the pleasure of contributing to the work that has now led to this report .
When the EU enlarged to include ten new Member States , it became possible to reunite the nations around the Baltic Sea .
Now , the heart of the region can give the Northern Dimension its vital spark .
The EU must make use of the Baltic Sea region 's considerable potential .
The quicker the new Member States can increase their prosperity , the stronger the EU will become in relation to its neighbours .
If this state of affairs is to be brought about , active measures are required on the part of the EU .
We therefore need a practical programme from the Commission in which all the areas administered by the latter play their allotted role .
A strong Baltic Sea region is needed if issues important to the whole of the EU are to be resolved .
Through direct contacts between people , we must break down the psychological barriers between West and East .
We need a modern visa policy and better economic cooperation with Russia .
We must resolve the border disputes in the Baltic , restore the ecological balance in the Baltic Sea , obtain an end to the Russian boycott of Polish foodstuffs and do away with the up to 30-mile-long queues of lorries at the border stations in eastern Finland .
The EU is there to solve common problems .
Vetoes need not be the only way of directing attention to important issues .
A common EU strategy is therefore necessary .
It is important for the Commission to lose no time in getting to grips with this issue , and Mr Stubb 's report is an excellent basis on which to do this .
( PL ) Mr President , the Baltic Sea , which today is virtually an internal sea of the European Union , is a matter of priority for both the economy of the region and the whole European Union .
Unfortunately , the Baltic is the most polluted area of marine water in the world .
It therefore needs attention , that is to say a joint strategy and consistent collaboration between the countries of the European Union and Russia to implement this strategy .
It is therefore fortunate that an agreement on a new political declaration concerning the Northern Dimension and a strategic framework document will be discussed at the EU-Russia Summit in Helsinki , on 24 November .
When tackling the problem of the Baltic Sea , we must remember that around 85 million people live on its shores and that it contains rich and diverse animal and plant life , including many already endangered species .
For centuries , this sea has fed millions of people and given not only fishermen and their families their livelihoods , but also those engaged in other activities .
Seafaring people have also created their own culture , which we should protect with no less care than the natural environment , the beauty of the landscape and material wealth .
That is why we view the planned northern gas pipeline , and the associated dangers of chemical pollution and military mobilisation , with concern .
The Baltic Sea is a treasure which we have inherited from our forefathers , together with the duty to pass it , and its values , on to future generations .
Mr President , first of all let me congratulate the rapporteur , my friend Alexander Stubb , and my colleague Christopher Beazley for his good work as Chairman of the Baltic Intergroup .
I totally endorse Diana Wallis 's remarks about raising the EU 's profile in northern Europe .
The Northern Dimension is a wide-ranging EU policy which governs EU relations with the north-west Russian areas , including Kaliningrad , the Baltic and the Arctic Sea regions .
The Northern Dimension is implemented within the framework of the partnership and cooperation agreement with Russia .
It is conceived as a way of working with the countries of Europe 's northern regions to increase prosperity , strengthen security and resolutely combat dangers such as the environmental pollution of the Baltic Sea , nuclear risks such as those posed by the Russian submarine fleet in the Kola Peninsula , cross-border crime and the management of marine resources , amongst others .
Eight EU Member States - Denmark , Germany , Poland , Lithuania , Latvia , Estonia , Finland and Sweden - surround the Baltic Sea , and the EU 's shared border with Russia has lengthened significantly following enlargement .
Nevertheless , EU-Russia relations cannot be dictated only by relations between the Baltic states and Russia .
Our strategic partnership and our collective EU needs for energy security , as well as cooperation in the fight against terrorism and the need to carry Russia in areas like preventing nuclear proliferation from countries like Iran and North Korea , transcend regional issues such as those addressed by the Northern Dimension .
There is currently financial support from Tacis and Interreg , but shortly Russia will be part of the European Neighbourhood and Partnership Instrument , and the EU should have a proper budget line for the region .
Climate change is making the Arctic more accessible to human activities now , such as exploitation of natural resources and increased shipping , but the Arctic also has an important role to play as an early-warning sign for potentially catastrophic global climate change .
Russia 's energy exports can also be a political weapon , we have now discovered , as we saw last year in Ukraine and this year with Georgia .
Now rumours abound that Russia wishes to set up an OPEC-style gas cartel , which we must resist at all costs .
I call upon President Putin to get around to ratifying the EU Energy Charter , which would give all EU companies more access to Russian oil and gas .
The EU must also invest more in renewables and low-carbon energy , while encouraging as much diversity in supply as possible .
( ET ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , although this is a shared sea , we have given it different names , and we must admit that we have not as yet come to see it as a shared space , or used all of its possibilities .
Thus I warmly welcome the efforts made by Alexander Stubb and President Toomas Hendrik Ilves in creating this strategy .
Under the aegis of the Northern Dimension , our shared lake strategy could grow into something even bigger .
I believe that in a globalising world and a multicultural , even expanding European Union , we all seek new identities , and the Baltic Sea could play an important role here , and become a kind of symbol .
Throughout history there have been connections between the countries that surround the sea , but cooperation aimed at the development of the region as a whole would take those relations to a new level .
We would all benefit from this .
The sea itself , which today is one of the most polluted bodies of water , demands joint action .
Why indeed do we need this strategy ?
A common Baltic Sea area will not arise itself or from individual projects ; we need coordinated activity ...
( The President cut off the speaker )
( FI ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to congratulate Alexander Stubb on an excellent report and thank him for his excellent levels of cooperation .
I just wish to raise one point , and that is the amendment which Diana Wallis and I tabled on the establishment of a local office in the Baltic Sea area .
At present , the European Investment Bank operates in 11 EU Member States and 6 countries outside the EU in the Mediterranean region and in Africa .
Just one branch , the one in Poland , is located in the Baltic Sea region and in a new Member State .
By contrast , there are eight branches in total in southern Europe and the Mediterranean region .
A branch office of the EIB was set up last spring in Vienna .
It is to be responsible for projects in eastern Central Europe and the Balkan region .
But it is not the function of any branch to be responsible for projects in the new Member States , the Nordic countries or the Baltic countries .
I think that it is important to establish an office of this kind , responsible for overseeing funding operations in that region and making the Baltic Sea Strategy a reality .
The presence of such a branch office could also aid large funding projects under the EU 's Structural and Cohesion Funds during subsequent terms , and in this way facilitate cooperation in the Baltic Sea region and promote major projects there .
( PL ) Mr President , the Northern Dimension of the European Union 's external policy is not just a priority for the Finnish presidency .
It is also an extremely important aspect of Polish foreign policy and the foreign policies of seven other European Union Member States which surround the Baltic Sea .
During the last dozen years or so , the Baltic has become a region for peaceful cooperation with Russia .
If we are to maintain this situation , we need to eliminate the dangers that have appeared on the horizon today .
The main threats today are the growing dependence of the countries in the region on Russian fuel supplies and the series of unsolved problems concerning the Kaliningrad area .
Addressing these challenges is beyond the capabilities of individual countries and also exceeds those of our group of eight countries .
It is therefore vital for them to be made a priority for the European Union as a whole .
Today , 24 % of gas supplies come from Russia .
This percentage will rise in the future .
The possibility , mentioned by Charles Tannock a moment ago , of Russia creating a gas cartel is additional cause for concern .
Investments such as the Baltic gas pipeline are increasing the dependence of the entire European Union 's on its eastern neighbour .
In addition they are causing dangerous political tensions between members of the Union itself .
Today , the Kaliningrad region remains a ticking time bomb .
We are not only concerned by the level of military mobilisation in the area , but also by the social situation in Kaliningrad .
A large percentage of the population is infected with AIDS , the natural environment is being destroyed and organised crime is rampant .
Therefore , if the European Union as a whole fails to take an interest in these issues , there will be no common policy with respect to energy or to Kaliningrad .
Without a common policy we will all face failure .
( PL ) Mr President , I would like to expand on the topic of Kaliningrad , as it does represent a great challenge .
We had all hoped that Kaliningrad would become for Russia what Hong Kong was for China .
However , there are fears that it may become what Puerto Rico became for the United States .
Apart from the dangers mentioned by the previous speaker , Mr Klich , I would also like to point out a further unsolved problem , namely the fact that , 15 years after the fall of the Berlin Wall and the end of the Cold War , there are still huge stocks of weapons in Kaliningrad and no one knows what they are doing there .
The figures are available because Russia , as a signatory of the Convention on Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons , is obliged to make these figures public .
There are more tanks in Kaliningrad than in the British and French armies combined .
What exactly are they doing there ?
As I said , 15 years have passed since the end of the Cold War .
As a result , we clearly need to try to resolve this complex of problems jointly with Russia , as the entire Baltic region , and its future , largely depends on the future of the Kaliningrad region .
It is probably the most dynamic region today , and its potential for further dynamic development is enormous .
Mr President , this is a joint initiative by members of the new Baltic Intergroup , successfully chaired by Christopher Beazley , on the basis of which Alexander Stubb has drawn up a very efficient report .
I would draw your attention to its underlying ethos , which is not to create a separate region , but to open the Baltic Sea area up to Europe as a whole in the interests of all the EU Member States .
The Northern Dimension will therefore retain its present foreign policy aspect of cooperation with Russia , Iceland and Norway .
However , a very important new internal EU cooperation aspect will be added as a priority , which one might call the ' Beazley pillar ' .
This is because we need to make full use of the cooperation potential of the eight Member States around the Baltic Sea .
Various studies show that the competitiveness index in this region is one of the highest of any European region in terms of growth in prosperity and productivity , scientific innovation , physical infrastructure , a skilled labour force and even a low level of corruption .
We therefore need to coordinate our efforts to fully harness the four basic freedoms with regard to this region and so achieve a new brand for it as one of the most attractive and rapidly developing in the EU .
We therefore also need a special budget line , and this would be our contribution to the development of the Lisbon Strategy .
Finally , I would like to remind the Commission of the first commandment , which is that the Commission should now take the initiative on the basis of this report .
- ( LT ) Mr President , I was prepared for a completely different speech , but I am captivated by the Commissioner 's idea that we must focus on the issues of an unhealthy lifestyle in the Baltic region .
The geopolitical importance of this region has been ignored for years , yet the Baltic region acts as a driver of modernisation enabling development of Northern Europe to the Arctic .
Because of this region , the modernisation of Russia became possible ( if one is aware of history ) .
Because of this region , Finland gained its strength . ( It is a pity that the Finnish Minister is not taking part in such an important discussion . )
Therefore , the significance of the region has been constantly downplayed .
In my opinion , this report is an opportunity to thank Alexander Stubb for his efforts to give some impetus to the Baltic region , which is actually a driver of modernisation in Northern Europe , and in this case could even be a driver of modernisation for the entire European Union .
I would also like to second the idea of Mr Beazley that this project matches the key activity of Parliament to bring decision-making closer to the people .
I hope the Commission will keep this in mind as well .
( PL ) Mr President , I believe that the Baltic Sea will increasingly unite , rather than divide , the countries of this region , by establishing and promoting economic ties , whilst respecting the political rights of these countries , and preserving its natural heritage .
However , this will not be possible if certain economic interests are promoted at the expense of others , without respect for the principles of good neighbourly cooperation , solidarity and shared responsibility .
A case in point is the construction of the Northern gas pipeline , which has been mentioned here several times , and is an investment that was made without consulting partners from the Baltic region .
We have to ask ourselves what our aims and priorities are in terms of closer cooperation within the group of eight Baltic countries .
On the one hand , we proclaim the need to protect the ecosystem of the Baltic Sea , while on the other we fear an open and honest debate on the environmental issues associated with the construction of the gas pipeline .
I would like to remind you that , last year , 60 Members of this House tabled a motion for a debate on the environmental aspects of building the gas pipeline .
This debate never took place .
The presidents did not include it in the agenda .
I would also like to inform the representatives of the Council and the Commission that Russia is hindering free travel on the Baltic Sea by not permitting ships to pass through the straits between the Vistula Lagoon and Kaliningrad .
This means that the port of Elbląg , which was recently renovated with European Union funds , is dying because it has lost access to the open sea .
It seems that the unilateral interests of Russia , which has its army base on these straits , have been given priority .
The Baltic strategy has highlighted these dangers , and that is why I would like to thank Alexander Stubb for his report .
He can count on our support for the aims he seeks to achieve .
I would also like to thank all the members of the Baltic Intergroup and its leader , Christopher Beazley , for their commitment .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , I have my own personal Northern Dimension , being born in the north of Sweden , so I am sure that my colleague Mrs Ferrero Waldner would have had an easier time keeping a cool head in this debate !
I have very much enjoyed listening to this discussion on the Baltic Sea Strategy and to whole debate on the Northern Dimension as a whole .
Part of challenge is to ensure that the Baltic Sea Strategy is one that embraces all the important elements , and not just those connected to the Northern Dimension .
I am confident that the new Northern Dimension policy , with its future shared ownership by the European Union , Russia , Norway and Iceland , will substantially benefit the Baltic Sea region because none of the challenges faced by the Baltic Sea can be tackled without genuine Russian involvement , just as none of the challenges faced by the Barents Sea can be dealt with without Russia and Norway .
Let me comment on just a few specific issues that have been raised .
Firstly , regarding the Baltic Sea , investment decisions must of course be taken by investors , but the Commission 's viewpoint has been that it is very important that proper environmental impact assessments are made for the implementation of the project , and we have not favoured one route over the other .
On the Kaliningrad oblast , this has of course been a priority sector for the Northern Dimension policy and will remain so .
It is also an area of particular attention in our bilateral relations with Russia .
The transit regime has now been successfully implemented and has been notably facilitated through very substantial EU assistance , on which the Commission expects to present its report by the end of the year .
Also , although the transit regime is an important issue , we should not forget that the key to success in Kaliningrad will be strong economic development in the oblast , supported by the EU in a harmonious manner with the Russian programmes for this territory .
Improved economic growth in Kaliningrad to reduce the gap with its immediate EU neighbours would help eliminate the long queues at the border .
At the same time , EU investments in border crossing infrastructure will continue .
That is how we are engaging with this very important issue .
As demonstrated by the very important opening of the St Petersburg south-west waste water treatment plant last year , with its tangible beneficial effects in water quality in the Gulf of Finland , cooperation and cofinancing with the Russian Federation is possible and it pays dividends both to their citizens and to ours .
The forthcoming large Northern Dimension environmental partnership projects in the Kaliningrad oblast combine with Tacis projects in the water sector in this same oblast to confirm these premises .
Furthermore , membership of the Northern Dimension as regards our EEA partners , Norway and Iceland , also provides a northern pan-European character to this policy , which we should welcome .
Finally , I would like to add to what Diana Wallis said .
Canadian and US involvement also gives the Northern Dimension a transatlantic and circumpolar value that we should maintain .
Let me also comment on the budget .
In the Commission 's view , the proposal in the report to set up a separate budget line for the Baltic Sea Strategy actually entails some risks .
It would go against the logic of simplifying the EU 's external financial instruments .
The European neighbourhood and partnership instrument would be the natural tool with which to accompany implementation of the Northern Dimension policy , but other financial instruments will also have a contribution to make .
We cannot afford to neglect any of the Northern Dimension components and we should use all its potential and synergies in full .
The European neighbourhood and partnership instrument will provide new opportunities , particularly in the field of cross-border cooperation which , together with a larger contribution from a more prosperous Russia , and a notably larger availability of European Investment Bank funding for this area , will provide the right incentives and improve the well-being of the citizens of the whole of Northern Europe .
Thank you , Commissioner .
I should also like to thank the rapporteur , Mr Beazley and all the speakers .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
( ET ) Ten years without review and re-assessment is too long , even for a long-term strategy .
The Northern Dimension initiative obtained its impetus and direction during Finland 's last presidency .
Now Finland once again holds the EU presidency .
In the intervening time , the Baltic Sea region has changed beyond recognition .
Russia is now wealthy enough to buy up energy infrastructure throughout Europe .
The Kremlin is once again self-confident , even aggressive .
The Baltic States are now Member States of the European Union , and the Baltic Sea is our internal sea .
The Baltic Sea region is now the most competitive region in the world , mainly due to the success of the Scandinavian countries .
In order to maintain its position , it is of the utmost importance that the region also function as a whole in its expanded form .
The report by our colleague Alexander Stubb emphasises the need for a definite strategy for the Baltic Sea .
The implementation of the strategy presupposes financing , and thus a separate budget line for the Baltic Sea strategy is unavoidable .
Without a budget line , the entire strategy would be no more than empty words .
The financial side of the Northern Dimension consisted only in providing aid to Russia .
European Union funds were able to significantly reduce the danger of nuclear and conventional pollution from Russia .
Now it is time to move ahead , concentrating on harmonising the level of development of the Baltic States and the Scandinavian countries .
Internal security , the safeguarding of nature , transport and infrastructure must be brought up to the Scandinavian level .
The relatively small markets of the Member States must be integrated .
There is much work to be done , and the sooner we begin , the better results we will be able to achieve .
The implementation of the European Security Strategy in the context of the ESDP ( debate )
The next item is the report by Karl von Wogau , on behalf of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , on the implementation of the European Security Strategy in the context of the ESDP .
Vice-President of the Commission .
The Commission welcomes this comprehensive report , which demonstrates the importance attached by the European Parliament to the European Security Strategy and more generally to the field of security .
As you know , this is not an area where the Commission leads , but we make an important contribution to security in situations of crisis .
I agree with the rapporteur that we need to act on the basis of a comprehensive concept of security in today 's security environment and that both external and internal security aspects need to be adequately addressed .
We need to use all available instruments , be they civilian or military , be they in the hands of Member States or the Union , to achieve our goals in the security sphere .
And , as stated in the Commission 's communication of last June entitled ' Europe in the World ' , we need to enhance coherence , effectiveness and visibility through a pragmatic and cooperative approach .
Let me assure you that the Commission will continue to cooperate with the Council in full respect of our respective institutional responsibilities .
I am encouraged by recent efforts in the EU amongst Member States , the Commission and the Council Secretariat to work more closely together on achieving the goals of the European Security Strategy .
Let me mention some examples : the development of the concepts of security sector reform and disarmament , demobilisation and reintegration , as well as concrete actions in Afghanistan and in the Democratic Republic of Congo ; the border assistance mission at Rafah and in Moldova , and the planned mission to Kosovo .
The new instruments introduced within the context of the 2007-2013 financial perspectives will facilitate better coordination .
The Stability Instrument , in particular , with its short- and long-term orientation , will help us respond flexibly to upcoming challenges , while going some way towards meeting your demands for better parliamentary oversight in the security field .
The Commission has been actively developing policies to confront main security threats and to promote effective multilateralism .
Commission work has focused on , amongst other issues , the Neighbourhood Policy , the effectiveness of development assistance , humanitarian aid and civil protection .
Drawing lessons from the experience gathered so far , we will soon make proposals for a reinforced ENP .
The report also refers to various initiatives taken by the Commission in the fields of disaster and crisis response , including health emergencies .
The report welcomes the Commission 's work on creating a European defence equipment market and specifically the forthcoming initiatives on defence procurement and intra-community transfers .
We are grateful for the Parliament 's continued support in this delicate area .
Progress here will help to strengthen the competitiveness of European industry and the development of military and civilian capabilities for EU policies .
The Commission is particularly grateful to the Parliament for the support concerning security research and space policy , which are already specific thematic priorities of the Seventh Framework Programme .
We fully agree on the importance of research for competitiveness .
In these areas , the Commission is working closely with the European Defence Agency with a view to ensuring complementarity and synergies for the development of capabilities and the strengthening of the European industrial base .
The Commission and the European Defence Agency together have a key role to play in moving from a national to a European approach and in convergence between security and defence industries .
We will do this within the limits imposed by the current institutional framework and clearly stated political positions concerning research for civilian and defence purposes by fully respecting the civilian character of the European Security Research Programme .
In conclusion , I would like to stress that the reports by Parliament are most welcome , as are the joint meetings of the Committee on Foreign Affairs with the corresponding committees of the national parliaments and the public hearings .
Regular stocktaking can be helpful in guiding our efforts to adjust our strategies to a changing environment .
The Commission is pleased to contribute to these debates by giving full information on its activities as part of the overall EU effort .

Mr President , Madam Vice-President , I would like to say how much I appreciate the Vice-President 's presence here today , which demonstrates the importance that the Commission attaches to security and defence policy , while the Council 's absence from a debate on it can - if one puts a favourable gloss on it - be interpreted to mean that the Finnish Presidency is , now that the pillar structure has been put in abeyance , on the way to accepting that security and defence policy , too , has become a matter for the Community .
Were it not for the fact that I subscribe to this favourable interpretation , I would be very angry at their absence .
This foreign , security and defence policy is becoming increasingly important , and I would like to thank Mr von Wogau for this report and also the Security and Defence Sub-Committee for the work that it has done , which highlights the truly decisive field into which developments are leading us .
When one considers the effort we put into securing our energy supplies , or the situation around Iran , the changes that may well occur in American policy in Iraq and Afghanistan following their elections , or the debate we had this afternoon on Gaza ; not to mention the things that are going on in Darfur and in other regions , where some are buying raw materials while others campaign for human rights and then hold great summits in Beijing and Shanghai , it is not difficult to realise that this issue is going to be of increasing importance to Europe , and that is why it is necessary that some efforts be made .
It is only if we Europeans become more credible in terms of our military capacity that we will be able to get the trans-Atlantic alliance to seek to rely not merely on military might , but on the threefold chord of prevention - which takes precedence - combined with civilian crisis management and military capacity .
We will be able to achieve that only through our strong position within what is termed the West , and that is why we must also make it our concern to strengthen our links with NATO .
I would be glad if , instead of a multiplicity of individual operations with national headquarters , there were to be political agreement that these would run more on the basis of ' Berlin plus ' , for that would mean not only a more Community-based approach , but also , at the same time , more common purpose and cooperation with NATO .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , let me say something quite brief about the view our Socialist Group in this House takes of what has emerged from the committee .
There are three things that we regard as important .
First of all , there is the need to reinforce the diplomatic and civil elements of the security strategy .
Secondly , there is the need to avoid the traps that might leave us with an unfounded military doctrine ; the text contains no terms such as ' pre-emptive ' or anything of the sort .
Thirdly , the instruments and the institutional requirements must be kept absolutely separate .
We regard these as important advances , and it proved possible to make progress on these points by means of good cooperation with the rapporteur , for which I am grateful .
From a social democrat point of view , however , there still remain a few controversial items outstanding .
We can see the risk of the procurement wish lists getting longer and longer as Christmas draws nearer ; we ought to be concentrating on the priorities we have already set ourselves , such as air transport , information and communication .
We do not actually need to aspire to amphibious motor vehicles , a Mediterranean fleet , and aircraft carriers , which hinders us from going after the things that really are important priorities in terms of the strategy .
The question must also be asked as to whether the last-named examples belong in some quite different context rather than in the security strategy .
On the other hand - although we will be endorsing most of the amendments that add precision to the parts of the text that have to do with diplomacy , civil society and disarmament - we do not believe that crisis prevention must , under all conceivable circumstances , involve the use of exclusively non-military means .
The reality we face today has already changed , and the rapporteur made reference to that .
We have sent troops to Macedonia in order to prevent the outbreak there of a civil war similar to those that have broken out in other states belonging to the former Yugoslavia .
In the Congo , we used not only civilian means , but also sent a contingent of troops , in order to ensure that the elections there could be held in peace , and I am confident that this contingent will be able to return home at the end of this month .
As I conclude this intervention , I should like to return to the point that the rapporteur made at the very outset and was quite right to highlight , namely that the analysis of the threats and of the action taken under the security strategy need to be reviewed on a regular basis .
Once the report has been adopted , the next thing we should do is to discuss how we , in this House , can organise this process .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I wish to begin by warmly congratulating Mr von Wogau on his excellent report , which offers an accurate and comprehensive survey of the current line of thinking of the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Subcommittee on Security and Defence .
I also want to thank him for the efforts he made to reach the broadest possible agreement with the other political groups .
While this clearly means that my group will approve the report , I would like to stress two particular points .
The first point is the need to ensure effective parliamentary control , both at national and EU levels .
The EU , as has been said , is currently engaged in a growing number of military and civilian operations in various parts of the world .
I insist on the need for Parliament to be continually updated and to be informed and consulted whenever a new operation is being contemplated .
Until now , all these operations have gone well , but it is entirely possible that one day a major incident will occur and there will then be widespread clamour for parliamentary oversight .
Secondly , much greater clarification of the respective roles and responsibilities of the Commission , the High Representative , the Council and the Member States is also needed .
Who pays what is too often decided on a case-by-case basis , which again makes oversight difficult .
This is conducive to overlap and waste and , worst of all , also leads to outright competition between , for instance , the Council 's special envoys and the Commission 's delegations .
Both the Council and the Commission will of course deny this is the case , but a number of us know better , even if , luckily , such competition is not the general rule .
Finally , what is needed most of all is political will on the part of Member State governments and that , alas , is an entirely different story .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , it is a matter of good manners in this House that one starts with warm congratulations to the rapporteur , and , while I am happy to do so , I also have to say that I am deeply saddened not to be able , for the first time in two and a half years , to recommend that my group approve a report - unless , that is , our main amendments to it are accepted .
I want to justify that firstly by reference to the report 's content , and secondly on grounds of form .
What is fundamental is that a great deal of the report - as one Member has pointed out - reads like the armaments industry 's shopping list , but such a thing cannot be sustained under the title of ' European Security Strategy and ESDP ' , which refers to far more complex concepts .
That being so , the report is not a comprehensive concept , but rather the very opposite of one .
I take it that that was the reason why the rapporteur 's own group tabled 45 amendments , which is a considerable figure .
When one looks at the report in detail , it is clear that what it is attempting to do is to blur the boundaries laid down by treaty between internal and external security .
Europol is covered by the ESDP . The intention is that the ESDP should be used for the purpose of combating terrorism , and for the protection of infrastructure , the energy supply , and of the external borders .
Combining police , military and judicial functions in this way is a blatant violation of treaties currently in force , and it also gives rise to additional security problems ; it is the very approach taken by President Bush , Dick Cheney and the now-departed Rumsfeld .
Homeland security modelled on US security policy has already failed and there is no need for us to copy it .
Secondly , the report gives the impression that there is no such thing as the civil arm of the European Security and Defence Policy , even though most of the 17 ESDP missions are civilian in nature .
Nor is sufficient reference made to civil conflict prevention , yet that is precisely what is needed right now .
Thirdly , instead of going into detail about the defence market , it would have been timely to speak plainly about Europe 's security and about disarmament - both conventional and nuclear - yet the subject occurs nowhere in the report .
Fourthly , I would like to look at the question of what military goods are to be purchased : aircraft carriers , satellite communication systems - all these things are asked for , with the justification given being that we are becoming a defence union .
What sign is there here , I ask you , of a realistic assessment of what we now have to do ?
We have to work towards harmonisation ; we have to compel the nation states , in the interests of all , to harmonise their strategies , structures and equipment , but the idea of us being a defence union is somewhere over the rainbow .
It always used to be the Greens who were fundamentalists , and it is quite astonishing that you have now gone that way .
As I see it , the resolutions adopted at Cologne , Helsinki and Feira have been turned on their heads , and , if I were a schoolteacher , I would give you nought out of ten for missing the point .
I regret to have to say it , but this amounts to an attempt at remilitarising European foreign policy .
In committee , we had negotiated a consensus , and it was the rapporteur himself who broke it at the last minute .
That is an unfair way of going about things , and something we cannot accept .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the Greens appear to be learning .
The chairman of the security and defence sub-committee has produced a report on military policy in the EU .
The report has now been wrapped up in social democratic cotton wool , its language - originally unmistakeable - robbed of its punch .
It is evident that no place could be found for the statement in the draft to the effect that the EU ought , under certain conditions , to be open to the concept of pre-emptive warfare ; that sort of talk was , no doubt , too plain .
The report makes the mistakes usually associated with a militarised EU foreign policy .
It incorporates a risk analysis of the European Security Strategy , according to which the principal threats faced by the European Union and its citizens are international terrorism , the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , regional conflicts , failed states and organised crime .
What about poverty , hunger and social inequality ?
The report speaks up for military border surveillance - aimed against whom , I wonder ? - and for the use of military means to secure access to resources .
The EU wants to develop a strategic partnership with NATO ; the report ' welcomes NATO 's increasing capability of playing a role in out-of-theatre operations ' - and that in a report from the European Parliament !
It also calls for a considerable strengthening of Europe 's operational capacities , including air and sea transport , and the conflation of civilian and military is taken still further .
The report amounts to a catalogue of demands aimed at the further militarisation of the European Union - demanding , among other things , more money for crisis operations , which will have to be found from the Community budget , which means new financial arrangements .
After the games played on us with Athena , what is now being proposed is the introduction of a virtual military budget .
We all know that the Treaty of Nice , quite rightly , outlaws any freestanding military budget for the EU ; that is why attempts are being made to resurrect the deceased EU constitutional treaty , for as it says , ' stresses the importance of the Treaty establishing a Constitution for Europe , which will bring about major progress towards a Security and Defence Union ' .
It is for precisely that reason that we are opposed to this Constitutional Treaty for the EU .
What is being called for here is the EU as a military union .
There are those for whom making the EU a military union is a goal , and paragraphs 51 and 52 of this report read like their wish list , with new weaponry and more money to buy it and enable the EU to be a military global player around the world .
That is the wrong way to go about things .

The EU is currently involved in at least 11 military and police operations around the world , and more are in the pipeline ; the list now includes Afghanistan , where NATO troops are killing more and more civilians , and now the EU wants to join in the carnage as soon as possible , when what is needed - and now ! - is for the troops to be brought home from Afghanistan and elsewhere .
The European Union has no need of more armaments ; it needs to be a civil power .
What is needed is disarmament , and it is needed right now .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , in the early 1950s Jean Monnet proposed a European Defence Community , with a European army run by a European Minister for Defence , a common budget and common arms procurement .
This project was thankfully rejected by the French after President de Gaulle opposed the idea .
Undeterred , Jean Monnet and his acolytes pursued the idea of a European political union by economic means rather than by defence and military means .
Over 50 years later , we have a European Union which has almost completed its political agenda : it has its own President , its own cabinet in the shape of the Commission , its own Parliament , a single currency , flag , anthem and Court of Justice , just to name a few of its attributes .
However , if it is to be a real state it must have its own military forces , and that is what this report is about .
The report calls for a common equipment and equipment procurement policy and for integrated command and control and communication systems .
What better way to ensure the integration of Europe 's national military forces than by ensuring that they will begin so interdependently that they will not be able to operate independently .
The militaristic pill is sugared , however , by reference to humanitarian operations and crisis management .
However , call it what you will , it is an army , and if war is the continuation of politics by other means , then the European Union needs an army to pursue its foreign policy ambitions .
I am not surprised that Mr von Wogau pursues political integration by these means .
He believes in political integration and is open about it , and I respect him for that .
What disgusts me is that Britain 's Prime Minister , the liar Mr Blair , and his rotten and corrupt Labour Government collude with the process of integrating Britain 's armed forces into the planned European army , while pretending to defend Britain 's national interest .
Luckily , you are over call-up age , Mr Batten , so it will never affect you .
( The sitting was suspended at 19.20 and resumed at 21.00 )

Membership of political groups : see Minutes
The implementation of the European Security Strategy in the context of the ESDP ( continuation of debate )
The next item is the continuation of the debate on the report by Mr von Wogau on the implementation of the European Security Strategy in the context of the ESDP .
Madam President , I would like to thank the rapporteur for presenting a comprehensive analysis of the current problems of the European Security Strategy and for evaluating threats to the modern world .
One example of these threats : in paragraph 10 the report stresses a need for a major EU contribution to promote regional disarmament .
I would like to draw attention to the Kaliningrad area , a heavily militarised Russian enclave within the EU .
To continue pretending that this last vestige of the Cold War and Soviet expansion is something with which we have to accommodate would be dangerous and absurd .
Therefore the demilitarisation of this area , which should be followed by making Kaliningrad a pilot project and opening it up to free trade , should be one of the topics to be raised at the forthcoming EU-Russia Summit .
The von Wogau report clearly presents our final objective .
We are on our way to a Security and Defence Union .
However , it also reminds us that the EU is still a long way from this goal .
We are just noting progress , increasing capacities and looking for additional money .
There are some problems we need to be very clear about .
We need to establish a common market in the field of defence , to provide for a European budget to cover both the military and the civil aspects of security and to intensify cooperation between the EU Defence Ministers , with the final goal of creating the post of Deputy EU Foreign Minister in charge of the ESDP .
To that end , it is essential to avoid duplication of efforts and to coordinate all these activities with NATO .
There is an urgent need to provide the same access to space-based intelligence systems for all Member States on a common basis .
( CS ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is often said in Europe that there is a crisis of public confidence in the European project and in European politics .
There is no such scepticism when it comes to security and defence policy .
As public opinion polls have shown , more than two thirds of the Europeans support this policy and take the view that the risks and dangers associated with terrorism , organised crime , regional conflicts and the spread of weapons of mass destruction require a joint , Europe-wide solution .
Mr von Wogau 's report calls for a joint solution , and for elements of the European security and defence policy to be strengthened .
I wholeheartedly support this call and the efforts to establish EU security and defence .
The proposals for creating an internal market for developing , manufacturing and purchasing arms , a shared communication and media system and European civil defence mechanisms are among many that I consider to be steps in the right direction .
Europe needs a joint approach to the security risks and threats it faces and Mr von Wogau 's report outlines such an approach in a way that is both realistic and outstanding .
( DE ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , European security and defence policy has great challenges ahead of it , and the EU must not close its eyes to them .

What is certain is that the future will see the EU taking on more and more international commitments , and the disturbing developments in the Middle East , in North Korea and in Iran are harbingers of this trend .
What we need is effective decision-making machinery , a clear command structure , no doubt about who is empowered to do what , competent personnel capable of being deployed quickly and kitted out with modern equipment , and the logistical capacity for getting troops quickly to where they are going to serve .
The von Wogau report demands these things , and also contains proposals for their improvement ; it is for these reasons that we will be supporting it .
Over recent years , the ESDP has achieved some progress ; the battle groups will , with effect from 1 January 2007 , have become fully operational , and the Foreign Relations Council , meeting yesterday , noted that there had been further improvements in the quality of equipment used by the Member States ' armies .
The European Defence Agency makes a valuable contribution towards the harmonisation of the armaments market and the coordination of joint research projects in the security and defence sphere .
It has to be said , though , that the planning of EU mission off-budget is on the increase , and this is still a disturbing trend .
An increase in the number of missions presupposes that they are legitimate in democratic terms , but that cannot be guaranteed if their finances are planned without reference to the European Parliament , which results in an unjustifiable lack of transparency .
The report contains refreshingly clear proposals as to how this may be prevented , and these , too , we can fully support .
I would like to add that I believe we should be conducting this debate in Brussels rather than in Strasbourg .
( ES ) Madam President , the drawing up of the European Security Strategy was influenced by three great debates of an international nature : the debate on the new threats that had to be faced and on how to face them , particularly following 11 September ; that on the problems faced by the United Nations as a universal and multilateral forum for preventing and managing disputes ; and that on the commitments to be made by the European Union in order to become a more active , capable and coherent actor at world level .
The European Security Strategy therefore points out that the greatest challenges that the European Union and its citizens must face today are international terrorism , the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction , regional conflicts , failed States and organised crime .
I naturally agree that those problems are important .
I fear , however , that this list does not place sufficient emphasis on other aspects that I believe are just as important , if not more so .
I am talking , for example , about poverty , the lack of a global justice system , the collective criminalisation of groups and communities , the increasing militarisation of the planet , the plundering of the basic subsistence resources of the poorest countries by the rich countries , the pollution of the environment and the destruction of social ecosystems .
In this regard , I do not believe that the European Union always offers the most appropriate response , in either political or structural terms .
Hence , for some time we have been hearing arguments in favour of creating a single European army , for example .
Nevertheless , that army is usually seen as an addition , or , if you like , a complement , to the 25 existing armies , and not as a replacement for them , as I believe it should be .
Though we apparently agree that , in order to deal with the current challenges , numerous armies of a national nature are no longer necessary , we still have a European Union with 25 national armies , whose personnel amount to some two million people , whose main duty is to defend the Member States ' borders and interests and which jointly cost more than EUR 160 million per year .
Furthermore , these are figures that many of us would like to see dedicated to the prevention and management of conflicts .
In short , the actions and decisions of the governments do not currently appear to be consistent with the change of attitude towards security that we have been seeing recently , particularly at European level .
( EL ) Madam President , the report describes in the clearest and most revelatory manner the nature of the European Union as an imperialist union of European monopolies which is being militarised .
The so-called ' European security strategy ' has nothing to do with a security strategy for the people ; it is an undisguised aggressive imperialist policy which moves in two directions .
Firstly , towards going along fully with the USA and ΝΑΤΟ in criminal action against the peoples and , secondly , towards the construction of the European Union 's own mechanisms to strengthen its military power , so that it is also in a position to take military action and intervene on its own .
Its objective is to secure a better share when the markets are divided up .
This policy is based on the principle of preventive war , on the adoption , to all intents and purposes , of the new NATO military doctrine for imperialist interventions throughout the world , on the pretext of combating global threats , terrorism and interruptions to the flow of natural resources , the imposition of democracy , crisis management and the principle of preventive strike .
It announces that the imperialist interventions of the European Union no longer have any limits to their action .
Their scope is extending to the entire world .
It indirectly adopts the model of the imperialist interventions in Yugoslavia , Afghanistan and Iraq , in other words imperialist war on various pretexts , such as the weapons of mass destruction in Iraq that were never found , followed by occupation and reconstruction .
This enriches the imperialists by plundering the wealth of the peoples .
It also promotes the creation of rapid intervention forces and deliberately links military and civil missions , baptising military interventions ' humanitarian ' .
It even links the external security of the European Union with the creation of a European constabulary and policy force , with the militarisation of the borders and a military approach to immigrants and refugees .
It even increases funding for military purposes with hidden budgets .
For the workers , however , there are starvation wages and permanent austerity .
In promoting this strategy , the aggressiveness of the European Union is intensifying and escalating , both towards third countries and within it .
The enemy is the people .
Efforts to strengthen the military power of the European Union are linked to the efforts to strengthen it in the imperialist competition and within the frameworks of competition between the war industries .
The effort to show that , apparently , the European Union is distancing itself from the US imperialist policy in Iran is brazen deceit of the peoples .
The excitement about Guantanamo and CIA flights and abductions on European territory is hypocritical , given that it follows the same imperialist policy and , at the same time , strengthens operational cooperation with ΝΑΤΟ .
The peoples must be concerned about and must act against the arming , militarisation and terrorism of the imperialists .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Madam President , I would like to warmly congratulate you on the report on European security policy .
It is an excellent report which , in my opinion , requires no further amendments .
In particular , it does not require any amendments which would deprive the European Union of any military significance in the world .
If it wants to play a greater role in the world , the European Union must be able to have an effective military presence , not only on its own borders , but also in other parts of the world .
This will not be achieved by simply creating a defence agency and harmonising armaments .
We also need to convince European public opinion to support greater defence spending that would be in line with our ambitions .
Europe has proved that it does not abuse military power , so pacifist fears in this respect are unfounded .
In fact , we should instead fear for our political and military ability to take responsibility for global security .
The creation of a European security policy should not aim to copy NATO , our main , tried and tested defence policy instrument .
Neither should our strategic autonomy upset our political and technical cooperation with the NATO powers .
In fact , the Western world , which stretches far beyond the borders of the European Union , has a right to expect from us a real contribution towards cooperation and synergy in terms of our joint activities .
The report presented this in a well-balanced manner , and that is why we will gladly support it in tomorrow 's vote .
( PL ) Madam President , today 's debate on the implementation of a European Security Strategy is one of the more important debates concerning the future of the European Union .
It is a step towards adopting some of the solutions contained in the dead constitutional treaty .
The proposal to create the post of a European Foreign and Defence Minister is a threat to the interests of many Member States .
Germany 's agreement with Russia was a fine example of European solidarity in the field of energy .
It is very typical and should be viewed as a warning sign .
It makes sense that the Union needs an instrument to exert military influence on its immediate surroundings .
However , any attempt to take on military responsibility for global security would represent an attempt to replace NATO or , to be more precise , to weaken the United States ' influence in Europe and the world .
There should be no competition between NATO and the European Union in the field of security and defence policy .
It must be stressed that NATO has a significantly more important role and capabilities than the armed forces allocated to the European Union .
Of course , there are members of the EU who are not NATO members , and we have to find a way to involve them in matters relating to European security .
This kind of cooperation should take place within the framework of cooperation between the national armed forces of the Member States .
We do not need to create new command headquarters , but simply to allocate parts of national armed forces to cooperate in specific actions .
However , it is vital to create a coherent European system in the field of intelligence , crisis response and the monitoring of economic threats .
It is for the national governments and the Union to monitor how individual Member States are prepared for terrorist attacks or whether they have an appropriate territorial defence system .
Moreover , the Union should deal with security in its immediate surroundings and not try to exert a global influence and become involved in local conflicts around the world .
Madam President , I have consistently opposed EU meddling in the defence sphere .
European countries are responsible for their security through their own efforts individually and through NATO collectively , and that is how it should remain .
The European Union has moved on to defence territory , not because it adds defence capabilities , because it does not , but because there are those who wish to see the EU acquire more State-like attributes and become a global actor , pursuing its own distinct foreign policy objectives .
To do this , it wants the full range of foreign policy instruments at its disposal , including armed forces .
This report , however , goes well beyond the immediate ambitions of even those who drive ESDP at the moment .
It advocates a Security and Defence Union and wants the EU to have its own defence budget .
Heaven help us if those responsible for the common agricultural policy , the common fisheries policy and all the interfering and counterproductive over-regulation of our lives were to have a role in organising our defence .
These unacceptable proposals for a Security and Defence Union , for an EU defence budget , are enough in themselves to ensure the opposition of the British Conservative delegation , but the international context in which this report is being debated makes it doubly objectionable .
NATO is currently engaged in a vital operation in Afghanistan .
It is no exaggeration to say that the success of this mission is indispensable to NATO 's future and to our own long-term security .
The Alliance has repeatedly called for reinforcement of this Afghanistan mission with combat troops , tactical lift helicopters and indeed with forward civil reconstruction efforts to consolidate the military gains that are made .
With some honourable exceptions , the response from European allies has been pitiful .
I have no doubt in my own mind that ESDP is a distraction from NATO and is part of the problem .
At this time of threat to the democracies , when solidarity is needed , it is disastrous for Europeans and Americans to have competing strategic visions , or indeed to have two defence organisations with overlapping membership , making competing claims on the same limited resources .
( PT ) I wish to congratulate Mr von Wogau on his ambitious report .
It is a report that recognises that , in spite of the progress that has been made in the area of Europe 's security and defence , much remains to be done .
I agree with what Mr von Wogau said in the Chamber today : the process of building a Union of security and defence has the potential to bring us closer again to the citizens of the Union .
The figures from Eurobarometer are clear : 77 % of Europeans support a European security and defence policy .
Even in the United Kingdom , the country of Mr van Orden and of some of the most vocal Eurosceptics in this Chamber , support stands at 59 % .
Yet this report is limited in scope .
Although it boldly proposes the creation of a European budget for the Union 's military activities , advocates strengthening the role of the European Parliament and national parliaments in scrutinising Europe 's security and defence policies and rightly calls for the advances proposed by the Constitutional Treaty not to be cast aside , this report limits itself to reiterating support for the initiatives put forward by the Council and the Commission in vital areas of industrial integration and the creation of a European defence equipment market .
It is disappointing that this report does not go further . I am firmly in favour of introducing the principle of European preference in the area of the procurement of defence equipment .
What is at stake in the long term is the EU 's strategic autonomy , and Parliament has thus far been unable to present its own vision in this area .
Madam President we must not let ourselves be blinded by the dogma of the market .
It is crucial that , following the lead of our friends and partners around the world , we do not forget the strategic and political implications of this sector of industry .
Madam President , this is the first serious review of the European Security Strategy by Parliament , but we are much less clear about NATO .
We say that NATO is responsible for our collective defence and a forum for transatlantic relations .
We do not say what we would do if NATO fails to achieve peace in Afghanistan .
NATO is not supposed to be defeated .
NATO has suffered from an absence of clear strategic reappraisal since the end of the Cold War and it suffers from continuing poor collaboration with the European Union .
Parliament should not be so shy of a critical scrutiny of NATO , without which our grip upon the development of the European Security and Defence Policy will always remain fanciful .
( SV ) Madam President , during my two years here in Parliament , I have come across many reports dealing with everything under the sun .
However , the report we are now debating is the worst I have seen so far .
Mr von Wogau proposes now one thing and now another , but the main theme is that of militarising the EU by developing the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
He wants to extend the scope of the European Security Strategy .
This would open the way for pre-emptive wars of the type we are seeing right now in , for example , the Middle East .
Mr von Wogau also believes that military efforts in the field of crisis management should be funded out of the EU budget .
In other words , it would be taxpayers in , for example , neutral Sweden who would pay for military operations around the world .
Among the more fanciful proposals is that of setting up a standing naval force in the Mediterranean Sea to take care of the EU 's security interests in the region .
To top it all , the rapporteur also emphasises the need for a Constitution , because this would speed up the creation of a Defence Union .
When , in 1995 , Sweden joined the EU , many Swedes were sceptical .
That the EU might become militarised was precisely one of the concerns dismissed by EU groupies as being completely unwarranted .
Today , slightly more than ten years later , we see that this is by no means an impossibility .
On the contrary . I , for one , do not want to see my three sons and other young Europeans participate in an EU army , and I therefore call on my fellow Members to vote against this report in tomorrow 's vote .
( PL ) Madam President , Mr Solana 's 2003 strategy is an excellent document .
It accurately describes the threats and challenges we face , as well as clearly describing the specifically European response which has become the calling card for a European security and defence policy .
In this respect , it does not seem necessary to update this document .
After all , NATO has been using the same strategic concept since April 1999 .
This is the only point on which I disagree with Mr Karl von Wogau 's proposal .
The value of this report lies elsewhere , in the prospects it outlines for the ESDP .
It is the result of a frank appraisal of the current civilian and military capabilities of the European Union , and Karl von Wogau states that ' The European Union currently has at its disposal only a limited capability for implementing civilian and military operations ' .
Karl von Wogau also draws the right conclusions from this assessment .
First of all , he calls for intensive cooperation between the European Union and NATO .
Secondly , he calls for the Union to focus its capabilities on our immediate geographic surroundings .
The rapporteur is aware of the cause of these limited capabilities , since he mentions the lack of strategic air and sea transport , interoperational telecommunications systems and intelligence capabilities , especially in relation to satellites .
These comments are by no means new , as these deficiencies have been with us since at least the first Capabilities Commitment Conference in 2002 .
In my view , however , the report 's biggest asset is to be found in the long-term perspective that Karl von Wogau outlines for the ESDP .
He moves beyond the boundaries of operational targets , in other words beyond 2010 and beyond the terms of the Constitutional Treaty .
This outlook involves the creation of a security and defence union .
We must not lose sight of this objective .
It is , and should be , the guiding light for the next steps that need to be taken to develop the ESDP .
Madam President , I would like to begin by quoting the results of the Eurobarometer survey , according to which 70 % of European citizens are in favour of a European Security and Defence Policy .
The citizens of the European Union seem to have a better idea of the challenges of our time than the Council representatives , who are not present in the plenary Chamber in Strasbourg tonight .
The European Security Strategy should focus on the most important aims in terms of creating a common Security and Defence Policy for the European Union .
Above all , we should call for a new generation of satellite systems to be integrated into the European system and for the data gathered to be made available to the military and the police , as well as for the purposes of disaster management , using the satellite centre in Torrejón .
Intelligence remains one of the most important areas of this strategy .
Secondly , the rapid response groups being set up now must be provided with intelligence and communications equipment that is the same as , or at least compatible with that used by NATO .
Madam President , I congratulate Commissioner Frattini for staying on board for so long .
Perhaps he is excited about the next season at Ferrari , with Kimi Raikkonen driving for them .
Sorry , Mr Duff , I know you do not follow Formula One !
I should like to make five points .
First point : I support the report .
I think it is excellent .
There is only one thing I think goes a little over the top and that is the idea of a European Defence Minister to supplement our Foreign Minister .
We will wait for the Constitution to start with one and then perhaps have the other .
Second point : this concerns Mr Van Orden , who unfortunately has already left .
He raised a lot of problems about the relationship between NATO and the EU .
I always tell Mr Van Orden that he should get a life .
If we have the Constitution all those problems will be solved , but alas , he is probably not in favour of the Constitution .
Third point : I think the strategic interests of the EU and the US are exactly the same and this report shows that very well .
That is why I think we need to try to solve our problems hand in hand as Mr von Wogau suggests .
Fourth point : I think the biggest structural problem that we have between ESDP and NATO is that our cooperation does not really work in the way it is supposed to .
As a former civil servant , I think that the relationships are too much staff-to-staff , in other words too many civil servants dealing with civil servants .
Perhaps we should make the relationship political and thus get a result .
My final point is that I think the strength of the ESDP is its diversity .
If we only focus on the civilian aspects of crisis management , we are cheating ourselves .
The question is , do you accept ethnic cleansing , for instance ?
If your answer is no , we also need a military aspect of crisis management .
So therefore I support the report with all my heart .
I think it is excellent .
( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to thank Mr von Wogau for this report , which is comprehensive , pragmatic and also courageous .
I share the view - one held by 70 % of Europe 's population and most of the people in this House - that the only response to the major threats facing us , from terrorism to failed states , that ultimately promises any success is that of a European Security Strategy .
I also share the rapporteur 's view that such a strategy must be constantly adapted if Europe wants to remain in future an area of security , freedom and prosperity .
Since there is hardly likely to be , in future , much support for increased military expenditure , we need to make more efficient use than hitherto of the means and resources at our disposal , and that is why the European Security and Defence Policy needs common standards , shared research and development and a single system of procurement .
There is a need for a single system of air and space reconnaissance and shared telecommunication standards .
There is a need for strategic cooperation between the forces deployed in the fields of external and internal security .
What is evident from present-day deployments of troops in the Congo is that , although their dedication has yielded successes , there are just as many deficits to be dealt with .
We all know that the EU , although an economic giant , continues to be a dwarf in security policy terms , but if it wants to become a political union , it must stop being a security dwarf and abandon national animosities in favour of something holistic and bigger .
It is for that reason that the Community needs a security policy that is also to be funded by the Community , with Parliament sharing in the decision-making and monitoring it , and with a political head in the person of a deputy foreign minister .
It is to this road that this report points , and that is why it is not only courageous , but also forward-looking in the interests of a secure Europe for its citizens .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Written statements ( Rule 142 )
I welcome the report which correctly reflects our opinions on the evolution of ESDP in the future .
ESDP should further enhance its civil-military character ; the best combinations of all assets and instruments are able to offer us the optimal stabilisation result in the field .
The aim is to stabilise a crisis management area with a better perspective in the long run .
In this way , we should not be inspired by the military model of NATO , but be able to develop our own approach as is the case in Congo .
Belligerents trust us more since EU is not driven by a leader nation with political arrière-pensées and its decisions are taken through transparency rules .
Rapid reaction in movement and transport is a common challenge for all EU operations regardless of their nature .
Europe should better explore the use of and synergies among its civilian transport assets .
Europeans are leaders in civilian air and maritime transport and such advantage should also serve our rapid reaction in crisis periods .
Multi-modal planning , optimal combination of different type of assets ( air , sea , helicopters , rail ) and better use of civilian assets need to be integrated into our concepts of how we conduct operations .
( PL ) Madam President , whether the aims presented in the Security Strategy are achieved largely depends on the ability of the European Union to implement this document , which will , in turn , lend the European Union credibility in terms of a serious security policy , and make it a body capable of taking decisive action in crisis situations .
At the moment , we are facing many challenges in the field of foreign policy , such as the conflicts in the Middle East , military missions involving soldiers of the Member States and the emergence of new world powers such as China or India .
In these times , it is vital to strengthen our Common Foreign and Security Policy .
To make our Common Foreign and Security Policy more effective and efficient , we need to take key steps today and provide answers to the fundamental questions posed by the rejected Constitutional Treaty .
We also need people and institutions to conduct this policy .
This includes creating the post of an EU Foreign Minister , greater financial resources , better analysis of key problems and coordination of the policies of the Member States .
It is important to create our own pool of skills in the field of humanitarian operations , peacekeeping and pacification missions and crisis management .
The security of the Member States of the European Union can be assured by having an effective , multi-faceted system and a stable region .
Implementing the Strategy will largely depend on the will of the Member States and the diligent fulfilment of the responsibilities assigned to them .
Actions such as the adoption of a legal framework , an implementation timescale and commitments in the field of external relations will , in themselves , not be enough to create an effective system for preventing and combating threats .
Succession and wills ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mr Gargani , on behalf of the Committee on Legal Affairs , with recommendations to the Commission on succession and wills ( 2005 / 2148 ( INI ) ) .
rapporteur . - ( IT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , let me say straight away that , in relation to the measure before us , there are in the European Union between 50 000 and 100 000 cases of succession due to death , and this is a measure that is likely to become the reference in issues of international law .
Transnational succession is an extremely wide-ranging phenomenon , and it comes up against an increasing number of difficulties stemming from profound differences between the system of private international law and the substantive law systems of the Member States .
That often results in obstacles to the freedom of movement and the enjoyment of the right to own property .
The Committee on Legal Affairs , which I have the honour of chairing , has therefore decided to take the initiative to make successions in Europe simpler by using the power granted to it by Article 192 of the EC Treaty , and to call on the Commission to adopt a legislative proposal .
Since we , ladies and gentlemen , unfortunately do not yet have the power to initiate legislation like all our counterparts in the national parliaments - that is an observation that I always make - I turn to you , Commissioner Frattini , and , with the strong backing that I am sure the qualified majority vote will give me , I call on you to carry forward an important request of ours in the interests of Europe 's citizens .
You are aware that , for beneficiaries to take possession of an estate , they currently have to start proceedings in all the countries where the property is located .
This is not only a costly and laborious process , but , since the transmission of property by inheritance is a special way of transferring ownership , it is associated with emotional and personal aspects - highly complex interpersonal relationships that even transcend legal arguments .
I should like to mention a very personal recollection from my youth , when I was at university : Professor Cariota-Ferrara , who had done his thesis on inheritance law , used to say that inheritance law was a law about emotions , a law that often involved suffering .
Hence , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I am convinced that our proposal will make a real contribution to creating a Europe of the citizens .
I am grateful to the committee , which debated this issue at length and thoroughly examined all aspects of it .
I truly believe that what we are putting before Parliament is a very important proposal that represents a step forwards for both political Europe and the citizens ' Europe .
I therefore call on you to adopt this report , and I also ask Commissioner Frattini to do so on behalf of the citizens of Europe .
The report we are proposing includes measures aimed at ensuring that there is one applicable law and one competent court .
Applicable law and competent court should generally coincide , and the criterion for establishing them is also objective : the habitual place of residence of the deceased at the time of death .
Individual freedom of choice is not ruled out , however : people making a will may choose which law should govern the whole succession , either the law of their own nationality or the law of the country in which they are habitually resident at the time the choice is made .
Similarly , should disputes arise , the parties may choose the applicable law and the competent courts .
I should like to say a few words on a key point that I consider the cornerstone of our proposal . The report proposes the introduction of a legally binding European certificate of inheritance , which will set out the law applicable to the succession , the beneficiaries of the estate , the persons responsible for administering the estate and their powers , and the property comprising the estate .
The certificate will be drawn up according to a standard model and will allow the property inherited to be recorded in the public registers of the Member State in which the property is located .
Mrs Berger has carried out a more thorough investigation than the others precisely on this proposal and has tabled five amendments . In this respect , I must say that I am particularly concerned that the certificate should be compulsory , consistent and legally certain .
Indeed , if that is not established , I think the whole structure of the provision will be adversely affected , and it will become less effective and rather less of a reference .
Not all the countries in the EU may take it into account , and it will end up being a consultative measure rather than a mandatory one .
In any event , that is likely to diminish its force , which should lie precisely in its legal certainty and its ability to reach all citizens , so that they can have a real chance of receiving their inheritance by means of these instruments .
In my opinion , the other amendments should be rejected , and in that respect I should like to appeal particularly to Mrs Berger to think again and perhaps to withdraw or recast her amendment in order to make this proposal more incisive .

Madam President , Mr Gargani , ladies and gentlemen , firstly , I would like to sincerely congratulate Chairman Gargani and the Committee on Legal Affairs for having drawn up a proposal which , if it is approved by this House - as I hope it will be - I will not hesitate to transform into a legislative proposal .
I too would like to begin with an observation .
We have worked for a long time to gauge the opinions of legal operators , of experts in the field , and , above all , of the citizens of the European Union , on the possibility of having an instrument clearly identifying the applicable law and therefore making it easier to create a real European area in the sector of succession and wills .
Well , from the results of a survey conducted by Eurobarometer in July 2006 on the various aspects of family law in Europe , it has emerged that , on average , 80 % of Europeans believe that recognition of succession and wills within the whole European area is necessary .
There are , obviously , countries in which the consensus on this matter is even stronger : in Germany , for example , one of the great founding countries , and in Latvia , a smaller country , 92 % consensus was recorded in favour of this kind of legislation ; in my own country , Italy , the figure was 88 % , as in Hungary .
There has therefore been a wide response , showing that , on average , four fifths of Europeans are in favour of facilitating European regulation on succession and wills .
In March 2005 , the Commission published a Green Paper on the subject , which has enabled us to gather hundreds of responses of great interest from academics , the legal profession and operators in the field .
We have also gathered many good ideas from the hearing on transnational successions , which Parliament had the excellent idea of organising .
Among other things , I can inform you that the Commission has , in turn , organised a public hearing on the same topic , to be held on 30 November .
It will give us an opportunity to collect further ideas , which , I believe , together with Mr Gargani 's report , will enable us to submit a legislative proposal in the near future .
The last subject on which I would like to comment briefly is that already touched on by Chairman Gargani , namely that of a European Certificate of Inheritance .
I share the rapporteur 's view that , if we want a truly effective European instrument in this area , it must have binding effect within European territory .
In this regard , many of you will remember other instruments of private international law on which we have reached an agreement .
If a certain instrument , once adopted in one Member State , could be called into question every time in the other Member States in which it is to be applied - if it is not binding on them , in other words - one of the foundations of the area of free movement of decisions would be jeopardised .
Obviously , the objection could be made that a certificate of inheritance , as such , is always binding , since otherwise it would not be able to certify situations .
However , I believe that in this case it would be appropriate to emphasise its binding nature , as we are creating , perhaps for the first time , a useful instrument for resolving the problem of movement among European citizens that is also shown through the recognition of wills , that is the problem of succession and wills .
Allow me therefore to say in advance that I agree entirely with Mr Gargani .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( ES ) Madam President , Mr Gargani has presented us with a report that expresses the Committee on Legal Affairs ' desire for the European institutions to take action in the field of succession law .
Commissioner Frattini has stressed that 80 % of European citizens believe that succession law must be regulated and recognised in a harmonised fashion throughout the European Union .
We are not talking about theories , but about the realities affecting people who live in different countries or who have families in different countries and who , when succession takes place , find themselves in an absolutely desperate situation .
Unfortunately , the European Union 's Treaties do not provide for the possibility of harmonising the substantive law on succession .
This is something that will probably have to be put right in the future , since it makes very little sense that the consequences , the legal system and the rights of inheritors should change entirely as a result of moving a few kilometres and depending on whether a person is established in one country or another .
For the time being , the Committee on Legal Affairs , by means of the report by Mr Gargani , is restricting itself to telling the Commission that it is necessary to begin to propose actions of a legislative nature .
Commissioner Frattini has indicated that the Commission is in favour of doing so .
We will probably not be able to go much further at the moment .

We in the Committee on Legal Affairs have discussed the merits and the content of the proposals that Mr Frattini includes in the annex ; there are certain amendments tabled by my Socialist colleague , Mrs Berger , which are intended to correct some of the defects noted in that annex , but the most important thing of all is that the Commission is prepared to make practical proposals , as Mr Frattini has indicated in this House .
We cannot improvise on this issue , since we must work on the basis of our experience .
Anybody who has had to deal with an international succession issue within the European Union will have found themselves faced with huge difficulties , above all in terms of jurisdiction .
We should probably begin to deal with the issue from the point of view of jurisdiction , the competences of courts and the recognition and effectiveness of decisions , removing the exequatur procedure , as Mr Gargani recommends , which makes no sense in the European Union .

I therefore hope that Mr Gargani 's efforts and Mr Frattini 's contribution will make it possible for us soon to have practical proposals on the table for the development of Community law in this field .

on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Madam President , on behalf of my Group , I would like to welcome the Green Paper , and thank Mr Gargani very much for his report and all the work that has been done on it in terms of consultation .
It really is welcome .
This is clearly an issue that affects an increasing number of our citizens and that we have to address , but it is not a simple issue .
When one thinks about how terrible it is for any individual to have to deal with bereavement and then adds to that the difficulties of dealing with some sort of transnational legal situation , it is clearly an area that we have to try to tackle in order to make life easier for our citizens , having encouraged them to be mobile in the way that we have .
But the legal problems that this raises touch on subsidiarity .
They touch the culture of our different legal systems very deeply .
But it is clear that if we are to tackle the problem , we need , as Mr Gargani has said - and I think my group would also underline - to move towards a binding European certificate of inheritance .
That has to be our first goal , to have free circulation of such a binding certificate , in the same way as we have free circulation of ordinary judgments .
It is going to be difficult though because , as I have said , it touches matters of public policy within our various countries .
It touches matters of taxation law .
But I commend the report and hope that the Commissioner will be able to take it forward to a legislative instrument .
( DE ) Madam President , the rapporteur - and chairman of our committee - deserves thanks for his report and also for having been willing to take on board a number of my amendments following the debates in committee .
I think today is a good day for a subject that is not exactly fun : death and inheritance .
Having adopted the services directive at second reading , thank heaven there was no derogation for funeral services , which is what many had wanted .
Tonight we are discussing European initiatives in the field of inheritance law .
Right at the outset , I would like to clear up a misunderstanding , since it is evident that a technical error has cropped up .
I am not seeking to make the certificate of inheritance anything less than binding , but only to delete the words ' unless and until proven otherwise ' ; on the contrary , indeed , far from wishing to do away with the certificate of inheritance 's binding effect , I want to reinforce it .
Since I shall be clarifying this with the House services , it might perhaps be possible , under these circumstances , for the other groups to vote in favour too .
I hope that Amendment 3 is now acceptable .
We are proposing as a starting point a residence period of at least two years , for people should not suffer unexpected legal consequences as a result of short-term relocation , while we do not want to make it easy for someone to evade his own country 's inheritance law , to the detriment of his family members , simply by moving elsewhere .
I would now like to put the case for my other amendments , which provide for the certification of conformity .
Since Recommendation 1 testifies to our desire not to interfere in Member States ' procedural law , I see this examination of conformity as going against the principle of non-interference not only in the Member States ' material law , but also in their procedural law .
I trust that these explanations will help the other groups to support our amendments after all .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Women in international politics ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Gomes , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality , on Women in international politics .
rapporteur . - ( PT ) Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish to express my gratitude for all the contributions that I received from all political groups in drawing up this report .
These contributions improved the report substantially .
The presence of women in international political life has increased .
Take , for example , Chancellor Merkel , President Bachelet and President Johnson-Sirleaf and Prime-Ministers Han Myeong-Sook of South Korea and Diogo of Mozambique .
Indeed , the EU Presidency is currently headed by a woman , Mrs Halonen . Yet closer inspection reveals that the female presence in politics remains unsatisfactory , both at world and European level , including within each Member State .
Gathering data for this report was not easy , and that tells its own bleak story .
At global level , in spite of the declaration and the platform for action adopted in Beijing , and in spite of the Millennium Development Goals , only ten out of the 191 Member States of the United Nations have a woman as Head of State or Government and only 16 % of members of parliament around the world are women .
In the UN , of the 91 envoys or representatives of the Secretary-General only nine are women .
In spite of Resolution 1325 of the Security Council , adopted six months ago , the composition of international bodies and missions involved in conflict prevention continues to be characterised by inequality .
Three weeks ago , the Security Council held a debate on women , peace and security in order to gauge progress in the implementation of Resolution 1325 .
All agreed that there remains much to be done to translate good intentions and positive words into action .
What emerged from the debate were recommendations to involve more women in peace missions and thereby to improve the operational effectiveness of these missions .
There was also a call for an urgent change of culture in the office of the Deputy Secretary-General for peace-keeping operations .
Our report contains similar recommendations .
I now turn to the situation in Europe .
Despite Resolution 2025 , and others from this Parliament , and despite , too , the Lisbon Strategy , the composition of the European Commission is not yet characterised by gender parity . Furthermore , out of 107 EU third-country delegations , only seven women are currently serving at the level of Head of EC delegation .
In the Council , there is only one woman among the 14 personal representatives of the High Representative for the Common Foreign and Security Policy .
This despite the abundance of qualified , experienced and capable women in the Member States and in the European Institutions .
At practically all levels of decision-making apart from the top , there are signs that the glass ceiling is starting at least to bulge , if not to break , because it is indeed only at the very top echelons of European power that women remain scandalously under-represented .
At national level , I wish to highlight the pioneering example of the Zapatero Government in Spain .
In a world in which the political machinery has a history of blocking women 's involvement in political and economic power , this is a model example , which demonstrates that democracy characterised by gender parity is possible and depends a great deal on clear political leadership .
The conclusions of this report are simple : action must be taken to redress inequality of opportunities at European and national level in all fields : for example , the UN and its Secretary-General , by means of a human resources policy that ought to act as an example to the world , and the EU , by means of support to international women 's networks and human resources policies ensuring the balanced presence of men and women in positions of political and economic decision-making .
In this connection , I welcome the fact that the Council has just sent a questionnaire to the Member States to gauge the level of implementation of Resolution 1325 .
National governments must also encourage more women to apply for political positions at national , European and international level and must ensure that electoral systems produce democratic institutions with balanced representation ; no democratic institutions should have fewer than 40 % and more than 60 % of either sex .
Quotas and other mechanisms designed to redress the balance , currently necessary for women , may become necessary for men .
Without parity of representation , democracy is incomplete and does not work properly .
In this regard , laws and measures contributing towards a better home and working life balance have a vital role to play .
Lastly , political parties should promote women 's involvement by setting quotas and establishing other mechanisms for redressing the balance , including specific training for women to embark on a career in politics .
The impetus for change also depends on the quality of party political leadership .
Take my country , Portugal , for example , where women have only been allowed to become , for example , judges , diplomats and armed and security forces professionals since the fall of the dictatorship in 1974 . These are careers that could provide many more candidates of both sexes for all kinds of European and international missions and posts .
Since 1974 , there has been extraordinary progress in the presence of women in these careers , yet this progress does not extend to the top of these fields , for example in government or party political decision-making .
It is abundantly clear that the glass ceiling effect is in operation , in spite of the overwhelming presence of qualified women in universities , public administration and the world of work as a whole .
A parity law governing the electoral lists of the political parties has recently been adopted and practical results are expected .
On the path we must follow , numbers should not be our prime concern .
Rather , we must recognise and highlight the qualitative difference made by the political representation of women in defining government agendas , in conflict resolution , in transparency and in presentation of accounts ; in other words , in reinforcing the rule of law and democracy .
Vice-President of the Commission . Madam President , I would like to start by congratulating the honourable rapporteur for this excellent report .
The Commission works hard to promote gender equality both within and outside the European Union and in this regard the European Parliament 's sustained commitment to these issues is vital .
The world needs women leaders at all levels , be it in local communities or in international politics .
Women and men must participate on equal terms in the drafting of agendas that affect us all and in the development of solutions to the problems we are facing .
However , if we look around us , what do we see ?
Men still make most of the decisions .
The main examples given in your report clearly demonstrate that the picture is not ideal even for our European democracies and , as you correctly point out , further efforts are needed even inside our respective institutions , the Commission and the Council , to achieve a better gender balance .
Stereotypes and discrimination persist , biased recruitment and promotion systems are rampant , labour market and educational segregation hinder women in achieving their full potential .
One of the core factors remains the imbalanced division of work and family responsibilities .
While the competence to act in this field remains at national level , I am convinced that the Commission can bring real added value by promoting awareness-raising , information gathering , research and analysis , networking and dissemination of best practice .
This role of the Commission is clearly reflected in our March 2006 Communication ' Roadmap to Gender Equality ' . The future European Institute for Gender Equality will also help keep the issue high on the European agenda , collect and analyse data , conduct research and disseminate good practice .
One priority of the roadmap is promotion of the participation of women and men in decision-making processes .
Considering that negative gender stereotypes are strongly related to the unequal representation of women , we have chosen their elimination as another key objective for our programme .
Amongst the Commission 's strategic actions for the next five years , the establishment of a European network of women in economic and political decision-making can be highlighted , as well as awareness-raising campaigns , data collection , analysis and exchange of good practices involving all stakeholders to combat gender stereotypes .
The roadmap also includes the promotion of gender equality outside the European Union .
As an example of our action in the external policy field , I would like to mention the Five-Year Action Plan on Gender Equality being signed today in Istanbul by Ministers from the 35 countries of the Euro-Mediterranean Partnership .
Women 's political participation is one of the key pillars of today 's Action Plan that will be supported by a regional project starting in 2007 .
Through the European Initiative on Democracy and Human Rights , we fund several projects promoted women 's empowerment .
As examples I would like to mention the regional project in West Africa aiming at enhancing women 's participation in five countries of the region , the regional project in Latin America , seeking to enhance the democratic participation of young people , particularly girls , and the projects undertaken in Egypt , Jordan , Nigeria , Morocco and Kyrgyzstan to empower women to actively participate in political life .
It is useful that a reference to elections is included in the report .
In that context , the Commission has already incorporated the gender perspective into the election observation methodology and women 's participation is systematically monitored throughout the Election Observation Missions .
A good example of this can be seen in the European mission recently deployed to Yemen .
As you know , the Commission has a strong and long-standing commitment to mainstream gender across the board in our external relations .
Since 2001 , the ' Programme of Action for Mainstreaming Gender Equality in Community Development Cooperation ' has given us a framework within which we have implemented an extensive training programme and developed political tools .
In 2007 , in cooperation with the United Nations and the International Labour Organisation , we shall be launching a new capacity-building programme , this time directed principally at our partner governments , civil society and other programme-implementing partners in third countries .
A specific thematic focus of this programme will be the promotion of women 's participation in peace building , along the lines of United Nations Security Council Resolution 1325 .
Finally , it is clear to me that , although progress has been made , tremendous efforts are still needed to progress towards gender equality and women 's effective participation in the political sphere .
In that respect , the Commission is committed to continuing to mobilise all the instruments available .
Pressing issues include the following : first , we need a stronger gender focus in electoral , constitutional , legal and judicial matters .
We need to enhance our support of women 's active involvement in defining and implementing policies at national level .
Secondly , companies need more women at board level to ensure that the widest possible range of thinking , perspectives , experience and abilities is brought to bear on high-level decision-making .
Third , overcoming gender stereotypes in education , training , the labour market and in the media remains an important challenge in all countries .
Finally , to achieve gender balance in decision-making , men must be mobilised and fully involved if we want to move ahead .
Family-friendly policies for women and men , such as more flexible working arrangements and quality childcare facilities , can be of much help .
Madam President , the initiative by Mrs Gomes to draft a report on women in international politics is praiseworthy because , as the Commissioner also pertinently observed , comparisons of the numbers and figures she presents - from Nobel prizewinners to the number of women who have reached key positions in international politics in the Member States or in international organisations - illustrate the lack of female participation .
It is incontestable that a democratic society must be represented in a worthy manner by both men and women and that equal participation should start with training and early initiation into the secrets of politics for men and women , without gender discrimination , and with the possibility of linking professional employment in international foreign politics with family life .
Alongside the rich action and promising plans of the European Union , the Gomes report would retain its value and topical nature if it did not include references to specific national governments and if it did not present lists of countries which have taken measures which cannot be evaluated merely by being referred to .
The participation of women as a mere physical presence on the international political stage is not enough .
On the contrary , it must be due to qualifications and abilities evaluated independently of their sex .
The constitutions and laws of the Member States should support the principle of equal treatment and the parties should promote worthy men and women without discrimination .
Is this not , however , a question of subsidiarity ?
Can we dictate the composition of the UN ?
We shall not therefore support these specific points of the report .
I do , of course , congratulate the European Commission on its efforts and the European Parliament should support the principle of equality and promote commensurate numbers during the composition of its directorates , delegations representations and delegations .
We shall only support the specific points of the report to which I referred .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( HU ) Madam President , the balanced participation of women in decision-making is one of the main challenges of a policy of equal opportunity .
This matter also figures on the upcoming action programme on equal opportunities .
This effort must be brought to fruition in all spheres , including external policy , to name but one . For equal opportunity cannot be restricted to the territory of the European Union .
We must promote the presence of women in political life around the world .
Our views remain voices in the wilderness if they are not accompanied by the necessary political will .
For this reason , it is important that at the March Summit six prime ministers , namely those of the Czech Republic , Denmark , Finland , France , Hungary and Sweden , approved the European Pact for Gender Equality , which extends the perspectives of equal opportunity to our collaboration with the Commission as well .
This will , hopefully , provide further possibilities both for women 's advancement in the workplace and in the creation of a suitable work-family balance .
My fellow representative has done excellent work , and I propose that we approve the report .
( SK ) I understand why , as a former diplomat and as a woman who has been involved in politics for years , Mrs Gomes has proposed this topic , and I congratulate her on it .
I fully support the idea that the equal and full participation of women in the political process and in decision-making should fully reflect the true make-up of society .
Such participation is important for future generations and for the proper functioning of democratic systems .
There is no doubt that equality between the sexes in terms of dignity and responsibility fully justifies the rise of women to public positions .
Genuine support for women in politics requires a clear acknowledgement of their value as mothers and their role in the family and this applies in relation to all other public functions and professions .
In addition , these functions and professions must be closely interlinked if we want social and cultural development to be genuinely and fully humane .
Let us be honest .
Women are always deeply involved in life 's difficult moments , where they make great peacemakers and mediators par excellence .
We certainly need to do much more to ensure that the conditions under which women and mothers live and work do not result in any discrimination in the world of politics .
In the future , women will be increasingly involved in the serious , hotly debated issues of the day .
It is unusual to see a strong social presence of women in all areas , as women are naturally opposed to a society organised exclusively on the basis of efficiency and productivity , and they insist on redefining these systems in a more humane way .
In conclusion , I would like to express the wish that all women who are active in politics may become preachers of a new feminism , capable of appreciating and expressing the true talents of women in all areas of social life , without being tempted to imitate the models created by our male counterparts .
And these are talents aimed at overcoming all forms of discrimination in public administration and in political parties .
( IT ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , five days ago the United Nations celebrated the 60th anniversary of the creation of the UN Commission on the Status of Women .
On that occasion Kofi Annan stated that the world is finally starting to grasp that there is no more effective tool for promoting development than the empowerment of women and girls , empowerment , says Annan , that raises economic productivity , reduces infant and maternal mortality , improves nutrition and promotes health .
The concept of empowerment , first developed by the European Union , was launched with great impetus by the Fourth United Nations Conference on Women , the Beijing Conference , eleven years ago .
The time has come to revive the idea of empowerment by organising a new world conference .
In this report we call on the United Nations once again to convene the Fifth World Conference , and we do so with one voice , the European voice , representing 25 , soon to be 27 , members of the United Nations out of a total of 191 members , a group carrying significant weight .
This is one of the follow-up actions that we call for in voting for this thorough and balanced report , on which we congratulate the rapporteur .
( EL ) Madam President , it is clear from the previous speeches that there is a lack of participation by women in the exercise of international politics , a record lack you might say , in comparison with other political sectors .
I therefore thank Mrs Gomes , who has given us the opportunity to debate this issue once again .
Firstly , because it is a very important issue from the point of view of equilibrium and democracy in the modern world and is a particular dimension of the efforts to achieve equality , justice and , of course , prosperity , as we have already heard .
The second reason is because this dimension is not usually included in the strategies for equality applied by the Member States and the European Union does not , of course , have the competence to impose it , although it could promote it more bindingly and more effectively .
The current situation is not satisfactory , as we have heard , nor are the forecasts optimistic , given that , according to surveys , globally we could exceed a level of 30 % in the participation of women in national parliaments alone after 2040 .
We therefore need to take a good look at ourselves and to apportion blame honestly , to recognise that simple truths and fundamental values are not being applied in practice as a result of the lack of awareness-raising of and information for society and , of course , the lack of political will in all the agencies , each for its part , as stated in the report and in the amendments tabled by my political group .
To close , I should like to comment on our responsibilities in the institutions of the European Union .
Both the European Commission and the European Parliament should routinely include in their external relations the dimension of issues of concern to women and should seek balanced participation , both in their speakers in external relations and in the composition of their delegations .

( PT ) I wish to begin by congratulating Mrs Gomes on her excellent report , which addresses a most topical and relevant subject . Women remain under-represented in both national and European political life , and this is no less true of the European Parliament .
It is incomprehensible that there should be more women than men in universities and increasing numbers of women with masters degrees and doctorates , and that at the same time it is rare to find women in positions of political decision-making or economic power .
When they reach a certain level there is always a glass ceiling blocking their path .
Parity is a vital element of democracy itself .
Experience has shown that a quota system has led to a more equal , and in turn , a fairer and more harmonious , society .
The Member States must adopt laws that guarantee parity .
I should like to conclude , Madam President , with a rhetorical question . How different would the world be if it were governed by a female majority ?
Would Europe not be different , too ?
( SV ) Madam President , I should like to begin by thanking Mrs Gomes for a quite excellent report .
This issue is extremely important from the perspectives of both gender equality and democracy .
More than half of Europeans are women .
The fact is , then , that it is also important from a democratic point of view for women to participate as fully as men in the political decision-making process .
European policy on equality is based on welfare - something that we must treasure and on which we need to build further , for there are now major deficits where both equality and welfare are concerned .
It is a question of being able to combine private and professional life .
We are concerned here with the unequal distribution of family responsibility and with discrimination in employment and professional education .
We must help each other so that women too are enabled to participate in the political process .
A country in which power is not divided equally between men and women is not a welfare state in which all are equal .
In the long run , such a state is good for men too but , in the short term , men need perhaps to give way a little and allow women a little more room .
In spite of political statements , recommendations , action programmes and special legislation at national level , women are still under-represented in politics .
What is needed if we are to have equality ?
I believe , unfortunately , that the only solution is to employ quotas and legislation , which should not be needed .
If men were to take part in the work to promote gender equality , this major problem could be solved .

( ES ) Madam President , we know that international conflicts affect women in particular : the majority of refugees and displaced persons , for example , are women .
We must be aware , however , that it is not women who take the decisions that lead to these situations because , as Mrs Gomes 's extremely interesting report makes very clear , there are practically no women in the places where decisions are taken on international policy , despite the recommendations of the Beijing Action Programme and Resolution 1325 of the United Nations Security Council and despite the fact that , according to experts , women have a particular gift for negotiation and reaching agreements .
It is a paradox that the majority of NGOs that play an active role in peace negotiations and post-conflict processes are made up of women .
The EU institutions must support these women , as the report points out .
It is urgent that we take all the necessary measures to ensure that there is a balance between men and women in all areas where decisions that affect our collective fate are taken .
An absence of women represents a democratic deficit .
The measures proposed by the report in this regard are very courageous and interesting and they are very much in line with those being taken by the government of my country , Spain .
Congratulations , Mrs Gomes .
( PL ) Madam President , ' Women represent half the potential talent and skills of humanity and their under-representation in decision-making is a loss for society as a whole . '
This is a quote from the Athens Ministerial Declaration , which was signed 14 years ago .
In spite of many similar political declarations , special action programmes and corresponding legislation , the phenomenon of gender discrimination has not disappeared .
Out of nearly 44 000 members of parliament worldwide , only 16 % are women .
Out of the 191 countries that are currently members of the UN , only seven have a woman as a head of state and eight have a female head of government .
The under-representation of women in the political and decision-making process is sometimes associated with the difficulties of trying to balance one 's social , family and work life , and is also often the result of discrimination at work and in professional education .
The European Union should set an example to the world in terms of equal opportunities and democracy .
However , even here , in the European Parliament , women make up only 30 % of MEPs .
Some countries , such as Cyprus or Malta , have no female representatives at all .
The Member States and political parties throughout Europe should aim to achieve a so-called ' balanced participation ' of 40 to 60 % of each gender on their lists of candidates .
Then social representation would really be equitable .
I would like to congratulate Mrs Gomes on her excellent report .
I hope it will contribute to changing the situation of women in political life .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow .
Fighting trafficking in human beings ( debate )
The next item is the report by Mrs Bauer on behalf of the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs on fighting trafficking in human beings an integrated approach and proposals for an action plan .
rapporteur . - ( SK ) Human trafficking is now spoken of as unquestionably the greatest shame of modern times and the most blatant violation of human rights .
It is also an exceptionally dangerous type of criminal activity , representing the third largest source of revenue after weapons and drugs trafficking , with a turnover in billions of euros and dollars .
Just today the Vatican issued a statement describing human trafficking as being worse than slave trade .
Experts estimate that every year approximately one hundred thousand persons in the European Union become victims of human trafficking .
The most recent findings by Unicef indicate that two thirds of Member States are among the countries of origin and destination .
The view that this does not apply to us is therefore mistaken .
Also incorrect is the idea that this is a matter concerning only a few thousand prostitutes , whose fates are often very tragic .
There are , however , new developments .
These include the increasing numbers of those affected by human trafficking in connection with forced labour , the provision of services , forced begging by children and petty crime , as well as trafficking for the purposes of illegal adoption or forced marriages .
A Council of Europe report also refers to evidence of trafficking in human organs in European countries .
Even though in the vast majority of cases it is women who are the victims , there is alarming evidence that children account for 40-50 % of victims .
The report aims to offer an overview of the problem of human trafficking as a whole .
It is not about people smuggling or about prostitution per se .
It is about trafficking in human beings where early identification of the victim is of primary importance .
In the absence of early identification , the victims themselves may well end up being accused of immigration offences or of involvement in illegal activities and they may be extradited from the country before being given a chance to assist in exposing well organised criminal networks , with a high probability of again falling victim to the same networks .
In this context it is necessary to emphasise the importance of the European Union 's plan as well as the tried and tested approaches , standards and procedures for combating human trafficking which are generally viewed as a major advance in this area .
I would , however , like to point out four problem areas in the report .
Firstly , despite the fact that this is an extremely serious crime , the situation in Member States with regard to the relevant legislation and its enforcement is far from satisfactory .
Five Member States have yet to ratify the United Nations Convention Against Transnational Organised Crime or its supplementary protocol , known as the Palermo Protocol , to prevent , suppress and punish trafficking in persons , especially women and children .
As many as ten Members States have not acceded to the Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child regarding the sale of children , child prostitution and child pornography .
To date , the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings has been ratified by only one country , and seven Member States have not signed it .
There are problems with commitments being honoured .
In one Member State the crime of trafficking is only punishable by a fine ; in another country it is not possible to prosecute trafficking in children who are then forced to beg , as begging per se is not considered a crime ; in other countries legal entities may not be prosecuted for committing such crimes .
Enforcement is also problematic in cases where Member States have all of the means available , for instance through labour law and the existence of labour inspectorates , despite which human trafficking still occurs .
Secondly , our failings in the area of prevention are no less serious .
I would like to refer to a shocking finding in a recent Unicef report , according to which as many as 30 % of children in the world remain unregistered .
These children , along with those on the streets , can easily fall victim to criminals .
Thirdly , victim protection is more than just a humanitarian task .
There is convincing evidence from Europol that without victim protection we cannot count on being able to expose the well organised networks of criminals and middle men effectively . And yet instead of protecting victims the easier option of criminalisation is often chosen .
Fourthly , it is obvious that an effective struggle against trafficking calls for enhanced cooperation between the Member States and Europol , Eurojust , Frontex , Unicef and other international organisations , including NGOs .
A unified method of identifying victims and a unified definition of the underlying crime would greatly help towards a better understanding of new developments and of the overall scale of the problem .
For now , we can work only with estimates that are regarded as totally unreliable by experts in the field .
For now , the criminals will continue to have a head start on the law enforcement agencies .
In conclusion I would like to thank my colleagues who have contributed to improving the report .
I would also like to express my agreement with an observation made some time ago by Helga Konrad , formerly OCSE special representative on trafficking in human beings .
The trafficking problem is at a crossroads ; we know a lot about it , but there are doubts as to whether we also want to take action .
Many of us are of the opinion that the time has come for resolute action in combating this particularly serious , dangerous and shameful crime .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on this very important report .
The European policy against trafficking in human beings is a priority not only for this Parliament but also for the European Commission and myself .
There is a need for further and more effective action to fight trafficking .
Even though many initiatives have been taken at national and international level , the results are not comparable to the enormous scale of the criminal phenomenon .
The European action plan approved , as you will remember , last December , is the framework for practical action aimed at tackling all aspects of trafficking .
I should like to stress some priorities that , in my view , are necessary .
First , for the Member States , it is essential that they accelerate the application of Directive 2004 / 81 / EC on the residence permit issued to third-country nationals who are victims of trafficking in human beings or have been the subject of an action to facilitate illegal migration and who cooperate with the competent authorities .
It concerns , in particular , assistance and social reintegration measures , the reflection period and the issuing of the residence permit to victims of trafficking , taking into account also the Council of Europe Convention of 2005 .
In this regard , it is important to point out that the reflection period and assistance measures are granted to victims irrespective of their willingness or capacity to cooperate with the law enforcement authorities and that , after the issuing of the residence permits , victims have access to the labour market , vocational training and education .
What is the situation so far ?
Unfortunately , it is very disappointing .
So far only two Member States have transposed the European directive and only six other notifications of initiatives to transpose have been examined by the European Commission .
There have been no notifications at all from 12 Member States .
As you know , the transposition deadline expired on 6 August 2006 and I have therefore decided to start infringement procedures against all Member States that have not yet transposed this very important EU directive .
Concerning assistance and social reintegration , the need for close cooperation on a regular basis between public authorities , including law enforcement authorities , and NGOs must also be stressed .
I believe it is very important to have close and permanent cooperation between public authorities and the private sector on protecting and reintegrating victims .
Concerning investigations , following the initiatives taken by Europol , international police cooperation between Member States ' special units should be enhanced .
I am promoting and encouraging better and closer cooperation between all the specialised national units dealing with countering trafficking in human beings .
However , on this point , there is a consideration I should like to submit to you .
With regard to prosecution I note , with disappointment , that very often charges against criminals exploiting victims of trafficking - for example for sexual reasons - are very weak , focusing only on the simple exploitation of prostitution instead of on the very real charge , which should be the reduction of victims to slavery conditions .
It is up to the prosecutors to decide charges , but I really hope that magistrates and judges will now take a much tougher line than in the past .
That is the real situation .
There are also priorities for the European Commission .
I have decided to set up an expert group on trafficking in human beings .
That group of experts will deal specifically with indicators and criteria in order to identify different forms of trafficking for the purpose of labour exploitation .
In the same context , at the beginning of 2007 I shall propose European legislation on sanctioning employers who exploit illegal workers , whose working conditions are sometimes akin to slavery .
Concerning trafficking for the purpose of sexual exploitation , we shall shortly be producing a questionnaire aimed at evaluating , inter alia , the possible impact of new legislation criminalising the use of sexual services in the knowledge that the person concerned is a victim of trafficking .
I am therefore keeping my promise to you about this questionnaire .
Furthermore , the root causes of trafficking must be addressed , including poverty , lack of job opportunities , gender violence and gender discrimination .
My departments will shortly be hosting an inter-departmental seminar on this issue , precisely to focus on the main problems that are emerging .
One last important point is awareness-raising .
The Commission is supporting the designation of an anti-trafficking day , possibly on 11 June .
That initiative aims at increasing the visibility of the problems connected with trafficking and the measures taken to counteract trafficking itself .
It will call for cooperation from public institutions and civil society and evaluate the quality and the results of all the actions that are under way .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Foreign Affairs . - Mr President , I should begin by congratulating the Commissioner on his very positive speech , and on everything he is doing in this area .
He is serious about making a difference in combating trafficking , and that needs to be recognised .
I also want to congratulate Mrs Bauer on her report .
It has not been an easy report to put together , as various opinions from a number of different committees have had to be incorporated into the final version .
I was responsible for the Committee on Foreign Affairs ' opinion on human trafficking , which concentrated specifically on the external relations aspects of this problem .
A large number of paragraphs and recommendations from my opinion have been incorporated into the text of the report and I thank Mrs Bauer for her cooperation in that regard .
I wanted this evening to comment primarily on foreign relations issues .
The report stresses the need for Member States to sign up to international conventions , ensuring a positive obligation on countries to address issues relating to trafficking .
The Irish Government , for example , has not ratified the UN Convention against transnational organised crime and the protocol to that Convention to prevent , suppress and punish trafficking .
This anti-trafficking convention and protocol have been ratified by 121 States across the world , including most European countries , but seven EU Member States are still to ratify , which is unacceptable .
The report also urges EU Member States to implement the Council Directive on residence permits so that the option of temporary residence can be granted to victims of trafficking .
This is absolutely necessary in order to shift the focus away from viewing trafficked people as illegal immigrants and towards treating them as victims of abuse .
It will also encourage victims to come forward to the police by assuring them of compassionate and fair treatment .
One of the core elements of the Committee on Foreign Affairs ' opinion is that the Council and the Commission should regularly raise the issue of human trafficking in political dialogues with third countries .
The human rights clauses written into EU agreements with those countries should be used , where appropriate , to raise concerns on trafficking .
There is clear evidence in various regions of the globe that pressure from governments , international organisations and NGOs is starting to have an effect on attitudes towards trafficking .
The EU has a responsibility to raise the profile , by all available means , of the continuing scandal of what amounts to modern-day slavery .
Europe needs to set an example if it is to insist on other parts of the world following its lead .
I am not satisfied - and this was confirmed to me by the Commissioner 's remarks - that EU Governments are serious about this issue .
That has to change , and this report is a step in the right direction .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs . - Mr President , I too would like to thank the rapporteur for the excellent work she has done on this report .
As has been said , I drafted the opinion for the Committee on Employment , where we focused on those people who were effectively trafficked for labour purposes .
Indeed , one of the things I welcome in this report is its recognition of the wide variety of reasons for people being trafficked .
My committee particularly welcomes the human rights-based approach of the integrated action plan , and recognises that this requires an emphasis , as the Commissioner said , on the forced labour or services , slavery and slavery-like outcomes of trafficking .
We have seen evidence of these slavery-like outcomes only too recently , in the shape of workers who have no choice of when , where or how they work .
They have no rights .
Their accommodation is tied .
They may find themselves beaten , deprived of any medical treatment , deprived of water in high temperatures , and sometimes , as was the case in Morecombe Bay in the UK , they are left to die .
When looking at the causes , the committee also examined the issue of demand and considered that the demand for low-cost , undocumented and docile workers in the European Union contributes to the illegal trade of trafficking in human beings .
It believes that the existence of such a workforce may drive down costs but that this is at the expense of human dignity and an undermining of labour standards , health and safety measures and fair pay and of local and / or state income , through a failure to pay taxes and social contributions .
We welcome the view expressed in this report that we should be looking , for example , at the dubious employment agencies that apply both for EU nationals and third country nationals , and which have become a front for these slavery-like outcomes .
We believe that there is a need to apply existing labour law and to network the information from labour inspectorates to bring it within the sphere of police intelligence so that we can stop or disrupt trafficking .
We also consider training to be an important dimension of that for those inspectorates .
We recognise the importance of good company practice where compliance is genuinely sought all the way down the line , and we also recognise the valuable work of networks , trade unions and reputable companies in helping to prevent trafficking and deal with the victims .
On a personal note , I very much welcome the action the Commissioner has said he intends to take on the issue of temporary residence permits .
I deeply regret the action of my own Member State , for example , which views victims , as Mr Coveney said , predominantly as illegal migrants rather than as victims .
The police tell us that those who are deported are often retrafficked around and around in a vicious circle , rather than being seen as vulnerable individuals , or indeed as potential sources of information .
I very much welcome what the Commissioner has said , and the report , and look forward to this being followed up with very strong action .
draftsman of the opinion of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality . - This report is the result of enhanced cooperation , pursuant to Rule 47 , between two committees , LIBE and FEMM .
I am therefore partly responsible for this report , specifically the parts dealing with trafficking of women and girls for sexual exploitation .
Seventeen years : that is the age of the typical victim of trafficking in Europe .
She is a young girl ending up in a brothel or in a so-called escort service in Germany , Austria or the Netherlands .
Seventeen years : that is the same length of time that this Parliament has been debating and producing papers on the issue of trafficking .
People say that we should stick to what we have been doing in this Parliament until now .
But I say we have to stop the wishful thinking and the empty talk and resolutions and start dealing with this issue in a practical way .
First , we have to identify the enemy .
It is organised crime .
While we have been talking , they have changed their agenda from weapons and drugs to the more profitable buying and selling of human beings for the sex industry .
We are talking commodities .
We are talking merchandise .
We are talking regular markets where naked young girls are sold to the highest bidder .
We are talking about girls who are sold at the age of 17 and at the age of 20 are worthless and thrown aside .
I have met them and listened to unbelievable horrors of being raped 14 times a day .
Do we want to end this , or do we just want to go on talking ?
This organised crime industry feeds on the demands of ordinary men who believe they have a right to buy the body of a young girl as cheaply as possible .
Some people say trafficking in women and girls for sexual exploitation is already a crime , while prostitution is merely a matter of consenting adults making a business transaction .
But more than 90 % of the girls in the sex industry in Germany , Austria and the Netherlands , where prostitution is legal , are from abroad .
How can you know that this girl is doing it of her own free will ?
How can you be sure she is not smiling only because she knows someone will threaten her family back home if she does not comply ?
If you see this as just another job , how come you would not want your daughter to do it ?
Or your own wife ?
The demand from men to buy sex is also a driving force in the trafficking business .
If you agree with me that we need to really do something about trafficking , please join me in voting against Amendments 23 , 24 and 25 tomorrow .
Commissioner Frattini , I am very grateful for your work , but we are still awaiting the study on how the laws on prostitution in Europe affect the number of trafficking victims .
That is needed if we are to find the best practice .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - ( PT ) Trafficking in human beings is a modern version of slavery .
It is not a recent phenomenon . It has been growing in recent years and has reached alarming levels .
The International Labour Organisation estimates , for example , that there are some 2.5 million people in forced labour throughout the world .
This is already the third most lucrative form of trafficking , after drugs and arms .
It manifests itself in the form of sexual exploitation , as previous speakers have mentioned , as well as abusive working conditions , forced domestic labour , illegal adoption , forced begging and the sale of organs .
Fighting the trafficking in human beings is therefore one of the major priorities at both Community and international level .
The Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats wishes to commend Mrs Bauer on her excellent report .
We agree that there needs to be a coherent European policy on fighting the trafficking in human beings effectively , one that covers all aspects of the issue , including questions relating to countries of origin , transit and destination , people who recruit and exploit and other middlemen , customers and beneficiaries .
Victims and witnesses must be protected , and prevention strategies must be put forward .
Trafficking in human beings is unacceptable and legal loopholes must not be allowed to facilitate it .
The law needs to be clear and far-reaching , and must be implemented and correctly enforced by all Member States .
There needs to be a legal platform acting as a basis for stepping up international cooperation , and I am appalled that it has taken such a long time to ratify and implement various international instruments , such as UN conventions .
I would call on the Member States that have yet to do so to take the necessary measures at the earliest opportunity .
In this connection , let me commend Mr Frattini for his remarks in the Chamber today regarding penalising those Member States that are late in adopting the transposed Community directives .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( SV ) Mr President , Commissioner Frattini , fellow Members , ladies and gentlemen , I want to begin by thanking Mrs Bauer for her sterling report and the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs for its constructive cooperation and for its enhanced cooperation with the Committee on Women 's Rights and Gender Equality .
I also want to thank Commissioner Frattini .
During the two and a half years that I have sat in the European Parliament , the issue of trafficking in human beings has assumed a prominent place on the political agenda , not only in the European Parliament but also in the Member States and among Europeans .
That is a good beginning .
I am very pleased that we are united in condemning people trafficking , as we were in condemning it in the context of the football World Cup .
I welcome the fact that we are now also including other aspects of people trafficking and that we are agreed that what we are talking about in this case is a modern slave trade , at least 80 % of whose victims are women and children .
What worries me is the lack of analysis of what happens to the women and children once they have actually reached the EU .
It does not help to be outraged by cross-border trafficking if one does not see , or does not want to talk about , what happens subsequently in the EU .
Those who purchase sexual services buy women and children indiscriminately in an equally indiscriminate EU market .
Whenever I have met trafficked women , they have said that they have been bought and that they have been sold into prostitution and marketed to clients in a great many EU countries day in , day out , all year round .
This has been possible because we , here in the EU , still do not dare to talk about those women and children who are here right now .
It is time to change attitudes .
The next step is for us to obtain more knowledge .
The fact that 50 % of those sold into prostitution are children is scandalous .
We should be ashamed of ourselves every day for not doing more , because we in the EU have a responsibility for children 's rights .
I am proud to tell you that we in the Socialist Group in the European Parliament are agreed as to how we want to move forward .
We wish to set targets , carry out studies and become better informed .
We shall then perhaps be able to agree on what is required in the short and long terms .
If you other political groups want to know what we are doing , I can tell you that we are preparing the way for a debate on various possible ways of putting an end to people trafficking in Member States , for example through the legalisation of prostitution or , as in Sweden , through a law prohibiting the purchase of sexual services .
Why is the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats afraid of university studies ?
That is something I should like to know .
Merely to be opposed to people trafficking this evening is simply to say that we in the European Parliament are concerned about the matter . We are , however , putting our heads , ostrich-like , in the sand and not assuming responsibility for what is happening to all those women and children who are being exploited here and now .
Many people say that we in the EU do little but talk when we should be setting practical targets .
The PSE Group and I therefore want us to set the EU a target whereby it is to halve the number of people exposed to people trafficking within ten years .
The PSE Group also supports Amendments 1 to 22 and recital P. We shall abstain in the vote on recital O because we are not adopting a position either in favour of , or against , an individual investigation .
On Amendment 25 , we shall each vote in our own way .
I shall vote in favour of paragraph 1 ( al ) and against Amendment 25 , and this on the basis of my political experience of the view taken of the sex trade and prostitution in Sweden .
What is most important now is to pursue the 50 % reduction in people trafficking and to implement the planned investigation in the EU in 2007 .
I want to thank all my fellow citizens for this debate . I also want to thank all those who have participated in the debate here in the House , together with the President and Commissioner Frattini .
on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( DA ) Mr President , I thought I would give a different speech to the one I have written down , as much of what I wanted to say has been said .
This is a good debate in which it is important for us to underline the fact that the issue in question is one that must be dealt with , both through the ratification of conventions and through work on the great social inequalities .
Let me state , then , that getting conventions ratified is not enough .
They also need to be complied with .
I am in a position to say that , in a country like Denmark alone , all too few resources are set aside for combating the sex trade .
There is not enough investigation , and those women who are the victims of the trade have no more than 30 days before they are kicked out of the country .
There is sufficient time neither for them to get the help they need nor for anything to be done about the problem .
We then ask ourselves whether this is because we do , in reality , accept that there can be trafficking in women and children .
On this point I personally do , in fact , agree with the Swedes that it has proved that , when there is a market , then it is all too very easy both to create an acceptance of the fact that this activity can take place and also , of course , to make things easier for the criminals .
It is very easy for them to gain access to an already established market with their victims and , until something is done about that , I really do not think that we will truly be able to stamp out this trade .
This is a debate we must have because it is incredibly important that we get something done about this issue .
As I say , I wish , personally , to support the Swedish proposal but I am also incredibly open to other things , as long as we establish that it is not just ratifications that are needed but changes of attitude and that funding also needs to be set aside to provide real help because , until all this happens , all that we shall have , as my Swedish fellow Member said before I got up to speak , is little more than words .
I can tell you that even the finest of targets do not help the people who are being trafficked if they are not backed up by proper powers , political will and proper effort . I hope , then , that this is something we can agree on .
on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( The speaker spoke Irish )
Mr President , I want to thank the rapporteur , Edit Bauer , for the considerable work that has gone into the series of proposals contained in the recommendations for an integrated approach to fighting trafficking in human beings .
Given that this problem is on the rise , an integrated approach is required and one which takes full account of the importance of prevention and the crucial issue of reducing demand .
I welcome the report 's call for EU Member States and the Council to strengthen the human-rights-based , gender-equality and victim-centred approach to this issue .
It is essential that the trafficking of people be dealt with as a human rights issue , rather than being seen mainly as an issue of border control .
Trafficking is primarily about exploitation , not illegal migration .
It is unacceptable that in some countries there is no legislative provision for residence permits for the victims of trafficking and in other states , where provision is made ; it is linked to the victims ' cooperation with police .
Some victims clearly will not be able to provide useful information .
They will be too traumatised to do so .
I too welcome the Commissioner 's comments here tonight .
I think they underline the long overdue need for action by governments , including my own .
The report contains important measures for protecting victims and shows the extent of the protection measures that are needed .
These have to be included and resourced as part , as a major part in fact , of any action plan and implementation of that plan .
I agree with other speakers that ratifying conventions is good , action plans are good , but we actually have to see the action to see this worked through .
Identifying the victims of trafficking is , of course , crucial to ensuring that they receive the services they require .
Training for those who come into contact with undocumented migrants is therefore important .
The report also points out that measures are required to ensure the protection of not only victims of sexual exploitation but also victims of labour exploitation and other forms of trafficking .
European governments therefore have to understand that an integral part of the fight against trafficking is the introduction of measures to strengthen workers ' rights to protect migrant workers .
I think we need to look not only at the Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings but also at ratifying the International Convention on the Protection of the Rights of All Migrant Workers and Members of their Families .
That too has to be an essential part of tackling trafficking in human beings .
( SK ) I welcome this important report and I would also like to express my thanks to Mrs Edit Bauer for her work .
I am glad that some of my amendments have been adopted in the Subcommittee on Human Rights , and I trust that they too have contributed to the quality of this report .
Trafficking in human beings is one of the most sophisticated , best organised and most profitable forms of criminal activity .
This is a problem not only for the developing world , but also for the European Union .
In my amendments I focused on the fact that most of the victims of sexual abuse and trafficking in human beings are minors , who constitute the most vulnerable section of the population .
For instance , the consent of a child to prostitution may not be viewed in the same way as the consent of an adult who is aware of the consequences of his or her conduct .
Many international agreements and treaties have been signed on this issue .
However , many states have not even ratified these instruments and those that have ratified them fail to enforce them , which results in these documents becoming irrelevant .
Although at international conferences attended by various states we all agree that we really must implement these documents to which we all subscribe , such efforts frequently cease on the last day of the conference and the status quo remains unchanged .
In addition to focusing on the customer-victim relationship , it is necessary to pay attention to employers , especially in countries where visa requirements are not applied .
Cooperation must exist between the three elements , that is , the country of origin , the transit countries and the destination countries .
It is necessary to monitor the operation and trustworthiness of employment agencies , including those that are thought to recruit only seasonal workers .
Companies that employ cheap labour obtained through human trafficking must be punished extremely heavily .
Inspections at facilities providing sexual services will not suffice .
It would be desirable also to have administrative inspections in addition to the penalties set out under criminal law .
The funding available to the non-governmental organisations that deal with political rights is many times greater than that available to NGOs addressing human trafficking or women 's rights .
Sadly , this appears to reflect how countries have set their priorities .
( HU ) Mr President , I can only congratulate Mrs Edit Bauer for having addressed this sad and very serious question with such professional expertise and commitment .
We can only support her in this at the vote tomorrow .
Thanks are due as well to Mr Frattini , for the same degree of commitment .
For this is what is necessary , given that trafficking in human beings , and especially in women and children , has since the 1990s grown into one of the world 's most alarming phenomena .
No doubt everyone has heard astonishing figures - we have listened to and discussed these here today .
I am particularly saddened by the fact that 40-50 % of all victims are children .
According to UNICEF 's estimate , one million children each year are caught up in the international trafficking in children .
One of the roots of the problem is the hopeless situation in the countries of origin .
But we must also recognise that the principal motor driving the trade is demand .
Human traffickers would not succeed if the host states did not have such a large demand for women and children to exploit , that is , for cheap labour .
It makes no difference that practically the whole world condemns this sexual exploitation or slavery of children , and the police forces of individual countries strive in vain to uncover paedophile rings , if trafficking in human beings remains largely international in scope .
Therefore , we must strengthen cross-border cooperation to protect the victims , bring the offenders effectively to justice and work out comprehensive methods of prevention .
Currently , human trafficking is the most rapidly growing criminal activity within the European Union .
The struggle against trafficking of women and children is a moral question as well , and I have no doubt that it is our duty to intervene against it .
It is sad to see that the European Parliament has to debate this issue , here among these empty benches , for in my view , this question somehow affects all of us , since it is our children who are at stake .
( PT ) Trafficking in human beings is a heinous crime that , in a particularly insidious fashion , debases the very nature of what it is to be a human being .
Unfortunately , it has become one of the most lucrative forms of international organised crime . It affects hundreds of thousands of people throughout the world , and in particular the weakest and the poorest , women and children .
The fight against this scourge ought to be an immediate priority .
For this fight to be successful , international cooperation must be stepped up in the areas of investigation , exchange of information , identification of victims , law enforcement and reintegration .
Accordingly , those Member States that have yet to do so must speed up the process of ratifying and implementing the many existing international conventions that could make a decisive contribution towards gradually eradicating this utterly abhorrent crime .
The EU , too , must strengthen its commitment to promoting initiatives aimed at combating the causes of this most disgraceful trade , and must support the weakest countries in which most of this trafficking originates .
As we debate this matter here in the Chamber , we must all be aware of the enormous difficulty of the war that we must wage together . We must be clear in our minds that we are fighting to defend human dignity .
There is therefore , ladies and gentlemen , no more urgent fight than this .
( PL ) Mr President , the fight against human trafficking is a great challenge for the twenty-first century .
In the struggle for human dignity , and in order to limit this phenomenon , international and national organisations have signed a series of declarations , conventions and directives , and are implementing a series of action plans .
As the rapporteur has pointed out , these action plans may restrict human trafficking in its broadest sense , but they do not eliminate its causes .
The causes include : unemployment , hunger , poverty affecting large parts of society , high indirect labour costs , competition and the desire to achieve maximum profit .
They often encourage illegal work and permit local communities to turn a blind eye to slave labour ( an example would be the case of the area surrounding the Italian town of Foggia ) , sexual abuse , ethnic conflicts and wars .
This report could provide the basis for drawing up a programme for further economic , legal , political , educational , informative and institutional actions .
Implementing this programme would restrict human trafficking , which goes against the principles of democracy and human dignity .
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , Mrs Bauer 's report not only affords us an in-depth analysis of this ghastly state of affairs , but also very wide-ranging proposals as to how strategies to combat people-trafficking - one of the cruellest branches of organised crime - may be successfully implemented .
These proposals range from the improvement of the legal framework to improved coordination of the most diverse measures at national and European level , taking in also the action needed in order to reduce demand and to protect the victims .
While I support them , I would also suggest that corrections be made at a few points , with it being prescribed in detail to the Member States what measures they are to take in order to protect victims , with regard to such things as access to the labour market , to accommodation , to education and so on , irrespective of whether or not the said victim is willing to cooperate with the authorities .
It is in these respects that the Member States should take appropriate action to protect the victims , albeit not of such a nature as to drive more of them into the clutches of the people-traffickers .
I am particularly grateful to Commission Frattini for taking very definite action that will have a lasting effect , and am very supportive of his action in now threatening that those Member States that have not hitherto been willing to implement and transpose the relevant directives , regulations and international conventions will have to face the consequences .
Their attitude is simply unacceptable , and the Member States must now do something in response to the requirements imposed by the UN and the European Union .
( PL ) Mr President , first of all , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , who has addressed a very important issue which is of great socio-political significance .
Human trafficking is a problem on a global scale and is a modern version of slavery which infringes fundamental human rights .
The trafficking of women and children is a particularly tragic side of this phenomenon .
In my speech , I would like to focus on the economic aspects of this phenomenon .
It should be stressed that human trafficking is driven by the forces of both supply and demand .
In some developing countries , in contrast to the levels of social and economic development in Europe , there are few prospects for the future in terms of the economic and social situation , unemployment is high and there is growing poverty .
These factors contribute towards a situation where it is easy for criminal organisations to profit through human trafficking .
However , we should also take into account the fact that the demand for cheap , unregistered and obedient workers in the European Union contributes to the illegal trade in human beings , as using such a workforce can cut costs .
However , this is done at the expense of human dignity and undermines employment standards , health and safety , fair pay and local and national budgets through unpaid taxes and social security contributions .
Human trafficking is the fastest growing criminal activity amongst the forms of organised crime in the European Union .
The measures taken to restrict human trafficking to date have yet to produce tangible results .
There are obvious difficulties involved in combating this phenomenon , but the European Union must take decisive action .
That is why we should gladly adopt the report before us , which proposes an integrated approach , and the proposed action plan .
( NL ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is women and children who are most vulnerable to human trafficking , and it is unfortunate that the world of sport deserves some of the blame in this respect .
More and more , professional sports clubs resort to attracting ever younger players , particularly from Africa , for the obvious reason that they pay very little , if anything , for them .
These players are often simply dumped along the way , and subsequently go underground .
Too little attention is given to this .
In our draft report on the future of professional football in Europe , we demand that the Commission should deal with this in the context of the Council 's framework decision on the fight against human trafficking .
Since , Commissioner , this decision makes no bones about the fact that the exploitation of children is punishable , we want the Member States to introduce hefty penalties for it .
May I remind you in this connection of the agreements that were concluded at the European Summit in The Hague two years ago ?
The European Council then recommended that a European plan be drawn up in order to develop common standards , best practices and suchlike to prevent and fight human trafficking .
I have to tell Commissioner Frattini that this issue is becoming all the more urgent and acute because some professional football clubs intend to circumvent and undermine the so-called ' home-grown ' rule by attracting ever younger players to Western Europe , or Europe in general .
This often involves entire families moving , only for many of them later to be left to their own devices .
I would like to add that we give our 100 % backing to this home-grown rule that has already been implemented by UEFA , because it benefits the training of young footballers .
Moreover , on the basis of initial discussions here in the parliamentary committees , it seems that this home-grown rule meets with broad support here in Parliament .
We must , whatever we do , rule out the risk of this measure being undermined , and that is why I urge you to support the amendment which I , along with the rapporteur , have submitted to that effect .
My question is , of course , addressed to the Members in this Chamber , but also to the Commission and ministers .
- ( LT ) I would like to thank the rapporteur for doing such an enormously important work .
Europe has long been proud that slavery was eradicated here sooner than on any other continent .
Sadly , it is returning in other forms that are equally repulsive , along with scorn , distress and , ironically , unimaginable profits .
What should we do first ?
We should coordinate the actions of the EU and all neighbouring countries better , eliminate legal gaps enabling offenders to evade law enforcement without being punished , even hand out to all Members of the European Parliament a kind of ' shame list ' of states , which have failed to ratify United Nations conventions on trafficking in human beings , and draft a code of conduct for officers of EU institutions and bodies , which would even be useful for some Members of Parliament .
We must make our citizens , especially those in the new EU Member States , clearly aware of the possible threats of becoming a target of traffickers in people .
The victims of offenders must not only have the courage but also the right to be able to address governmental institutions without being afraid of deportation .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Written Statement ( Rule 142 )
( IT ) I worked as draftsman for the Committee on Development on the Financial Instrument for Democracy and Human Rights , together with the members of the Committee on Foreign Affairs .
Our committee has voted for an amendment including the fight against trafficking in women and children , who represent almost all the people trafficked , among the projects that can be funded using this instrument , primarily to help the countries at the origin of the trafficking to combat this dishonourable practice .
However , few projects , even if well targeted , are not enough to combat a problem concerning over a million victims a year , above all women , teenage girls and children .
A legal framework regulating prostitution , close collaboration between the Member States and , above all , with the countries of origin of the majority of victims , as well as extremely harsh punishments for those promoting this trafficking , are necessary tools to try to bring an end to this scourge .
However , we also need to implement a strong dissuasion and awareness campaign for all Europeans that feed people trafficking , primarily through sex tourism .
Finally , I would like to extend my support to the committee 's proposals for actions supporting victims , helping them to come out into the open , denounce their traffickers and become rehabilitated in European society .
Agenda for next sitting : see Minutes
Closure of sitting
( The sitting was suspended at 11.30 p.m. )
Opening of the sitting
( The sitting opened at 10.00 )
Mr President , I rise simply to report to the House the good news that last night the President of Pakistan , who was our guest a few weeks ago , has commuted the death sentence on my constituent Mirza-Tahir Hussain , who had been on death row for 18 years but is widely regarded to be innocent of the charges against him .
A number of Members of the European Parliament , led by Mr Karim , were going to Pakistan next month to make a final plea .
Now , of course , we shall turn our efforts towards ensuring Mr Hussain can return to Leeds by Christmas .
I am delighted at this news and hope that the President of Parliament will make a statement later today .
I know he has worked very hard on this case , as have other Members of Parliament .
( Applause )
Ombudsman 's 2005 annual report ( debate )
The next item is the report by Andreas Schwab , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the annual report on the European Ombudsman 's activities in 2005 .
Ombudsman .
Mr President , I wish to thank you for this opportunity to address Parliament and to present the annual report for 2005 , a year in which the Office of the European Ombudsman celebrated an important milestone : its tenth year of operation .
The annual report records our progress in handling complaints , promoting good administration and making the Ombudsman 's work better known to citizens .
In total , 3920 complaints were received , a 5 % increase compared to the previous year .
I note that a rise in complaints does not necessarily result from worsening administrative behaviour by the European Union 's institutions ; rather , it may also reflect citizens ' increased general awareness of matters European and growing knowledge about their rights and about how to exercise those rights .
This general awareness was also observed during 2005 in the participation of citizens in the debate about the future of the European Union and the Constitution .
To contribute to the furthering of this general awareness , I made intensive efforts to inform citizens about their rights and to spread the word about the positive results that have been achieved in defence of those rights .
All in all , I and my staff gave over 170 public lectures , presentations and press interviews , in addition to meeting with ombudsmen , public officials and other interlocutors in the Member States .
A particular feature of these communication activities in 2005 was a series of events to mark the tenth anniversary of the Ombudsman , directed at specific target groups , namely , civil society , academia , the press and the institutions themselves , including a reception in honour of the European Parliament on 27 September , which was addressed by President Borrell Fontelles himself .
During 2005 , I was able to assist over 75 % of the people who complained to me .
This assistance took the form of opening an inquiry , transferring the case to a competent body , or advising on where to turn for a prompt and effective solution to the problem .
I closed 312 inquiries during the year .
In 36 % of the cases , the inquiry revealed no maladministration .
Such a finding is not always negative for the complainant , who at least has the benefit of a full explanation from the institutional body involved .
Furthermore , even when there is no maladministration I may identify an opportunity for the institutional body to improve the quality of its administration in the future .
If so , I make a further remark in closing my decision .
Wherever I find maladministration , I try if possible to achieve a positive-sum outcome that satisfies both the complainant and the institution .
In 30 % of cases my inquiry has resulted either in the institution concerned settling the case to the satisfaction of the complainant , or in a friendly solution .
When a friendly solution is not possible , I close the case with a critical remark or make a draft recommendation .
One of the draft recommendations accepted in 2005 was a case in which the Commission granted ex gratia compensation to a complainant whose project it had cancelled at extremely short notice .
The Commission agreed to pay EUR 56 000 , the largest such settlement ever secured by the Ombudsman .
If a Community institutional body fails to respond satisfactorily to a draft recommendation , the Ombudsman 's ultimate weapon is a special report to Parliament .
Three special reports were made in 2005 : on the Council 's continuing practice of legislating in camera ; on the Commission 's responsibility for children of its officials with special educational needs ; and on the nature of information provided by OLAF to the Ombudsman during a previous enquiry .
I am grateful to Parliament for its support as expressed in its resolutions of 4 and 6 April 2006 , based on the Hammerstein Mintz and De Rossa reports respectively and concerning the first two of these special reports .
I would now like to say a few words about my priorities for the future .
As indicated before , the first priority is to promote a citizen-centred approach by the EU institutions and bodies in all their activities .
To that end I seek every opportunity to reach out to EU institutions , to encourage best practice and promote friendly solutions .
The active cooperation of the institutions and bodies is essential to the success of the Ombudsman 's work for citizens .
The annual report contains many examples of the institutions taking prompt action to settle cases brought to their attention and responding positively to my proposals and recommendations .
During visits to the institutions and bodies , I underlined the value of reacting promptly and constructively to complaints .
The ultimate goal for all of us must be to ensure the best possible service to the citizen .
The Commission has already taken constructive steps to improve its service to citizens by overhauling its system of handling the Ombudsman 's inquiries resulting from complaints .
In its communication of November 2005 the Commission outlined the new procedure to apply henceforth .
Commissioner Wallström 's idea in designing the new procedure was to give individual Commissioners greater ownership of cases , while fully maintaining the valuable role of the Secretariat-General .
I am particularly grateful for her efforts in bringing that concept to fruition and for her continuing commitment to its proper implementation .
The new procedure allows individual Commissioners to get involved in cases at an early stage , when options still remain open .
The speed of the new procedure already bore fruit in a case in which I found that the Commission 's response to a citizen 's infringement complaint had been unsatisfactory .
I held a meeting with Commissioner McCreevy and learned from him that the Commission had taken steps to resolve that particular issue .
I believe that the successful resolution of that case illustrates the value both of the Ombudsman 's role in promoting good administration in the infringement procedure and of the concept of greater ownership of cases by individual Commissioners .
I wish to thank the Commission for that in the presence of Vice-President Wallström .
I have also revisited the question of the Ombudsman 's Statute by submitting to President Borrell Fontelles in July considered proposals for revision , in response to earlier resolutions on the Ombudsman 's annual report by this House .
Overall the Statute continues to provide a good framework for the Ombudsman 's investigations and for effective cooperation with the institutions to promote good administration and fight maladministration .
The changes I propose are therefore limited both in number and scope .
My principal objective is to ensure that citizens can have full confidence in the Ombudsman 's power to find the truth when hearing witnesses or inspecting documents .
I should also like to cooperate with Parliament to ensure that citizens ' complaints about violations of the fundamental rights mentioned in the Charter can be brought before the Court of Justice if an important issue of principle cannot be resolved in any other way .
Parliament already has full rights as an institution to initiate cases before the Court .
In this context , it would be useful for the Ombudsman to have the power to intervene in such cases , a power that has already been given to the European Data Protection Supervisor , with whom I have developed a close working relationship .
I look forward to working with Mr Guardans Cambó and Mrs Matsouka as they embark upon the process of drawing up a report and opinion concerning this proposed vision in the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and the Committee on Petitions respectively .
My third priority is to deepen my close cooperation with ombudsmen in the Member States through the European Network of Ombudsmen .
The aim is to promote good administration throughout the Union in order that citizens can enjoy their rights under European law .
I am delighted that the Committee on Petitions participates in the Network as a full member and was represented at the meeting of national ombudsmen that took place in The Hague in September 2005 .
Next week , a similar meeting for regional ombudsmen in the European Union , with whom I have made a commitment to meet every two years , will be held in London .
I should like to thank the members of the Committee on Petitions , and in particular this year 's rapporteur Mr Schwab , for their support and constructive proposals as set out in Parliament 's report .
I have already mentioned today many of the matters on which the report contains wise advice to the Ombudsman .
I am committed to improving the information given to Parliament and citizens about the services provided by me and by the European Network of Ombudsmen .
I have already asked to appear before the Committee on Petitions whenever I submit a special report to this House .
Next year , I intend to put an interactive guide on our website to help complainants find the appropriate ombudsman to deal with , be it at European , national or regional level .
I believe this will be of great benefit to citizens and help address the concerns rightly expressed in Mr Schwab 's report about the large percentage of inadmissible complaints .
Last year we successfully consolidated the Office of the European Ombudsman and moved firmly in the direction of enhancing the institution 's ability to deal effectively with complaints and inquiries from citizens of the enlarged European Union .
To that end , we could always count upon the support of two of Parliament 's most senior officials who are about to retire or have just retired - Mr Priestley and Mr Garzón Clariana .
Their wise counsel and assistance to the Ombudsman have been invaluable and will long be remembered .
I believe that the relationship of goodwill , trust and understanding built up over the last decade between the European Ombudsman and EU institutions constitutes a precious resource for improving the quality of public administration in Europe to the benefit of citizens .
It is enormously reassuring to me , both personally and institutionally , to know that in this regard the European Parliament and its Committee on Petitions are vital partners for the European Ombudsman .
I intend to make the most of that partnership in seeking to contribute to the deepening of a service culture to the benefit of EU citizens .
Thank you for your attention .
( Applause )

rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , Mr Diamandouros , Commissioner Wallström , ladies and gentlemen , I am glad that you have all managed to get up so early and be present here for the debate on the report on the 2005 report from the European Ombudsman .
I would like to start by thanking you , Mr Diamandouros , most warmly for the constructive contribution you have made in the shape of your annual report , on which I have had the privilege of reporting to this House on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , and I would like , in so doing , also to thank all the Members of this House who , by their amendments and personal comments , have played a constructive part in the report 's gestation , especially our coordinator Mr Atkins and my predecessor from last year , Mr Mavrommatis .


I am glad that you started by highlighting the need for the Ombudsman 's status to be specified in rather clearer terms in view of the increasing workload with which the public present you , and I am most obliged to you for having actually done that again today .
Since we should try to draw the demarcation lines between the functions of the different European institutions as sharply and distinctly as possible , the deliberations on your letter to our President , Mr Borrell , may well bring us to a satisfactory outcome .
The European Ombudsman is an important European institution , being particularly relevant to Europe 's development and with a special importance in the eyes of the European public .
He exists to bring the European Union closer to its citizens and to make it transparent .
It is to him that Europe 's citizens can turn in order to complain when the institutions do not do their jobs properly ; that gives him a very personal relationship with Europe , one that cannot be the same everywhere , and that is what makes his position so special .
It is this idea - the idea that European policy should be shaped more by practical considerations and by reference to the interests of the public - that we should , in future , take more to heart .
We must focus our policies more closely on the public and thereby show them that they and their concerns - be these major or minor , important or trivial - are taken seriously , and we will accomplish that firstly by making a better job of communicating what European policy is all about , and secondly , by way of greater transparency - two important points from among those I have made about your annual report .
The Committee on Petitions has received the European Ombudsman 's annual report , which discusses his activities over the past year , and that leads me to thank you for doing a splendid job of work .
You have been in office since 1 April 2003 , and your labours are being crowned with success .
I believe that the report that this House has produced is a very balanced one ; I have endeavoured to examine the Members ' amendments and , where I thought it possible , to incorporate them .
I believe that the report is comprehensible to the public , and that is the most important thing , but , following the vote in committee , I assumed that not all the amendments could be re-submitted , and I will , for that reason , be recommending to my group that it should reject them .
For that I ask your understanding .
We have spent a long time trying to compromise on this point .
You have already set out the most important points from your report .
The year 2005 saw a large number of complaints - the largest , indeed , ever made to the Ombudsman - and the first thing that indicates is that more and more people are taking an active interest in the EU and in the way it works .


What is shocking , though - and this is something to which you referred - is the continuing large number of complaints - amounting to some 70 % of those made - that are not actually within your remit , very often because the people making them do not know with any certainty to whom they actually need to address themselves , and it is for that reason that I very much welcome your statement to the effect that you want an online form set up on your homepage as a guide to the right institution ; that would certainly be useful to all those who want to contact you online .
It follows , then , that the powers and responsibilities of the institutions need to be demarcated even more clearly in order that the public may understand who , in the European Union , is responsible for dealing with what , and you can help to make the tangled undergrowth of institutions and their powers more transparent , something that is , of course , in the first instance a task for Parliament and for its Members in the electoral districts in the relevant regions , but you can play your part too .
We extend a very warm welcome to the European Network of Ombudsmen and similar bodies , which take quite different forms from one Member State to another , and we have , for that reason , particularly highlighted their public information events .
Turning to the substance of the various complaints , they focus primarily on a lack of transparency , and so , in that the report repeats the Ombudsman 's demands - made in his special report on the subject - for all meetings of the Council in its legislative capacity to be open to the public , you have served the cause of democracy and transparency in Europe well .
We also , though , need more transparency if the democratic functioning of the European Union is to be guaranteed , and hence , in our report - and in saying this , I am perhaps addressing you , Commissioner Wallström , more than anyone else - we call for the ' europa.eu ' Internet portal to be redesigned as a means of access to all the institutions and for a clear guide to the various European institutions - rather than a catalogue of all the European Union 's activities - to be positioned on the homepage .
Finally , I should like to give voice to another thought , namely that it was in January that you presented your annual report for the past year , yet it is only now - in November of the following year - that we are debating it .
We in the Committee on Petitions should endeavour to discuss these reports as soon as possible after they are published .
Vice-President of the Commission .
Mr President , first I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Schwab , for his work on the European Ombudsman 's report on his activities in 2005 .
This is an important report from Parliament on the general principles , the state of play and future development of cooperation between the Ombudsman and other EU institutions .
I would also like to congratulate the Ombudsman , Mr Diamandouros , on his annual report .
I am happy , as always , to hear Mr Diamandouros confirm his commitment to ensuring the highest standards of administration in the European institutions , and that is a commitment the Commission shares .
I entirely support Mr Schwab in his endorsement of the role of the Ombudsman as an external monitoring mechanism for sound administration .
Through his work , the Ombudsman contributes to the promotion of good administration .
I am convinced that , through their cooperation with the Ombudsman , EU institutions are helped in fostering a citizen-oriented approach to their daily work .
That means ensuring greater transparency of the EU decision-making process and working to develop best practices to meet citizens ' expectations and safeguard their rights .
This is about bridging the gap between institutions and EU citizens .
I would like to comment on three specific points in the report .
Firstly , I think that the cooperation between the Ombudsman and the Commission has developed well in recent years .
As pointed out in the report , the Commission uses a new internal procedure empowering each Commissioner to adopt and transmit communications to the Ombudsman .
I am happy that both the Ombudsman and Mr Schwab welcome this innovation in their reports .
In addition , the Commission has adapted its internal rules to speed up the handling of its replies to the Ombudsman .
The Commission will continue to develop its cooperation with the Ombudsman .
The rapporteur suggests that a similar empowering procedure be introduced for the handling of petitions .
While the Commission will continue to work closely with the Committee on Petitions , that is not a possibility that the Commission envisages .
The Committee on Petitions and the European Ombudsman have distinct roles , each with its own value to citizens .
Secondly , the report mentions the Europa website .
It is one of the most visited websites in the world and it has become quite complex to navigate .
It is in that light that the Commission is well on its way towards refurbishing its own part of the Europa portal .
The ultimate objective is to transform the Europa website into a more user-friendly , well-structured and coherent web portal .
It will be multilingual at appropriate levels and the presentation will be more oriented to citizens and communication .
Thirdly , and finally , the decision to revise the Ombudsman 's statute rests with the European Parliament , with the approval of the Council .
The Commission is , however , consulted and closely follows developments relating to the proposal , including those in the committees concerned .
The Commission is currently examining the proposal in detail , and has been in contact with the Ombudsman 's office to seek clarification on some aspects of the proposal .
In conclusion , I understand that next year the Ombudsman intends to include a few star cases in his annual report .
These are , as I understand it , cases where the handling of complaints by the EU institutions has been exemplary , regardless of whether maladministration occurred .
I think that is an excellent initiative and I also look forward to seeing next year 's report .


Mr President , Madam Wallström , Mr Diamandouros , ladies and gentlemen , I should like , first of all , to congratulate the rapporteur , my honourable friend Andreas Schwab , on the extraordinary effort he has made in his report to illustrate that , year on year , the institution of the European Ombudsman is becoming extremely important to European citizens , thanks to the work being carried out by the European Ombudsman .
I also wish to express my thanks to Mr Diamandouros , because the new facts that he brings to light in the position he holds are reference points for the trust that the citizens place in the institutions .
I acted as rapporteur for the annual report on the activities of the European Ombudsman in 2004 and I wish to point out that , compared with that year , during which complaints rose by 53 % over the previous year , in 2005 the Ombudsman received a total of 3 920 complaints , in other words an increase in the order of 5 % .
This does not mean that there are more cases of maladministration on the part of the institutions of the European Union , but that the citizens are more informed as to their rights .
An important factor for the efficacy of the institution of the Ombudsman is its cooperation with the institutions of the European Union .
I would refer by way of example to the regular updates and meetings between Mr Diamandouros and the Committee on Petitions and its bureau .
The Ombudsman 's annual report illustrates , among other things , the efforts being made by the Ombudsman and the Commission , of course , to broaden and further strengthen the network of national and regional ombudsmen , by developing exchanges of information for best practices .
The participation of the Committee on Petitions of the European Parliament in this network is important and would facilitate practical cooperation between the European institutions and the national and regional ombudsmen and would allow regular contacts with the committees on petitions of the national parliaments and with the ombudsmen of the Member States to be increased .
If we compare the Ombudsman 's reports for 2004 and 2005 , we see that the result was positive , so that we can concentrate on the points in which the Committee on Petitions is particularly interested .
Furthermore , we can see in this way the essential role he plays and the progress made within one year .

on behalf of the PSE Group . - I too want to thank Mr Schwab , and my colleagues in other political groups as well , for the considerable amount of work they have put into this report .
The Ombudsman 's report , particularly the executive summary , is , I believe , an excellent example of how to present our work to the citizens .
It is clear , concise and to the point .
Transparency is , I believe , the key to European democracy and its main building block .
I welcome the increased awareness of the European Ombudsman 's role , reflected in the increased numbers taking their complaints to him .
I am not at all concerned about the fact that many of these are not directly his responsibility .
That is a reflection of his success in bringing his office to the notice of the public and perhaps also an indication of the inadequacies of other institutions in making clear who they are and how to access them .
I believe we should not expect citizens to find their way through the maze of EU institutions .
They have more important things to be doing with their lives .
When they have a complaint to make , they will reach for the nearest known vehicle available to them .
I think that the citizen 's right to make a complaint is a good thing .
The action of the Ombudsman in referring those cases for which he does not have direct responsibility to the appropriate institution is an excellent way of dealing with such complaints .
I believe it should be followed by other institutions .
One final point : ten years after the initiation of the Ombudsman 's statute , there is clearly a need for a review .
I welcome the Ombudsman 's initiative in that regard and I look forward to debating it in Parliament in the near future .
( Applause )
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , I too should like to thank the Ombudsman both for his report and for his interesting presentation today .
I would also like to thank Mr Schwab for his very competent report and analysis of the Ombudsman 's report .
There is little to say except that everything seems to be going well in the sense that our citizens are more aware of the Ombudsman 's activities .
If the numbers of complaints are rising owing to an increasing awareness of what is possible and an awareness of Europe , then that is helping to bring our citizens closer to us .
That is what we should be all about .
Reports of this type help give us a snapshot of what is going on and of how we can do things better in the future , and this report sets out many of those lessons .
I want to centre my remarks on an issue already mentioned by other speakers , which is that if we want to be citizen-centred then we have to ensure that our citizens can make a complaint easily , perhaps via a one-stop shop .
Simply having a good website may not be the answer .
At present there are a lot of people dealing with complaints , problems and issues .
We have the Ombudsman 's very good service , Parliament 's Committee on Petitions , the Commission itself , which accepts complaints , and ourselves as MEPs , who receive constituents ' case-work , as well as SOLVIT and EUROJUST .
I fear that some EU citizens who apply to one of these bodies only to be referred to another will fall by the wayside and give up .
We need to think about ways in which we can bring these various strands together so that our citizens feel that their issues are being answered promptly and that they are being directed to the right recipient .
That is something we should think about for the future .
Thank you again for your report .

on behalf of the Verts / ALE Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I would like to thank the Ombudsman and also Mr Schwab , for his thorough , complete and positive report .
I would like to begin by expressing my agreement with Mrs Wallis 's proposal and with the proposal for a European one-stop shop for the citizens ' complaints .
This one-stop shop could bring together SOLVIT , the European Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions and would be responsible for channelling the citizens ' complaints to the appropriate institution .
We cannot expect the public to be able to navigate such a complicated labyrinth as the European Union .
My only regret about the report , which in general is very positive , is its consideration of the third special report by the Ombudsman , which was going to be a report on OLAF and which has been blocked by the Conference of Presidents .
Some of the wording of the Schwab report appears to legitimise this House 's Conference of Presidents ' attempts to hinder the Ombudsman 's work of monitoring European bodies , including OLAF .
In particular we should thank the Ombudsman for some of his efforts , such as those relating to the environment , where there is great popular concern .
I would especially like to mention the case of the industrial port of Granadilla , in the Canary Islands , where the Ombudsman has tried to ensure more rigorous application of the Habitat Directive , with a degree of success .
It is also important to highlight the special report on the transparency of the Council when acting as legislator , a report that I personally was involved in preparing .
We can see that there is slow , gradual , but real progress in this area .
I would like to end by making it clear that the role of Parliament 's Committee on Petitions in no way clashes with the role of the Ombudsman , but rather their roles are complementary .
The Ombudsman monitors the European institutions in their day-to-day work , while the Committee on Petitions plays the role of direct intermediary between the citizens and the body of Community law .
There should be more fluid day-to-day cooperation between them , with more information and more contact .
Thank you for your report , Mr Schwab , and thank you , Mr Diamandouros , for your very intensive , wide-ranging and important work .


on behalf of the GUE / NGL Group . - ( ES ) Mr President , I too would like to thank the Ombudsman , Mr Diamandouros , and our rapporteur , Mr Schwab , because they are both working to try to improve the way we respond to the European citizens ' complaints , administrative or of any other kind .
In fact , I believe that the time has come to take concrete initiatives to make such improvements .
Some interesting ones have already been mentioned , such as the online form and the better demarcation of the competences of the different bodies , but I believe that we should be rather more ambitious .
We should move toward a code of good administrative conduct for all of the European institutions , and the one-stop shop , which Mr Hammerstein mentioned , can also be important .
The reports note that 24 % of complaints relate to a lack of transparency .
I believe that we must make an effort to promote a public debate in Europe on how close a relationship citizens have with the institutions and to ensure that those institutions act in an entirely transparent fashion .
In this regard , I would like to mention another problem that the members of the Committee on Petitions should resolve .
Many of the citizens ' complaints received relate to large works , large infrastructures , that are carried out in the European Union without the mandatory environmental impact study .
Sometimes the European Commission is late in issuing a report , since the damage caused by certain absolutely monumental works is already irreversible .
I believe that the European Commission must act much more quickly , in order to prevent that damage from having an horrendous environmental impact .
To this end , I believe that we should all do our bit to create speedy assessment mechanisms for these kinds of works , in order to prevent that damage .
I believe that the European Network of Ombudsmen is important , because it may be the key to providing many solutions that can prevent complaints from the citizens of Europe and , where necessary , improve the way we respond to them .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , I am , in a sense , wearing two hats today .
As you said , I am speaking on behalf of the Union for the Europe of the Nations Group as well as in my capacity as Chairman of the Committee on Petitions , which makes me particularly qualified to speak on this matter .
I would , of course , like to thank Mr Schwab for his report , which was very well prepared and subsequently adopted in our committee , and I therefore fully agree with everything Mr Schwab has said .
I would particularly like to thank Mr Diamandouros .
He does his job extremely well and this is fully appreciated as , if I may remind you , he has been re-elected to his post by a majority of over ninety percent of the votes cast .
I very much appreciate the contact that Mr Diamandouros has with the European public , outside of his main work as Ombudsman .
He has attended over 170 meetings .
I myself was present at one of these meetings in Poland , which was attended by over 150 people who had come to see who he was , what he had to say and what message the European Ombudsman himself had for them .
This is one of the achievements of Mr Diamandouros ' hands-on approach .
As everyone has already mentioned , I would like to say that the active involvement of the European Ombudsman is closely linked to , shapes and reflects a greater awareness of the rights of the European Union citizens , and that they are more aware of these rights precisely thanks to the activities of the European Ombudsman .
The Committee on Petitions , of which I am the chairman , works closely with the European Ombudsman .
We have similar competences , but they are not identical .
It is therefore important to be aware of the differences between the competences of the Ombudsman and those of the Committee on Petitions .
If the President will allow me to extend my speech by a few more seconds , I would like to draw your attention to one more matter .
The Committee on Petitions is a European Parliament body .
It is therefore very regrettable that the European Parliament and its bodies sometimes bypass our committee in their dealings with the Ombudsman .
There was an instance of this on 15 March 2006 , when the European Parliament signed a new agreement with the Ombudsman over the heads of the committee which I chair , and which was not involved in this process .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , the Ombudsman 's 2005 report indicates that a growing number of citizens are dissatisfied with the European Union 's bodies .
There is a striking lack of transparency concerning their activities and a lack of effective control over the way we spend our money .
The infringement of citizens ' right to information is particularly damaging .
A glaring example of this was the campaign to promote the so-called Constitution for Europe .
In March of last year I addressed a complaint to the European Ombudsman regarding the use of EUR 8 million to promote the European Constitution .
This funding was only available to supporters of the Constitution .
This fact was confirmed by a European Commission spokesman on 16 February 2005 .
In response to questions from the media on whether European Union money could be used to fund a campaign organised by opponents of the European Constitution , he said , and I quote : ' The Commission is treating the European Constitution like its baby and cares about its ratification ' and the ' European Union 's Office for Official Publications is not going to print pamphlets written by opponents of the Constitution . '
These frank statements by Commissioner Wallström 's spokesman explicitly show that opponents of the Constitution did not , and still do not , have any opportunity to present their views .
For example , before the referendum in Spain , the European Commission spent EUR 1 million on printing 5 million pro-constitutional pamphlets and stickers , which were handed out in public places .
There was a deliberate move to avoid providing information on the negative aspects of the European Constitution .
This was therefore a blatant infringement of the European citizens ' fundamental right to equal access to information .
After investigating my complaint for a year , the European Ombudsman decided that the European Commission did not infringe the citizens ' right to equal access to information .
In that case , who did ?
When they see their credibility collapsing and disintegrating , the European Union institutions resort ever more frequently to mendacious propaganda and to funding and imposing a single , ' true ' vision of European unity .
I appreciate the Ombudsman 's efforts in the fight to achieve transparency concerning the work of the European institutions , but there is still a long way to go .
Dinners with representatives of the bodies the Ombudsman are investigating are not enough to increase the credibility and authority of his office .
This office should be a real Ombudsman defending our rights , an Ombudsman who speaks out for the truth and defends the citizens from the ills of the European Union machine .
However , such work requires courage and autonomy .
Mr President , I congratulate Mr Schwab .
He has produced a jolly good report and I am delighted to be part of it .
The Ombudsman has been signally successful in his activities , but ironically his success has provoked more interest .
That , however , is actually good news for the task of the Committee on Petitions , to which the Ombudsman reports and whose joint work with him is so important .
I agree entirely with Diana Wallis that is essential that EU citizens are made more aware of the facilities for the redress of grievances , particularly those that exist through the auspices of the Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions .
I , with everyone else , congratulate Mr Diamandouros on his achievements , especially , if I may say so , on his determination , past , present and future , in explaining the use of his powers to the new Member States and encouraging them to use his services .
We have plans to do the same on behalf of the Committee on Petitions and I should say that the combination of a Commissioner from Sweden , where the Ombudsman originated , and an Ombudsman from Greece , where democracy originated , is a powerful and influential one .
I am particularly interested in the Ombudsman 's special reports .
He will know that I am the rapporteur manqué for one such report , relating to OLAF .
He must know , as must this House , that I will not allow this issue to go away .
Transparency and open dealing must be paramount and this report must and will be dealt with when the judicial process is completed .
As the chairman said , the Committee on Petitions is of increasing importance and must soon cease to be the Cinderella committee at the end of the list of limited significance .
The activities of the Ombudsman and the Petitions Committee are many , various and growing exponentially .
They must be recognised by Parliament and the Conference of Presidents and given the authority they deserve .
( Applause )

( ES ) Mr President , I would like to begin by congratulating Mr Diamandouros on his detailed report , which proposes a way forward and improvements in the relationship between the citizens and the European Administration .
I would also like to congratulate Commissioner Wallström and thank her for her tireless efforts to facilitate communications between the citizen and the European institutions and implement quick , simpler and interactive solutions .
I would also , of course , like to congratulate Mr Schwab in particular on the in-depth way in which he has dealt with these issues , which may seem routine but which certainly represent progress on the road towards ' more Europe ' .
I am particularly pleased with the progress in the work of mediation and response to the citizens ' demands and I am particularly pleased and interested to note the friendly solutions proposed .
I would also urge Mr Diamandouros to develop a format for the peaceful settlement of disputes that serves as a model for Europe in general .
I am sure that the democracy enjoyed by both the Administration and the citizens will be increased by means of a better and more transparent administration .
I am also delighted with the explicit proposal to offer the Internet sites for all of the institutions in all of the Union 's official languages .

Given his constructive approach , I share Mr Schwab 's concern about the need to improve cooperation , with no obstacles or misunderstandings , between Parliament and the European Ombudsman , while preventing any overlapping between them : the Committee on Petitions and the Ombudsman are still seeking their own directions , and it is therefore positive that the Committee on Petitions should participate in the European Network of Ombudsmen .
Finally , perhaps because I am not aware of the scale of the issue , I am rather concerned that the future of the Ombudsman appears to lie in the courts , and I hope that that does not mean that improving information and , particularly , the efforts to achieve the peaceful settlement of disputes will be abandoned early .
The proposed judicialisation is not the best way to improve relations between the citizens and the European public Administration , and I would refer to the existing examples that have already been mentioned .
I truly believe that the European citizens ' confidence in their Ombudsman will depend on a greater capacity to settle disputes peacefully .

Mr President , I wish to thank Mr Diamandouros for his report , and Mr Schwab for the report we are debating today .
I share his concerns that it is a little late in the day to be debating this issue , but I suppose it is better late than never !
The Ombudsman is the watchdog of the system .
I would prefer to think of him as a Rottweiler , which is what we need , rather than a tamer breed !
My Irish colleagues will giggle at the ' Rottweiler ' description because politically speaking we have one of those in our national parliament .
The Ombudsman has an important role to play and I do not share the concerns of those who maintain that 70 % of complaints fall outside his remit .
As others have said , this reflects the fact that there is a huge amount of frustration and people need somewhere to turn .
It is important to underline that .
I am pleased that the Ombudsman , in his wisdom , does not turn them away , but actually assists them .
He should continue to do that .
Others might not agree , but that is part of his job , and we need that flexibility .
I compliment the Ombudsman for trying to promote his work .
There is an onus on all of us in this House to help him in that regard , even if I regard my own office - and I think other colleagues feel similarly - as a one-stop shop .
At the end of the day , I hope MEPs are the first port of call for citizens who have problems .
Mrs Wallis ' proposal to set up a one-stop shop is a good one , but let us not forget that we as elected representatives are also here to obtain information for citizens .
The Ombudsman should bear in mind that we in this House often experience as much frustration as the public when it comes to getting information from the Commission .
There is a duty on administrators to see themselves as servants of the public and not as protectors of the system .
If necessary , we will have to train people and change their culture .
I would be interested to know whether the Ombudsman has looked into the attitudes of those who are at the root of problems .
In other words , in the complaints he has upheld , is a bad attitude evident among administrators ?
If so , we should do something about that .
I wish to thank all those involved again , and I hope the Ombudsman 's workload increases exponentially , as it should .
( NL ) Mr President , the European Ombudsman 's annual report reveals that a quarter of complaints come from citizens who experience a lack of transparency on the part of the European institutions .
Whilst these complaints are not always justified , of course - as is also mentioned in this extensive report - this is still a large proportion , and so there is much room for improvement .
The rapporteur is right to point out that , according to the Treaty of Nice , every European institution must seek to be as open and accessible as possible .
The bulk of the complaints are directed at the Commission , of course , because they are most closely involved with the citizens , although it is in actual fact mainly the Council of Ministers that is causing the delays .
In the old-fashioned culture of paternalistic power and the top-down approach , openness can wait .
Nevertheless , confidence is a key condition if policy is to be effective , and the world needs a strong EU that is carried by its citizens , because there is more at stake than a little governing .
Would Europe want to stand up for globalisation of a different kind , social , sustainable and fair development ?
Only if Europe commits to this can the EU truly gain confidence .
Only a Europe , though , that offers openness in every decision will be given it .
If we want to boost Europeans ' confidence in their own European Union permanently , openness and accessibility are absolute political priorities .
I would urge Europe to throw the doors open wide .
( DE ) Mr President , on a point of order , I would like to comment on what my esteemed colleague Mrs McGuinness said .
The Rottweiler dogs to which she referred come from the town in which I was born , and so I regard myself as a Rottweiler .
If I can assist you , Mr Diamandouros , in Rottweiler-like fashion , I shall be very happy to do so .



( DE ) Mr President , Madam Vice-President of the Commission , Mr Diamandouros , Mr Schwab , I would particularly like to thank the latter two of you for the splendid work that has been done , and to express the hope that Mr Schwab can continue to have as firm a bite - not least where politics are concerned - as the well-known breed of dogs from his home town of Rottweil .
In any case , I wish him every success in that .

You , too , Mr Diamandouros , have an important part to play , particularly since you are , in my view , the relay that connects the public to the European institutions ; it is to you that citizens turn with any concerns they may have with them , and your role is to settle grievances and you do try to find solutions .
Last year saw 3 920 submissions made , and in 75 % of cases , it proved possible to offer the complainants a solution by setting investigations in motion or referring them onward to the relevant departments ; that really is a very high percentage .

The Commission , too , has a very important part to play in this , in that it keeps on trying , by means of various transparency initiatives , to demonstrate how open it is , and I can do no other than encourage it in that , and you , Madam Vice-President , in carrying on down this road .
The fact is that , as we know , great institutions - not only the Commission , but also those in the business world - have a tendency to become self-sufficient and to acquire a life of their own into which it is difficult for outsiders to get an insight , so press on with your transparency initiative , I beg you .
What I would like to say to our Polish friend is that I think it extremely hypocritical to accuse the Commission of providing only such information on the constitutional treaty as shows it in a favourable light .
The publications I have seen were all kept relatively objective and were a necessary means of informing the public as to what this is all about .
( Applause )
It really is hypocritical to demand , on the one hand , more information , and , on the other , to ask that some of it be curtailed .
That is why we must press on together down this road in order to be able to build a Europe in which we can all share .
( Applause )
( PL ) Mr President , the 2005 report allows us to conclude that the European Ombudsman is successfully achieving the aims of increasing the effectiveness of his institution in the field of good administrative practice and adherence to the principles of the rule of law and human rights .
At this point , we should say a word of thanks to Professor Diamandouros , who is in charge of this institution .
The public nature of the Ombudsman 's activities deserves praise .
Nevertheless , it is worrying that 70 % of all complaints lodged still remain outside of the scope of competence of the Ombudsman .
This is nearly always a result of the fact that the essence of the complaints are not directed against the bodies or institutions of the European Union .
It shows that the division of competences between the institutions and the decision-making processes are still unclear to many European Union citizens .
It is therefore vital to define and clearly delineate the role of the Ombudsman and the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions in a way that is clear to the citizens of the European Union .
Last year , the number of complaints rose by 5 % over the previous year .
This may reflect the fact that the Ombudsman 's activities are more widely acknowledged , or it may be linked to the fact that not all European Member States have this type of institution , which means that many people go to the European Ombudsman with problems involving national , regional and local administrative bodies .
The Ombudsman must increase its efforts to provide the public with reliable information .
Citizens must have easy access to information in their own mother tongues .
This will allow them to feel that they are card-carrying citizens of the European Union , whose welfare is important and whose voices count .
Finally , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur , Mr Schwab , on an excellent report .
I think that he will continue in his role as a watchdog , or indeed a rottweiler , of the law .
( EL ) Mr President , eleven months after the celebration of the tenth anniversary of the institution of the European Ombudsman , the annual report for the 10th year is being approved today .
I congratulate Mr Diamandouros on his worthy representation and effective conduct of the role of defender of transparency and honest administration in the European Union .
Perhaps next year we shall examine his annual report in Parliament earlier and more quickly and the Committee on Petitions , as the competent committee , will be in direct contact with the Ombudsman , so that it can be informed about the procedure for the signing of interinstitutional agreements between him and the European Parliament .
Paragraph 6 of the Schwab report justifiably expresses our regret about the signing of a new agreement with effect from 1 April 2006 , in other words before the report for 2005 had been approved .
The Ombudsman also submitted on 11 July a proposal for the adaptation of his statute . Paragraph 13 of the Schwab report welcomes the fact .
However , I should like to comment that the issues which he touches on in his request are particularly sensitive and his arguments are particularly weak .
The ban on intervention in cases pending before the courts is something which cannot be contested on the basis of the Treaties .
Community servants must be bound by professional secrecy .
We have competent institutions for examining human rights ; but we too , as a parliament controlled by the citizens , have the jurisdiction to investigate and file complaints .
There is a plethora of extrajudicial procedures .
The Ombudsman has numerous duties and one can only hope that he has time with the staff in his department , which fortunately is constantly increasing - from 38 to 51 and 57 in 2006 - to respond to the increased number of complaints .
If , however , the Ombudsman condemns the lack of transparency in the work of the Council , we call on him in Amendment 1 - which I call on you to support - to check , not after specific complaints from citizens , but on his own initiative , the transparency with which EPSO recruitment competitions are carried out and the recruitment methods of the European agencies , including his own department .
This is an issue which touches on the sensitivity mainly of the new Europeans , who take part in competitions and interviews in their thousands and do not have the right to find out why they failed .
My thanks also to the Commissioner for highlighting the intention of the Ombudsman to use his time praising the Commission .
Ombudsman .
Mr President , I should like to thank very warmly all the Members of this august House for their very encouraging words .
I take heart from the support I have from this particular body , whose cooperation I value enormously .
I also commit myself and my staff to trying to move forward , to doing more of the same and to doing more of what I am asked to do .
It is not possible for me to cover all the remarks that have been made , but let me address some of the issues .
Firstly , I am very grateful for the support I have received concerning the Statute .
With the permission of Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou , I would like to clarify two points concerning this , which I will do in Greek , since she addressed me in Greek .
( EL ) Mr President , Mrs Panayotopoulos , I wish to assure you that the European Personnel Selection Office is already within the European Ombudsman 's mandate and that this is a matter of particular concern to us , which we are monitoring very , very closely .
As far as my recommendations are concerned , I also wish to assure you that the request I make ...
( The speaker was cut off by the President , who drew his attention to a problem with the interpretation )
I apologise , Mr President .
I did not realise there was a problem with the interpretation .
I thought it was an attempt to test my ability to speak in my native tongue !
With the President 's permission I would like very briefly to assure Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou and the House that the European Personnel Selection Office is already within the Ombudsman 's mandate and we devote a great deal of time to questions concerning recruitment .
On the Statute , I want to make it absolutely plain that the Ombudsman is not , under any circumstances , asking for the right to initiate cases before the Court .
That is clearly not for us to do .
The Court and the Ombudsman are separate .
What we are asking for is the right to intervene before the Court , as that right has been given to the European Data Protection Supervisor in cases of major violations of fundamental rights .
That is a fundamental difference .
I repeat , we are under no circumstances seeking to have access to the Court in a way that would in fact go beyond my mandate .
I appreciate the encouragement concerning a Single Code and I am working with Commissioner Wallström to see whether that would be possible ; she referred to that in her own remarks .
I wish to thank Sir Robert Atkins in particular for his determination to see that all the special reports submitted to this House by the Ombudsman will be dealt with eventually .
I hope that will be done .
The one-stop shop idea is a very important one .
I would very much look forward to working with Mrs Wallström and with other institutions and perhaps launching a brainstorming and reflection procedure about that idea , so that we can serve citizens better .
I want to stress that the European Ombudsman and the Committee on Petitions are complementary organisations ; I am very grateful to that committee and we will work with it constantly with a view to moving forward .
Lastly , I have a few comments to make if I may .
The inadmissibles are indeed very important and we shall try to reduce them .
But we will continue to help all citizens who come to us for the wrong reason by using the Network of Ombudsmen of the European Union as a mechanism of transferring complaints to them , thereby helping those citizens and in a sense trying to apply subsidiarity in non-judicial mechanisms .
We work with our colleagues at national and regional level to serve citizens better , which includes the transfer of inadmissibles .
I thank Mrs McGuinness very much for her very laudatory remarks .
I view myself as an external mechanism of control over the administration and therefore , if everything else fails , yes , I will also have to act as a Rottweiler .
Leaving aside the Irish overtones of that - I do not want to get into theological implications here , or divinity - I think that is , however , the ultimate step .
The first step , on which I am working very closely with the Commission , with the Secretary-General of the Commission and with Mrs Wallström , is to reach out to the institutions , to reach out to the Commission , and help them understand what their obligations are .
It is indeed to help them realise that a change of culture is extraordinarily important if the European institutions , including the Commission , are in fact to understand that the institutions exist to serve the citizen and not the other way round .
Thank you very much for giving me the time to make these clarifications .
Once again , I want to thank this House for its very encouraging and very warm reactions to my report .
( Applause )
The debate is closed .
Voting will take place today at 12.00 .
Written statement ( Rule 142 )
( HU ) I wish to draw attention to a matter concerning Mr Diamandouros 's report on his activities in 2005 , on which the European Parliament has already adopted a resolution this year .
In 2005 , the European Ombudsman submitted a special report to Parliament , because he had found an unjustified discrimination with regard to funds for members of EU staff with children with special educational needs .
In his draft recommendation , he asked the European Commission to take the necessary steps to ensure that parents , whose children are excluded from the European Schools because of their degree of disability , should not be required to contribute to the educational costs of their children .
Parliament 's resolution on the matter requested that the Commission respect the principle of equal treatment .
The necessary steps were not taken , however , since unfortunately in the course of school enrolment this autumn , it once again happened that a pupil with special educational needs was refused admission .
This practice , which violates respect for human rights , has led to several families living apart and having to leave Brussels , and often the European institutions as well .
As laid down in the Charter of Fundamental Rights and in the EU Treaty , the right to education , equal treatment and the prohibition against any form of discrimination constitute the founding principles of Community law .
I therefore request that , having regard to the Ombudsman 's recommendation and Parliament 's resolution on this matter , the European Commission create the conditions for equal educational opportunities for children with special educational needs , in line with European principles .
Communication of Council common positions : see Minutes
Statement by the President
I wish to make an announcement to my honourable friends .
It was with huge relief that we heard the news that the death penalty on Mr Mirza-Tahir Hussain , a British subject detained in Pakistan , has been commuted .
The President of the European Parliament and the Members of the House made huge efforts to save Mr Mirza-Tahir Hussain 's life .
In this particular case , we are all in a position to welcome the fact that the message sent by Parliament was heard .
( Loud applause )
1 .
EU-Mauritania fisheries agreement ( vote )
- after the vote :
( FR ) Mr President , since we had some difficulties last time with roll-call votes on a show of hands , I would like to know why we have had a roll-call vote today , which is not even indicated on my voting list .
Because a political group requested one .
2 .
Situation in Gaza ( vote )
- before the vote on paragraph 4 :
( IT ) Mr President , at the end of paragraph 4 , the following phrase would need to be added : ' Condemns the recent rocket attack in Sderot and the killing of innocent Israeli civilians ' .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
3 .
Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention ( vote )
4 .
A Baltic Sea Strategy for the Northern Dimension ( vote )
5 .
The implementation of the European Security Strategy in the context of the ESDP ( vote )
- before the vote on Amendment 21 :
Mr President , since an editorial problem has come to light here , I suggest that we deviate from the voting list I proposed and instead vote against Amendment 21 .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
- before the vote on Amendment 7 :
( DE ) Mr President , the Group of the Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for Europe has asked me if I might make a small amendment , and I shall be happy to do so , since it would not in any way alter the political thrust .
The last line would then read :
' would welcome the willingness of the United States to join in such negotiations with Iran ' .
( DE ) I am therefore happy to do as the Liberals have suggested and amend the text accordingly .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
6 .
Succession and wills ( vote )
- before the vote on Amendment 3 :
( DE ) Mr President , I move that our Amendment 3 be amended so that , in the English text , the word ' testator ' is replaced in its two occurrences by the word ' deceased ' , and the period for which a normal residence may be maintained is reduced from three to two years .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
- before the vote on Amendment 1 :

( DE ) Mr President , although this amendment was intended to delete a number of words from our rapporteur 's original text , its effect was to delete a few too many of them , so the words ' with binding effect ' should stand and not be deleted .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
7 .
Women in international politics ( vote )
8 .
Fighting trafficking in human beings ( vote )
- before the vote on Amendment 4 :
. - ( DE ) Mr President , We would like to have a recount of Part 2 of paragraph ( 1 ) .
We have announced this in good time .
We ask you to have the vote reviewed .
- before the vote on Amendment 21 :
rapporteur . - Mr President , I should like to ask colleagues to accept the replacement of Amendment 21 with a clearer text as follows : ' The Commission should address the problem of child trafficking in the sports sector in the context of the Council Framework Decision on combating trafficking in human beings , with particular attention to cases where some clubs might consider giving contracts to very young children in order to circumvent the home-grown rule ' .
( Parliament agreed to accept the oral amendment )
9 .
Ombudsman 's 2005 annual report ( vote )
- before the vote :
rapporteur . - ( DE ) Mr President , I would like to raise a point of order .
This morning , we discussed with the European Ombudsman the question of what powers he possessed to monitor EPSO , the European personnel agency , and he confirmed that he exercises such functions by virtue of his office .
I would therefore like to make a request of the Members with whom we debated this morning , namely that we should agree to adopt Mrs Panayotopoulos-Cassiotou 's Amendment 1 on the grounds that it confirms what the European Ombudsman said .
10 .
European communication policy ( vote )
- before the vote on paragraph 44 :
. - ( FR ) Mr President , it seems to me that there has been some confusion .
We were in fact voting on paragraph 44 ( 2 ) , while the screen was displaying paragraph 44 ( 1 ) .
There may therefore have been some confusion .
( IT ) Mr President , I should just like to confirm that , regarding the previous vote , 44 ( 1 ) appeared on the screen and not 44 ( 2 ) , in the last vote that was cast .
There has been a great deal of confusion as a result of this .
That concludes the vote .
Voting time
The next item is the vote .
( For outcome and other details of the vote : see Minutes )
Explanations of vote
in writing . In supporting this joint Resolution I want to highlight the demand that the EU must now use all the instruments at its disposal , including the EU association agreement with Israel , to end the violence in Gaza which has condemned the Palestinians to a slow death and risks setting the whole Middle East on fire .
Israel , as a democratic state , needs to ask itself questions .
Lawlessness cannot be allowed to be the answer to lawlessness .
The Israeli government must end its blockade of Gaza and there must be an immediate resumption of aid to Palestine , and support for the government of national unity .
I support the call for an international inquiry into the possible use by Israeli forces of weapons of mass destruction , as was suspected in Lebanon .
I also support the idea of an international peace conference bringing together all the actors in the Middle East , including Syria and Iran .
I demand an international force in Gaza .
We have contributed to the chaos in Palestine and we have allowed the Israelis to go too far in the name of their legitimate right to protect their security .
We now have mistakes to make up for .
in writing . - ( PT ) I wish to state that I voted against the joint resolution on the situation in Gaza .
I did so not because I do not consider the military excesses that have struck at civilian populations to deserve condemnation , but because I feel that the overall content of the statement includes some highly negative terms for the State of Israel , which has been the victim of constant terrorist attacks . That is in no way justifiable .
in writing . - ( PT ) Israel is escalating its aggression against the Palestinian people with impunity , as shown by the Beit Hanun massacre and the criminal , inhuman blockade of the Gaza Strip , which has been turned into a vast concentration camp .
In view of that , the European Parliament - while dodging the issue of having endorsed EU participation in the financial blockade of the Palestinian Authority - condemns the Israeli army for the massacre it committed and for its action , which it terms ' disproportionate ' .
Faced with glaring evidence of Israel 's brutal aggression against the Palestinian people , Parliament merely ' notes ' the disgraceful US veto of a draft resolution in the UN Security Council repudiating Israeli aggression , when actually it should be denouncing US complicity with and responsibility for the attacks and crimes perpetrated in the Middle East , specifically by Israel .
Rather than proposing the presence of foreign troops in Gaza and the West Bank , which might just help maintain the status quo , what is required is condemnation of Israel over its colonialist policy , the construction of the illegal wall , the systematic repression of the Palestinian people , the destruction of infrastructure , and all the obstacles it places in the way to prevent the legitimate Palestinian Authority from working and to stop the creation of a sovereign , independent Palestinian state , with its capital in Jerusalem .
in writing . ( IT ) On behalf of the Transnational Radical Party , I voted wholeheartedly against the resolution on the situation in the Gaza Strip ( just as I would have done on any of the proposals of the various ' groups ' ) , believing all the resolutions put forward to be inadequate to solve the structural problems of the Middle East .
I do not think that the European common position on the longest-running conflict in the Middle East can continue to be the old policy of ' two peoples , two states ' .
As the Israeli ambassador to the United Nations has pointed out , every civilian victim of the attacks by Israeli forces is a tragic error , experienced as such by Israeli democratic society , while every Israeli killed by the rockets and suicide bombers of Hamas or Hezbollah is hailed as a triumph over Israel , which is looked upon as a tumour to be eradicated from the Middle East .
In reality , Mr President , the viable and urgent European alternative for building peace between Israel and the Palestinians ( and in the Middle East ) is this : two peoples , two democracies .
This is because only by proposing democratic reforms and the anti-nationalist European federalist model to the Mediterranean as a whole will it be possible to eradicate the structural causes of the Middle East conflict , causes which are very similar to those of all the wars which have devastated our continent , until the decision is made to renounce national sovereignty as an absolute value .
in writing . - ( PT ) The solution to the Middle East conflict depends on our upholding peace and mutual recognition and rejecting violence , terrorism and gratuitous military action , as well as accepting that a democratic state has the right to exist and to defend itself .
This resolution does not do that .
It is disproportionate when it should be reasonable , and blind when it should be clear-sighted .
We cannot regard the terrorist attacks on Israel as the acts of ' combatants ' and then accuse Israel of massacres .
This Parliament should not be lecturing a democratic government about its composition , when it merely asks elected but by no means democratic governments to do the bare minimum in recognising Israel .
That requirement , by the way , is not even mentioned here .
Furthermore , I will not be associated with a resolution that seems to conclude that the United States is the reason why the conflict is still going on , and which rather unsubtly threatens to call the association agreement with Israel into question just as an association agreement with Syria is about to be approved .
The sincere solidarity shown towards the victims and the refusal to accept that the attack on Beit Hanun should go unpunished cannot make me forget the need for balance or make me support a resolution that is disproportionate and counter-productive .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted against this resolution on Gaza .
This is not in any way to minimise the tragedy of Beit Hanoun , where misdirected Israeli artillery fire claimed 19 Palestinian lives .
The mistake had tragic consequences , and it is right that we should condemn it .
The tragedy , however , does not entitle us to adopt a resolution that is the most unbalanced I have seen in my seven years in this Parliament .
I cannot possibly enumerate all the partisan and contentious points in the text of this draft .
In general terms , it is a one-sided indictment of Israel .
Paragraph 4 just about manages a reference to the country 's inalienable right to security .
The Qassam rockets that rain down daily on Israeli towns , on the other hand , do not merit a single mention .
No more than three words are devoted to Gilad Shalit , who has now been in the hands of kidnappers for three months .
This brief reference , moreover , is hidden away at the very end of paragraph 19 , with no mention of his comrades who have been kidnapped in Lebanon .
Some comments made during the debate , indeed , were despicable , such as the reference to an Israeli society ' hypnotised by rudeness and racism ' , or the talk of Palestinian deaths counting less than Israeli deaths .
It seems that anything goes nowadays , and the boundary between anti-Israeli and anti-Semitic rhetoric is overstepped without anyone batting an eyelid .
This is unacceptable .
in writing . ( SV ) In today 's resolution on the situation in Gaza , which I have voted in favour of , I would like to have seen a more balanced discussion of the reasons why Israel and its army have been compelled to use methods that , viewed on their own , can be regarded as unreasonable .
The right of a country to protect its own citizens is a fundamental one , and it is the whole picture , and not individual events , on which judgments must be made .
in writing . Britain is in the forefront of research into defences against biological and toxin weapons and Britain must have continue to have freedom of action and independence in these matters .
We deplore the use of weapons against civilian populations and fully support the existing Geneva Conventions , including the Fourth Convention , which already provides legal protection for civilians in time of war and has been ratified by 194 countries .
in writing . I support the demand that next week 's Sixth Review Conference should reconfirm the commitment of all 155 States Parties to the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention ( BTWC ) the first multilateral disarmament treaty banning an entire category of weapons and their commitment to the complete prohibition of biological weapons .
There must be a thorough review of the operation of the BTWC to identify , discuss and agree on how to further strengthen the Convention and achieve a ban on biological and toxin weapons that is a universally binding rule of international law .
The EU must take up this issue in the transatlantic forums , in particular NATO , to convince the US Administration to move away from its unilateral standpoint and to contribute to the relaunch of an enhanced multilateral framework .
I welcome the entry into force this month of the CCW 's Protocol V on Explosive Remnants of War and hope many more States will sign it and ratify the five Protocols .
I urge the EU and its Member States to urgently establish protocols on relevant weapons systems and establish a protocol unambiguously banning the production , stockpiling , transfer and use of all types of cluster bombs ( fragmentation bombs ) .
in writing . The European Parliamentary Labour Party has today decided to join fellow MEPs in voting to support the international campaign for a ban on the use of cluster bombs .
In addition , we draw attention to the fact that although white phosphorus is a conventional and not a chemical weapon , Britain - but not America - has signed Protocol III of the 1980 Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons banning the use of incendiary weapons against civilian populations .
Labour accepts the assessment of health consequence from depleted uranium made by Britain 's Royal Society and supports further research by the World Health Organisation .
British troops always deserve the best available equipment to protect themselves , but reports that white phosphorus grenades were used in Iraq have been shown to be wrong , and neither does Britain have any DU stocks in Iraq .
in writing . The British Conservative Delegation fully supports the BTWC and the international efforts to universalise the Convention and to implement it effectively .
We are also long-standing and consistent supporters of the ban on anti-personnel landmines ( APL ) although we do not believe that it is a priority to clear APL from uninhabited and economically unused terrain ( for example , parts of the Falkland Islands ) provided that areas of possible danger are properly indicated .
We are also very wary about campaigns to extend the scope of international conventions to include cluster and other munitions .
We support moves to minimise the negative after-effects of conflict , such as explosive remnants , and to introduce ' smart ' ( self-destructive , precision-guided , etc . ) weapons where appropriate .
We support a ban on the use of white phosphorus a weapon , but it has other battlefield uses , for example for smokescreen .
We would certainly not support any action that would put British military personnel at increased risk or deprive the British Armed Forces of essential ordnance .
Therefore , while we support most of the text of this resolution we are not able to support a sweeping ban on cluster munitions at this stage , or indeed on the use of white phosphorus .
We therefore voted against the amendments and abstained overall .
in writing . ( SV ) We support the Via Baltica highway project , on condition that a sound environmental study is carried out .
in writing . ( SV ) The June List welcomes the Baltic Sea being put on the political agenda .
There are many positive aspects to this report , including the fact that due attention is to be paid to the environmental problems in the region .
We are also very positively disposed towards paragraph 13 , which states that those Member States that wish to do so should have the right to introduce environmental regulations more stringent than those proposed by the EU .
We do not agree , however , that the EU should fund the Via Baltica highway project .
It is also proposed that Europol cooperation should be increased .
We do feel able to support this , provided that it only means that the exchange of information is improved .
It must not lead to a European arrest warrant or to a given State 's police being able to take action in a different State .
We have supported this report as a whole in today 's vote as we have concluded that the positive elements in it outweigh the negative ones .
in writing . ( SV ) The primary aim of this report is to stress that the Baltic is a particularly sensitive sea of brackish water .
Paragraph 13 , which grants the Member States the right to more stringent legislation in order to protect the Baltic Sea , and paragraph 11 , which requires that environmental impact assessments be carried out for all energy projects , are critical to saving the Baltic Sea .
I am therefore voting in favour of the report despite the negative points in relation to increased border checks and more unsustainable infrastructure projects in the region .
in writing . ( SV ) The report on which we are voting today is a wish list for advocates of a militarised EU state .
Fortunately , it is only an own-initiative report , but , all the same , it is a clear signal to the other institutions of the EU of the direction that Parliament 's majority wants the EU to take .
The establishment of a standing naval force in the Mediterranean is one of the most preposterous ideas put forward .
What is more , the majority of the committee advocates the creation of a separate budget heading for military operations , and attempts are also being made to revive the dead draft Constitution .
As always when the European Parliament gets the chance to give its opinion , there is a desire to give more power to the Members of this House .
We have also adopted a position on the amendment calling for a coastguard under the aegis of the EU .
The development described in the report is very disturbing and should be a wake-up call , even for the most inveterate advocates of an EU state .
In view of the insecure situation with which we are faced nowadays , as a result of the numerous conflicts that are going on around the world , we should instead be asking ourselves whether the establishment of an EU army is the right way to address these problems .
Whether or not a nation state is to send in troops is something that must always be decided by the national parliaments , and never by a United States of Europe formed from the EU .
We have therefore voted against this report and most of the amendments to it that have been tabled .
in writing . The European Parliamentary Labour Party supports much of this report , in particular the emphasis on ensuring that ESDP is made more effective , so that it can be used as a tool to help in crisis zones throughout the world .
We also welcome the support given to greater cooperation between the EU and NATO , building on past experience , and the need for further development of capabilities .
However , we do not support the provisions in paragraph 52 concerning the establishment of a European Defence Minister , or the establishment of a European standing naval force .
In addition , we do not support paragraph 44 , which recommends military operations be funded centrally from the EU budget .
Concerning paragraph 51 , it is important to remember that we are currently in a period of reflection on the future of the Constitution and to underline that ESDP does not constitute the development of a Security and Defence Union .
in writing . - ( FR ) Some of the points in Mr von Wogau 's analysis coincide with our views , particularly those concerning the threats to Europe 's security , such as terrorism , the vulnerability of our oil supplies and the permeability of our borders .
In fact , contrary to the assertions of our governments , which have dismantled the systems that used to defend our nations , the world has become more dangerous than it was before the Berlin Wall came down .
The proposals contained in the report , however , are built on a second illusion , namely the idea that nations can rely on supranational bodies to guarantee their security .
In actual fact , when the chips are down , a nation always stands alone .
Today the United States devotes 3.5 % of its GDP to defence , compared with the one per cent spent by the 25 Member States of the European Union .
European harmonisation of defence equipment is certainly necessary , but do not let us dissolve our armed forces into a Eurocorps , in which orders would be given in 21 languages and which , via NATO , would be under US command .
Let us rather strengthen the defence of each of our countries .
Only independent nations , conscious of their identity , will make that effort .
To that end , the soulless and borderless Europe of Brussels must first be replaced by a Europe of sovereign nations .
in writing . - ( PT ) The document proposed here has earned my support since it is both realistic about what is desirable and ambitious about what is possible .
Security is one of the most important issues for European citizens , particularly as regards the risk of threats on European soil , and on that subject the rapporteur has sought to be realistic and to understand the immediacy and nature of the threats and the real danger they pose .
On the other hand , he has been ambitious in wanting to take a global approach , not just in the military field but also in the areas of technology , information and intelligence .
We too have to be ambitious as regards the need to promote peace and economic development in third countries , insofar as that is essential for our own security and for a better world , which is a goal that we should be pursuing with just as much commitment .
I have therefore voted in favour of this agreement , since I agree in essence with its analyses and concerns , even though I neither share nor think it necessary to share all its axioms and conclusions .
in writing . ( SV ) The EU 's common cooperation on foreign and security matters must not be allowed to become a competitor to NATO .
It is therefore pleasing to see that the European Parliament has come out clearly in favour of strengthening the transatlantic link and that it is stressing the importance of closer cooperation with NATO .
The EU does currently have a common foreign and security policy .
This report , however , represents a step towards a deeper level of cooperation on foreign and security matters through which Sweden could lose its ability to decide on its own foreign and security policy .
The Member States ' own military resources should , in fact , continue to form the basis of this cooperation in future .
It is regrettable that the report expresses support for the European arrest warrant , which makes it possible for Swedish citizens to be handed over to other EU states without the opportunity of trial in Sweden .
The report also contains expressions of support for the Constitution .
The result of all this is that I voted against the report in the final vote despite the fact that I share the goals of the report in terms of strengthening the EU 's cooperation with NATO .
in writing . ( SV ) We have voted in favour of the report on succession and wills in order for the conflict rules to be clarified .
However , as an aim of the report is to harmonise laws on succession and wills , we wish to stress emphatically our view that a harmonisation of the substantive law is undesirable and that , under the EC Treaty , this area must be , and indeed remain , a solely national competence .
in writing . - ( FR ) In seeking to regulate conflicts of law and jurisdiction regarding succession and wills , the European Parliament has for once refrained from encroaching on areas for which national governments have sole responsibility .
Succession cases with an international dimension , of which there are 50 000 to 100 000 every year in EU territory , do not actually warrant a new wave of forced standardisation of the provisions of substantive law but only require the harmonisation of the rules of private international law and the creation of a European certificate of succession .
Accordingly , we subscribe to the second parliamentary recommendation , which is designed merely to standardise the rules governing conflicts of law and jurisdiction .
This , we believe , is the only approach that will enable the Member States to preserve their own legal systems and their own legal customs and traditions .
Only then will it be possible to coordinate effectively the national legal systems involved in a given probate case .
To prevent any conflicts of law in the area of inheritance , it is necessary and sufficient to know for certain , with no room for dispute , which law will apply .
in writing . ( SV ) This report would create legal chaos and set differing national legal standards and practice against each other if its ideas were implemented .
The June List is a committed opponent of common civil and criminal legislation at the EU level .
The consequences if this proposal were adopted would include Swedish citizens losing their unconditional right to divorce ( allowing for the rule on a six-month period of reflection ) .
One example of this is as follows . A married couple with Swedish citizenship take up residence in Malta .
One of the spouses then moves back to Sweden and petitions a Swedish court for divorce .
Under current Swedish legislation , that spouse would get a divorce under Swedish law .
Under this proposal , however , it would instead be Maltese law that applied .
This could mean that it would simply not be possible to get a divorce , as divorce is prohibited not only in Malta but in a number of other European countries .
This would therefore mean that Swedish citizens would miss out both on maintenance for their children and on the right to half of the assets owned jointly with their spouses .
In the June List 's opinion , this is entirely unacceptable .
Legislation in this area is an expression of national , religious and social values .
The EU must not be allowed to trample all over these values .
As usual , we are discovering that subsidiarity and pluralism only exist in grand speeches , while the reality is a ruthless drive towards harmonisation .
in writing . - ( FR ) I voted in favour of the Gomes report on women in international politics .
The political desire demonstrated at the Beijing Summit in 1995 and the existing international conventions have indeed helped to make the public and decision-makers aware of the issue of equality at every level of society .
Nevertheless , these declarations have not had the practical effect of eliminating the non-legal obstacles that continue to prevent women from playing a full part in public life .
The Member States need to adopt measures aimed at reconciling social , professional and family life , in line with the conclusions of the Barcelona European Council and of the Lisbon Strategy .
I support the creation of a European Institute for Gender Equality aimed at boosting the low numbers of women in politics and at promoting greater female representation in international politics .
It is therefore a matter of urgency to open up new channels that will allow women to become more involved in peace and security issues , particularly through more equal nominations at the United Nations or within the external delegations of the European Union .
in writing . The Lisbon Strategy placed gender- sensitive economic policies at the heart of the strategy for growth and competitiveness , but women 's full participation in politics is an essential requisite to achieving gender-sensitive economic policies .
A milestone was reached by the 1995 Beijing Conference in advancing the gender equality agenda .
Yet , according to the Inter-Parliamentary Union , of the 43 961 members of parliaments worldwide only 16.4 % are women .
The percentage of women elected to the European Parliament ranges from 58 % to 0 % , with an average slightly above 30 % .
The percentage of women elected to the Member States ' national parliaments varies between 45 % and 9 % .
This marks a fundamental democratic deficit at European level and in the wider international context .
I call on Member States to review their national legislation to promote parity and genuine democracy in politics , review their constitution , legislation and practice , enshrine gender equality as a fundamental principle in their constitutions and take measures aiming at the reconciliation of social , family and professional life , in line with the conclusions of the Barcelona European Council and the Lisbon Strategy , thereby creating an enabling environment for women 's full participation in politics .
in writing . - ( PT ) Although this report is about women in international politics and it finds that there is a real problem , it ought not to have skirted around the constraints that prevent women from playing an effective part in political and social life .
The text contains no reference to the economic and social reasons why women 's participation is limited .
For instance , it refers to the pay gap and the need to share domestic responsibilities with men , but it does not mention the real difficulties , particularly working conditions , over-exploitation , low pay , job insecurity , part-time work , and the lack of social facilities at an affordable price .
The approach taken to the subject ignores class differences , and includes only what happens in the dominant class .
Thus there is no explicit reference to economic , employment or social policies .
As a result , in the measures it puts forward , the report continually proposes something that I find unacceptable : a compulsory quota system with penalties for parties , while ignoring the fact that the problems and constraints that exist include , for instance , the economic and social conditions on the ground and the electoral systems themselves .
In Portugal , for example , the Socialist Party has approved the quota system but is preparing to throw out the current electoral system , which in practice may lead to fewer women being elected .
in writing . - ( PT ) Participation by women in international politics ( as well as national politics , the economy and the arts ) is a sign of developed , well-balanced societies .
A world just of men is worse than a world of men and women .
But that does not mean that , every time a woman is elected , or every time a government is composed of as many women as men , it should in itself be a reason to feel satisfied .
Women are not just women , contrary to what some of those who support quotas and equal representation seem to think .
Fortunately , the value of each of these women lies in what she thinks , does , supports and represents .
I therefore do not consider it reasonable simply to applaud the election of any woman , whoever she might be .
Similarly , I do not think the desired effect can be achieved by means of quotas and imposing equal representation .
Balance must be an outcome , not a gesture .
I can speak quite freely on this subject , because the Democratic and Social Centre ( CDS ) is the only party that has had a woman as parliamentary leader , minister of justice or secretary-general .
These women deserve my recognition , however , not for symbolic reasons , but on their merits .
in writing . - ( FR ) In Germany , Liberia , Chile and , even more recently , in the United States Congress , the appointment of women to key posts has been widely applauded .
I willingly join in this applause , while hoping that , one day , these female success stories will no longer have a symbolic value , but may become an everyday occurrence .
It is no longer enough for a female politician to centre her media discourse on the real or supposed male chauvinism of her opponents , as we can see from the sad ' example ' provided by the French Socialist Party 's internal campaign for the presidential nomination .
We need to demonstrate a more responsible and less demanding attitude , since equal gender representation is now the accepted approach .
The UMP delegation in the European Parliament , which consists of nine women and eight men , sets the trend in that regard .
I hope that we support the aspiration and desire of a new generation of women to get involved in politics .
However , rather than constantly churning out finicky and sometimes overly radical regulations promoting women , we must have faith in their ability to assert themselves and to project their beliefs at every level - local , national or European - as women , certainly , but also as elected representatives .
in writing . - ( FR ) I should like to congratulate Mrs Bauer on this very high-quality report .
Its unanimous adoption within the Committee on Civil Liberties , Justice and Home Affairs testifies to its quality .
The report is timely in pointing out that the international trade in human beings affects between 600 000 and 800 000 men , women and children each year .
Around 80 % of these victims are women and 50 % are young girls .
The majority of the victims of this trade are sexually exploited for commercial gain .
In order to deal with the growth in this form of trafficking and with its increasingly international character , this report proposes a series of integrated measures to be taken at European level , which I feel are equal to the challenges associated with this scourge .
Above all , it highlights the EU 's desire to follow an approach focused on human rights and on the victims , which I feel is crucial .
For these reasons and because the fight to uphold human dignity deserves our full support , I voted in favour of this text proposing the adoption of a European Parliament recommendation to the Council on fighting trafficking in human beings .
in writing . - ( FR ) Bizarrely , this report strives to make a clear distinction between human trafficking and illegal immigration .
In many cases , however , they are unquestionably similar , because illegal immigration has become part and parcel of genuine human trafficking , the most appalling form of which is carried out for the purposes of sexual exploitation .
Who are the real culprits , though ?
Without doubt , they are the smugglers , the drug traffickers , the pimps and other oppressors who take advantage of a European territory that has no internal borders and that is wide open to migratory flows .
Yet , they are also the national and European leaders , who are taking no serious action to combat illegal entries , mass immigration , sham marriages - or , worse still , are implementing an overtly ' pro-immigration ' policy .
Punishing the smugglers more severely , dismantling the criminal rings , and paving the way for further cooperation among States are undoubtedly objectives that must be attained .
The placebo effect will not last long , however , because the real difficulty - the lack of controls at the European Union 's internal borders - remains .
If we do not challenge the free movement of non-EU nationals , that veritable dogma spouted by Brussels , then illegal immigration will continue irresistibly to develop .
in writing . ( SV ) The Council of Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings has already been signed by 30 countries .
The Convention has been ratified by Moldova and Romania , amongst others , and work on ratification is under way in Sweden .
The Convention applies to all forms of trafficking in human beings irrespective of whether it is national or international or linked to organised crime .
The Convention complements , in this way , the provisions of the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organised Crime .
The June List believes that the EU should respect the national and international agreements already signed by its Member States .
In our opinion , it is for the democratically elected national parliaments of the respective countries to enter into legally binding treaties .
We support the struggle against the trafficking of human beings and we congratulate the governments of Romania and Moldova on their courage in having ratified this extremely important Convention .
We therefore do not see it as necessary for the EU to be calling for ratification .
The sovereign nations of Europe have already taken up the struggle amongst themselves , without interference from supranational bodies .
in writing . - ( PT ) On the whole we welcome the report , although we regret that certain proposed amendments have been adopted that do not help to make the fight against trafficking in human beings , above all women , any more effective .
We are unhappy at the removal of those paragraphs that referred to the need to ' criminalise the buying of another person 's body for sexual use ' with the aim of reducing trafficking for sexual purposes .
As many studies show , banning the exploitation of prostitution substantially decreases organised crime and trafficking , particularly of women and children .
The report has , however , retained a number of positive points , such as the need to impose extremely severe penalties on companies using cheap labour supplied through human trafficking , or the need for Member States to accept responsibility for the victims of trafficking in human beings , in addition to effectively clamping down on the laundering of the proceeds of the traffic in human beings .
Even so , the report could have gone further on fighting the problem at source , through a policy of cooperation with the countries of origin , including support for specific economic and social development projects , thus reducing the main causes of trafficking , which are poverty , unemployment and social exclusion .
in writing . - ( FR ) This report accomplishes the amazing feat of making an illusory distinction between human trafficking and illegal immigration .
The fact is that , since the disastrous 1985 Schengen agreements abolishing the European Union 's internal border controls , these two phenomena - which no one doubts are closely linked - have developed at an exponential rate .
Ever since Europe took it upon itself , on behalf of the Member States , to implement ' an area of freedom , security and justice ' , the criminal gangs , the pimps and the organised smuggling rings have made profits such as they have never made before .
These networks are multiplying and prospering by exploiting more and more human beings .
In a bid to find a solution to these human tragedies , the Commission and Parliament are proposing to organise political dialogues among States and to introduce yet more programmes and cooperation plans .
What is the use in doing that ?
It is high time we tackled the real causes of human trafficking and illegal immigration : the lack of secure , protected borders in Europe .
It is true , however , that it is impossible for our Eurocrats to challenge the sacrosanct rule of free movement of persons !
Trafficking in human beings is a modern version of the slave trade , but in some respects worse .
In this case , desperation makes the victims pay to be trafficked , and the authorities , often with the best of humanitarian intentions , may adopt policies that encourage trafficking and help the traffickers do business .
In this field , as often happens , we have to be cruel to be kind .
That means being strict with those who provide work , strict with those who arrive , strict with those who stay and , above all , strict and rigorous in enforcing the law .
Shutting our eyes to illegal immigration is tantamount to aiding and abetting human trafficking .
I therefore believe that we should unhesitatingly recognise the benefits of legal immigration and , since the lack of a strong hand in fighting illegal immigration merely encourages the networks that traffic human beings , we have to stand firm in upholding legality .
It is not enough , however , to focus on immigration laws .
For an effective - and humane - approach , we must try and promote the economic success and development that we enjoy in the migrants ' countries of origin .
That is the direction in which we should all be moving together .
in writing . - ( FR ) The figures and estimates concerning human trafficking are frightening .
Mrs Bauer 's report quotes figures of 600 000 to 800 000 men , women and children who are trafficked throughout the world each year .
This is a form of exploitation that includes , at the very least , not only prostitution , but also forced labour or services , slavery and even organ removal .
Yet , what the report does not tell us is that there are more and more of these human tragedies , ever since the destructive Schengen agreements abolishing internal border controls were signed in 1985 .
Europe 's idea of heaven , the universally longed-for and coveted ' area of security , freedom and justice ' , proves not to exist in any of the Member States and , worse still , it proves to be dangerous and to be favourable to the development of all kinds of gangs and organised crime .
As long as our national and European municipal worthies refuse to see that the increase in this international trafficking is due to open borders and that all the policies for combating human trafficking and illegal immigration hinge on the immediate re-establishment of border controls in Europe , the programmes and plans that follow on from one another will be worse than useless .
in writing . - ( PT ) This report on a highly controversial Commission communication has ended up enshrining some of the most negative aspects of the methods , particularly propaganda , that are being developed in order to put the project for a so-called European Constitution back on the table .
After the defeat that Europe 's ruling elite suffered in the referendums on the draft Constitutional Treaty in France and the Netherlands , they now want to go on as before without any further setbacks by investing as much as possible in a propaganda campaign , transforming a necessary democratic communication policy into a real propaganda campaign serving the interests of the dominant class .
Although the report also covers other , less controversial topics , such as sectoral programmes aimed at young people in education and the call to intensify parliamentary and other debates , the truth is that its predominant line overall is propaganda , especially about the quality leap that they want to achieve with a so-called European Constitution .
Hence our vote against .
in writing . - ( FR ) The aim of the European communication policy is ostensibly to ' counter the effect produced by the rejection of the Constitutional Treaty [ ... ] and to halt the general rise of Euroscepticism ' .
What is at stake , in your opinion ?
Information on Europe , which is truncated , distorted and exploited by the media and the national political classes .
What is the solution ?
A campaign plugging the benefits of the European Union , organised by a Brussels ' Propaganda Staffel ' .
Who is the target ?
The people of Europe , whose Euroscepticism is directly proportional to their ignorance of the paradise created for them in Brussels , Euroscepticism that must be converted into blind admiration and unconditional support .
Who are you trying to kid ?
You have not listened to or understood a thing .
It is precisely because they were informed , and because they got their information from the source , by reading the text , that the people of France and the Netherlands overwhelmingly rejected the Constitution .
It is precisely because they live through the economic and social disasters of your policy each day that they are Eurosceptics .
It is precisely because , for once , they were directly asked their opinion that they took an interest in Europe .
It is precisely because you have a deep-rooted fear of the people that you prefer brainwashing to direct consultation of these citizens , whom you regard , deep down , as idiots .
They feel exactly the same way about you .
in writing . ( SV ) The EU 's communication policy must not be an attempt to sell a United States of Europe to the citizens .
The institutions of the EU should only put out accurate and factual financial reports and reports on their activities and otherwise provide information on things such as the exchange projects on offer in higher education .
It is not the case , as seems to be assumed , that the more knowledge a particular voter has , the more he or she becomes a proponent of the construction of an EU superstate .
People 's views on intergovernmental collaboration or supranationalism as forms of cooperation within the EU have their basis in values and not in factual knowledge .
We further do not believe that Brussels should arrange for top-down initiatives and funding to enable EU parties to engage in dialogue with their constituencies on EU matters .
The political interest in EU matters must be built from the bottom up through political parties and organisations .
It is also pointed out in the report that communication is to be based on initiatives promoted through popular communication channels such as cultural programmes ( such as through the awarding of literary or film prizes ) , sporting events and the like .
We would again state our view that such methods of marketing the EU are redolent of contempt for Europeans .
This is not how the EU should inform people of its existence and of what it does .
in writing . - ( PT ) While I agree in essence with the positions and concerns of the Commission regarding communication policy , particularly on the need to be transparent and to engage with the people , I still feel that it should be quite clear that a communication policy is not an end in itself , but a means . That is how it should be understood .
The illusion that everything is communication and that communication is everything may lead us to a society devoid of meaning , in which all that matters is the existence of the message and little is invested in its content .
What that means , in my view , is that the key to a successful EU communication policy lies in the Union 's ability to be seen to be useful to the citizens of the Member States .
I stress useful , and seen to be useful .
That is where the two issues - substance and communication - come into play .
The EU has to promote political reform that stimulates economic development , security , international order and hope .
That is the substance .
As for communication , if the substance is good , it is an art , but it is only part of the story , and not the most important part at that .
In addition , right now , it must not be confused with propaganda .
I agree with the former , but not the latter .
Corrections to votes and voting intentions : see Minutes
( The sitting was suspended at 1.10 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

Approval of Minutes of previous sitting : see Minutes
Agenda for next part session : see Minutes
Famagusta / Varosha ( debate )
The next item is the debate on the question put by Marcin Libicki , on behalf of the Committee on Petitions , on the oral response concerning the incorporation of the return of Varosha to its lawful inhabitants into the comprehensive measures for ending the isolation of the Turkish Cypriot community-B6-0446 / 2006 ) .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , we have been waiting for quite a long time for the oral question on Varosha , in the Famagusta area , to appear on the European Parliament 's agenda .
It so happens that we are debating matters related to the Committee on Petitions for the second time today .
This morning , our committee presented its report on the European Ombudsman 's report .
I am very pleased that , although we have been waiting for a long time to discuss these two items , they have both been raised on the same day .
It is with great satisfaction that , since we are describing the Committee on Petitions as a body that is intended to bring the European Union institutions closer to the citizens , we can today discuss a very important petition .
I am also very pleased that some of the authors of the petition are here in the Chamber , and are sitting in the gallery .

I am pleased to welcome Mr Afxentiou and Mr Christofidis who , as I have mentioned , are two of the authors of the petition and are listening to the debate today .
Mr President , the decision to table an oral question was taken in our committee at its meeting on 14 July 2005 .
The authors of the petition , including those who are here today , were also present at that meeting .
They represent an organisation which is very important in Cyprus , and is called the Famagusta Refugees Movement .
This movement was created in 1976 by the displaced inhabitants of Famagusta .
Unfortunately , the European Parliament deferred the discussion a number of times .
This resulted in significant delays to the staging of today 's debate .
In the meantime , the whole problem has taken on even greater urgency .
The authors of the petition stressed that 30 years have passed since Famagusta was occupied by the Turkish army and the district of the town known as Varosha was closed off .
When presenting their problems and their petition during our committee meeting , the authors of the petition pointed out that Varosha , which has become a complete ghost town , is causing a great rift between the displaced inhabitants and their descendants .
It is an obstacle to the general economic revitalisation of the town and is doing nothing to promote better understanding between the communities in Cyprus .
The authors of the petition propose in particular that Varosha should be returned to its original inhabitants , under regulations to be adopted by the international community , and in particular by the European Union .
The authors of the petition declare their support for attempts to help Turkish Cypriots who , from a legal and social point of view , form an integral part of Cyprus .
They also express concerns regarding the regulations which have been implemented , and which favour the Turkish Cypriot community .
Their concerns relate to the fact that these measures are causing isolation and disassociation from the underlying strategy which aims to reunite Cyprus .
The authors of the petition stressed that , although this objective is contained in the explanatory statement in the Council regulation , which aims to create a financial aid instrument to foster the economic development of the Turkish Cypriot community , this package intends to facilitate the reunification of Cyprus by supporting economic and social development , focussing particularly on economic integration .
There has been no consistent policy to achieve these aims .
For their part , the authors of the petition propose , first and foremost , measures to facilitate the promotion of trade and tourism , which could increase the prosperity of the community and improve its financial situation , as well as making full use of the potential of the port of Famagusta , which would then result in the regeneration of the whole surrounding region .
The authors of the petition also proposed that part of the European Union funding earmarked for providing support to Turkish Cypriots should be paid into a special fund managed by a non-governmental organisation , in which both communities would be equal stakeholders , under the auspices of the European Union and the supervision of the European Commission .
They also proposed that these funds should be earmarked for renovating , modernising and making use of the port of Famagusta .
The Committee on Petitions has , on behalf of the authors , addressed a question to the European Commission asking what instruments the Commission intends to use to ensure that the issues raised by the authors of the petition are resolved .
On 27 February 2006 , the General Affairs Council decided to call on the Commission to undertake further efforts in the field of direct trade for the benefit of the Turkish Cypriot communities , on the basis of negotiations which took place during the Luxembourg presidency , when the matter of the closed area of Varosha and the port was raised , together with matters relating to free trade .
At the same time , it was also said that this part of Famagusta , Varosha , is not currently being used .
It is an incredibly painful situation for the displaced inhabitants and their descendants .
It also makes the economic regeneration of the town difficult and it does nothing to build trust between the Cypriot communities .
What action , then , does the Commission intend to take in connection with the above-mentioned decision , to ensure that the closed area of Famagusta can be returned to its rightful inhabitants ? .
Mr President , this House has , on numerous occasions , debated issues in this House related to Cyprus , Turkey and the problems caused by the Turkish aggression against Cyprus .
This petition , and the oral question resulting from it , addresses this very problem , which is a fundamental issue for that part of Europe and has consequences for the whole of the European Union .
That is why I would be very grateful not only for an answer on this issue , but also to see the proposals put forward by various European bodies , as well as the demands of the authors of the petition , being implemented .
The matter is important , as the solution will , for Turkish , Greek and Cypriot society at large , serve to indicate how effectively the European bodies can resolve problems related to the hopes of European citizens .
Mr President , Commissioner , I would very much like to request a response and I hope that this response will satisfy the authors of the petitions , as well as the Committee on Petitions and the European Parliament .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , I wish to begin by thanking Mr Libicki and the Committee on Petitions for raising this question .
Personal friends I have known for a long time are refugees from Varosha and , therefore , I know the importance of the issue not only because of my portfolio but also because of my personal contacts .
The United Nations has the responsibility and competences to pursue a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus issue .
The Commission supports the United Nations in these efforts and encourages the parties concerned to resume talks on such a settlement .
The return of Varosha to its lawful inhabitants is one of the key elements in the UN-led process .
If agreed by the parties , the return of Varosha will have to take place under the auspices of the United Nations .
The Annan Plan foresaw an early return of Varosha to its lawful inhabitants .
However , the plan , supported by the United Nations and the European Union , fell in 2004 .
The return of Varosha is a separate issue from the introduction of direct trade between the Turkish Cypriot Community and the rest of the European Union .
Direct trade is a matter of EU competence .
The Commission proposed a draft regulation to this effect in July 2004 .
Successive EU presidencies , in seeking to establish a consensus in the Council on the direct trade regulation , have investigated possible solutions , but without success so far .
The Finnish Presidency is making substantial diplomatic efforts to unblock the current stalemate and the Commission fully supports the Presidency in its efforts .
The Finnish formula would create a genuine win-win situation for both communities and all parties concerned .
It would be a major confidence-building measure towards a comprehensive settlement , thus meaning also a prospect of the return of Varosha .
Creating a win-win situation has been the essence of European integration since the times of Robert Schuman and Konrad Adenauer , who united France and Germany just five years after the most bitter and devastating war on earth was fought on their soil .
Over the past 42 years there has been enough talk of ' red lines ' and ' blackmail ' in the eastern Mediterranean .
That is pre-modern talk in today 's post-modern Europe .
It is high time to replace red lines with bridge-building and win-win thinking , because that is what the European Union is all about .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , the Famagusta question is primarily a humanitarian one .
That was precisely the basis on which the Famagusta refugee movement presented its petition to the Committee on Petitions .
For 32 years now , over 30 000 people have dreamt day and night about going back to their homes .
Thirty-two years is too long .
The beautiful city of Famagusta is still uninhabited .
It is a ghost town .
Turkey cynically insists on keeping it as a bargaining tool .
Naturally , the question the inhabitants of Famagusta are asking is what the international community is doing , and what the European Union is doing , to help them go back to their homes .
The Commissioner has said that everybody is trying .
However , the issue is very simple .
There is an empty city to be given to its lawful inhabitants .
There are other bargaining tools for Turkey to use .
Turkey is not being sent the right message on what should be done .
The deliberations on Famagusta are the first big step towards a proper solution to the Cyprus problem based on United Nations resolutions and European values .
Turkey has to take that step now , in the interests of justice , in the interests of Turkey and in the interests of Greek and Turkish Cypriots , as Mr Libicki has said .
The desperate appeal coming from those refugees from Famagusta who are still alive is : ' Help us to go back home ' .
Let us help them , Commissioner .
Now is the time .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , most of us are lucky enough to enjoy small luxuries , such as , for example , living in our own home , in a neighbourhood of acquaintances and friends .
Today , however , we are debating efforts by certain people who belong to the large European family to be able to regain exactly what we consider to be reasonable in our everyday lives .
The movement of refugees from Famagusta consists of displaced citizens from what has been a ghost town for 32 years .
These people have , of course , managed to rebuild their lives in Cyprus . Just think , however , what it means to know that your first home or your parents ' home lies abandoned and inaccessible a few kilometres away , for reasons for which you are not to blame .
The return of the town of Famagusta to its lawful inhabitants in the Greek-Cypriot and Turkish-Cypriot community will have numerous economic and social benefits .
Famagusta was a popular tourist destination .
Its reconstruction can restore it to its former glory , as well as creating huge potential for trade , by making use of its port , which can be reopened as requested , using the latest technologies in order to make the best possible use of it .
If the town is restored to its residents in a way which safeguards the strengthening of ties between the two communities , with guarantees from the international community and , of course , the European Union during the period of reconstruction and development , reasonable ties will develop between the two communities .
If an environment of security , certainty and trust is created for economic development and cooperation , as cooperation in employment and the economy develops , social ties will develop alongside it .
Finally , what is needed is for the town to develop its own momentum , a momentum which will function as an example and precursor .
I wonder , given that the request comes from the residents of the town themselves and knowing the good ties between people on both sides , if we have the right to refuse , if we have the right not to help .
Nonetheless , this opportunity should not become a chance for us to blow up progress efforts in Cyprus .
We shall all have our responsibilities , responsibilities towards the people as well as responsibilities towards posterity .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , the taking of hostages by terrorists and their subsequent holding to ransom has not been an uncommon occurrence in recent years .
It is a despicable act of satanic criminal perversion , and is widely and universally condemned by all those with even the slightest degree of common sense .
Equally , the taking of a city as hostage by a country which has invaded another and then uses that city to extract political gains by blackmail is a case of psychopathic barbarism of immense magnitude and unintelligible reasoning .
This is what has happened in the case of Famagusta .
Up until 1974 , Famagusta was a thriving city full of life and vigour , with a rich history going back thousands of years , surrounded by blossoming citrus fruit orchards , lying on a golden sandy coast .
It was a city of enviable beauty .
Famagusta was widely regarded by many as the jewel of the Eastern Mediterranean .
Its peace-loving inhabitants went about their daily lives , working hard to achieve progress and prosperity .
But in the summer of 1974 , all their dreams were shattered .
After repeated severe and catastrophic air bombardments , the city was overrun by droves of Turkish soldiers , tanks and armoured vehicles , spreading death and destruction in their path .
In horror , the inhabitants fled , trying desperately to save the lives of their loved ones and carrying with them the bare essentials needed to survive .
Most of them found refuge on an area of high ground a few kilometres to the south of the city , where they lived in makeshift refugee camps , and from where they watched their homes being looted by Turkish soldiers .
Apart from furniture and other household effects , the invaders took away doors , windows , pipes , roof tiles and everything else they could lay their hands on .
Then they fenced off the whole city , declared it a military zone and put guards around it .
This state of affairs continues today , 33 years later .
Whenever an inhabitant , driven by homesick desperation , has tried to approach his fenced city , he has been shot dead on the spot or arrested by Turkish soldiers and tried in Turkish military courts on grounds of entering a high security military area .
The ghost city of Famagusta has many times been the focus of attention in various UN resolutions , and in between the ' ifs ' and ' whens ' and ' hows ' of hazy diplomatic language , the people of Famagusta have tried to believe time and time again that they will return to their homes .
But this has all been an illusion , because in the real world of political diplomacy it is almost always the strong who have their way .
In the case of Cyprus , Turkey was , and still is , by far the strongest .
Just as the refugees from Famagusta were about to become totally disillusioned with the UNs and Security Councils of this world , new hope suddenly emerged in the form of Cyprus ' accession to the EU .
Men , women and children were suddenly uttering words like ' the European acquis communautaire ' and ' the principles and values upon which the EU is founded ' .
Many were even convinced that after accession the EU would force Turkey to return Famagusta to its rightful occupants .
How simple-minded they were .
Little did they realise that the EU mainly cares about trading in the vast Turkish market and not about the old-fashioned principles of justice and freedom .
Little did they know that the EU mainly views Turkey as being of close to almighty importance in counteracting the threat of Islamic fundamentalists .
And so , dear colleagues , we find ourselves today talking , talking and talking about the right of Famagustians to go home .
Most probably , if Turkey has its way , we shall continue talking about it for a long time to come , while the great EU goes on being proud of its principles and values , and almost everybody will be happy - especially the Turkish Government - apart from the people of Famagusta .
We will gradually come to terms with their grief at having to watch their city , the jewel of the Eastern Mediterranean , slowly die away under the careful eye of the UN , the Security Council , and now the EU .
Mr President , the question of the return of the sealed-off area of Famagusta to its lawful inhabitants has never formed part of the overall settlement of the Cyprus question , on which the relevant United Nations resolutions have been passed .
The long-standing decoupling of the return of the town from the overall settlement is one element I want to comment on .
The second element is that the Commission , in its last progress report on Turkey , emphasised that the application of the protocol is per se a legal obligation which cannot be linked to the status of the Turkish-Cypriot community .
Consequently , Turkey is wrong to link the matter of the honouring of its commitments to the lifting of the so-called isolation of the Turkish-Cypriots which , insofar as it exists , is due solely and exclusively to the Turkish occupation .
Circles in the European Union are likewise wrong to accept this link .
However , if this link is made , the proposal by the Cypriot Government on joint use of the port of Famagusta , under the aegis of the United Nations and with supervision by the European Commission , combined with the return of the lawful inhabitants of the town , may be the turning point which will help overcome the entirely unwelcome impasse that has developed .
Turkey will be satisfied in its demand for the so-called isolation of Turkish-Cypriots to be lifted .
The Turkish Cypriots , even though they have absolutely nothing to lose by returning the town which has been deserted for 32 years to its lawful inhabitants , are safeguarding the right to engage in export trade via the port .
Likewise , all the lawful inhabitants will move back to their town while , at the same time , the Turkish ports and airports will open to Cypriot ships and aeroplanes .
Finally , the coexistence of the two communities in Famagusta will help efforts to find an overall solution to the Cyprus problem .
To conclude , the return of Famagusta to its lawful inhabitants is the key to addressing current difficulties in a way which serves the well-meant interests of all sides .
If everyone rises to the occasion and reason prevails , we are quietly optimistic that the complication that has arisen will be addressed with success .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , Famagusta is being held hostage .
It has been described as a ghost town ; it is desolate , isolated and empty .
Famagusta is a city on the east coast of Cyprus .
In 1974 Turkish troops invaded Famagusta and since then the city has been fenced off .
At the moment it is unused and is guarded by Turkish troops .
Nobody lives there .
Anybody who attempts to enter is shot on the spot or tried in military courts .
Famagusta only enjoyed independence for 14 years .
During that time , it was of indispensable benefit to the Cypriot economy .
It had a population of 60 000 and 15 000 daily commuters .
It hosted a bustling port .
Despite housing only 7 % of the population of Cyprus , it accounted for over 10 % of the total industrial employment and production of Cyprus .
Despite these figures and the obvious benefit to Cyprus , the town has remained desolate .
This is clearly not a tolerable situation for Cyprus or the people .
Obviously something must be done .
I find it incredible that the EU is not demanding the immediate and unconditional return of Famagusta to its inhabitants who are , incidentally , EU citizens .
Instead we have this bizarre situation where the EU and many EU governments try to accommodate every one of Turkey 's obscene demands and wishes .
We all know that Turkey desires to join the EU .
We know what a powerful country it is .
However , we must ask ourselves whether Turkey is ready to join the European Union .
Turkey is doing its accession cause no good .
When I first came to this House , I voted to open talks with Turkey .
I abstained in the latest vote .
Will I have to vote against Turkish accession or will I feel a little goodwill on the part of Turkey some time soon ?
I can see no good in this situation .
Returning Famagusta would be an excellent opportunity for Turkey to show not only the original inhabitants of Famagusta but also the EU and the rest of the world that it is a peace-loving and peace-supporting nation .
Mr President , since the Turkish invasion of 1974 , Cyprus has remained tragically divided and the city of Famagusta has been occupied by the Turkish armed forces .
We are now beginning to see a promising deal emerging under the Finnish Presidency of the EU , under which the Turkish-occupied north of the island can be reopened to direct trade through the port of Famagusta , under strict EU monitoring .
This would be in exchange for the return by Turkey of the fenced-off area of Varosha to its original Greek Cypriot residents , under UN control .
Fortunately , the original Greek Cypriot inhabitants can return with minimal disruption , as no one needs to be relocated because the depopulated Varosha area was sealed off in 1974 and is under the direct control of the Turkish military .
Reference to the resettlement of Varosha was included in the 1979 Kyprianou-Denktas high-level agreement .
It was agreed all that time ago that this would be implemented without awaiting the outcome of the discussion on other aspects of the Cyprus problem , or be used as a bargaining chip in dealing with other Cypriot issues .
Certainly its return cannot be linked to the issue of Turkey implementing its firm commitment as an EU candidate state to open its ports to all Cypriot vessels , as agreed by Turkey under the Ankara Protocol on enlargement of the customs union , which must be extended to all EU Member States .
These include the Republic of Cyprus , which Turkey ludicrously refuses to recognise legally , even though Cyprus is a full EU Member State .
The Green Line also needs to be carefully monitored if direct trade from the north is resumed , with regard to potential increases in illegal immigration and people-trafficking , particularly of women from Eastern Europe .
Furthermore , the so-called Republic of Northern Cyprus cannot be allowed to carry on as a sanctuary to escaped criminals , including notable UK fugitives from justice such as Mr Asil Nadir .
( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , it is , in European terms , intolerable that Varosha should be in the state it is : a ghost town , a town sealed off by barbed wire , yet , having formerly been home to some 30 000 people , it has been empty for 32 years .
The people who once lived there can , from a distance , see their houses behind the fence ; the desire to go back to them has never left them , and I believe they have a right to do that .
I know , Commissioner , that we in this House and you in the Commission cannot sort out the Cyprus problem on our own .
If things had gone the way this House , or the Commission , had wanted , a solution based on the Annan plan would be in place today , but , disappointed though we are by the Greek Cypriots ' overwhelming ' no ' , we do have to respect it , and - let me make this quite plain - we actually have done so .
We nevertheless hope for a solution soon .
What really could create trust and encourage further positive developments would be for Varosha to be returned to its original inhabitants and governed by representatives of both communities , and for Cypriots of both ethnicities to live together in Famagusta .
You have indicated , Commissioner , that the Finnish Presidency of the Council is currently endeavouring to facilitate the direct trade between the EU and Northern Cyprus that has been promised for over two years .
We have given the Turkish Cypriots our word that this would be done .
Opening up Varosha in line with the petitioners ' request , though , could help people who have been waiting for thirty-two years to return there and would also make it possible for them to coexist in a new way , one that can open up the prospect of an overall solution .
I hope that the Finnish Presidency will rethink its proposal in this regard .
( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , Cyprus has for a long time been divided into three sections .
Three percent of the territory is made up of British army bases .
None of the local people knows what happens there , but they are clearly places where a number of foreigners earn good salaries .
The General Affairs Council is calling on the Commission to support direct trade with the Turkish community in Cyprus in connection with the opening up of Famagusta - known as Varosha in Turkish - which is currently sealed off .
Given that Parliament has discussed the release of an amount of money to develop and renew the infrastructure of the northern part of Cyprus , I should like to ask when , if Famagusta belongs to the northern part of the island , reconstruction work using the above-mentioned resources will start and when it will be open to the local population .
If , on the other hand , it belongs to the south , when will it be open for the local inhabitants to begin rebuilding the town ?
Or is there perhaps some third way forward , Commissioner ?
Should the British units posted on the island be solving the problem ?
( DE ) Mr President , Strasbourg , this wonderful city , in which the European Parliament has its only seat , and will , it is to be hoped , continue to do so in future , was proposed , after the Second World War , as the capital city of an united Europe by the British Labour politician Ernest Bevin .
He said at the time , that , as no city had suffered as much from human stupidity as Strasbourg , it was ideally suited to being the place where human stupidity was to be overcome .
I wish we could soon be in a position to say something similar about Famagusta , which is symbolic of a brutal expulsion that is both contrary to international law and a violation of human rights , as brutal as it is senseless ; yet it could , without difficulty , and by one simple act of goodwill , be made a symbol of the downfall of nationalism and expulsion , one whose impact would be felt a long distance away from Cyprus .
I recall how , on one occasion when I was in Northern Cyprus , I had a Turkish Cypriot driver who spoke good Greek , and said : ' I have deep sympathy with my Greek-speaking fellow-Cypriots , and it is not the Greek Cypriots that are our problem , but the Turkish army and the settlers that have been brought into the country artificially . '
It is these people who have a vested interest in keeping this dispute alive .
That is what we should do something about .
We should ensure that both ethnic groups can be reconciled and that the expellees can return to their original homes in Famagusta ; that would send out a message to the whole of the Mediterranean , to Europe and the world as a whole , affirming that people belonging to different ethnic groups can live together in peace under the rule of law .
Cyprus could , in this respect , become an example for many , many other troublespots , and so I am grateful to the organisers of this petition for raising this issue .
We owe it to them to stand alongside them in every way and secure them that to which they are entitled and for which they have been waiting for so long , namely that Famagusta should once more become the flourishing place of commerce and culture that it has been throughout its history - a history filled with proud traditions which , let it be hoped , may be re-established in the future .
( Applause )
( EL ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , 32 years after the military invasion and continuing occupation , the photographs emerging from the sealed-off area of Varosha , which is controlled solely by the Turkish army , bear irrefutable witness to the Cyprus tragedy , breaches of international and European law and the collapse of European democratic civilisation .
The request by Greek-Cypriot citizens - refugees themselves like their Turkish-Cypriot fellow citizens in their own country - for the chance to return to their homes and properties , is a basic request for respect for humanitarian principles .
At the same time , it is a vital initiative to build a climate of trust , security and reconciliation between the two communities , an initiative which surpasses the harsh reality of the partition and will help efforts to achieve joint development and coexistence and close the psychological gap between the two sides .
If the European Union works consistently and decisively in the direction of confidence-building measures - and it can , Commissioner - then the necessary preconditions can be created for the resumption of an honest dialogue with the objective of a viable and operational solution to the Cyprus problem .
The solution cannot be a matter for leaders and their political will alone .
It is closely linked to the community and the citizens and with the feeling of justice which must be consolidated .
In the history of Cyprus there have been many lost opportunities at political level .
We must not waste opportunities at social level for the peaceful reunification of the island for the benefit of all its citizens , both Greek-Cypriot and Turkish-Cypriot .
( PL ) Mr President , as far as the facts of the matter are concerned , a lot has already been said about Famagusta 's status .
I would like to highlight three points .
First of all , the inhabitants have the right to their own property and have the right to return there .
Secondly , the problem of Famagusta is like schizophrenia , or like a cancer on the body of the European Union .
If we are unable to deal with this situation , I doubt that we will be able to cope with Turkey 's accession to the Union at some point in the future .
Finally , Mr President , you yourself , all the European institutions , and European democracy as a whole , will one day be judged and accused of failing to protect the legacy of the culture in which we were all raised .
Famagusta is a good example of this cultural heritage and we cannot allow everything there to fall into ruin , as already appears to be the case .
If we are dealing with an occupying power , then it seems to me that we have to adopt a different strategy .
The current strategy is not effective and we are all responsible for that , yourself , Mr President , included .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , many speakers have said that the division of Cyprus is tragic .
I fully agree .
Reunification should have happened yesterday at the latest .
The European Union consistently supports these efforts , and the EU has tried to take its own part , with the Commission being actively involved in all these efforts .
With the involvement of all the presidencies in these efforts in the last couple of years , the European Union has invested an enormous amount of energy and effort in solving the Cyprus dilemma .
Today , the Finnish formula is likely to be the last chance for several years to unblock the current stalemate .
Therefore it should be taken extremely seriously .
Judging by last Monday 's Council Meeting of Foreign Ministers of the European Union , the EU Member States are indeed supportive of the Finnish efforts .
So is the Commission , with both the political ways and means and legal and other substantive expertise to facilitate solutions .
To sum up , everybody should seize this opportunity and thus create a real win-win situation for everybody , including the Varosha refugees .
The debate is closed .
1 .
Ethiopia
The next item is the debate on the six motions for resolutions on Ethiopia .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , the news of the ongoing arrests , humiliation and intimidation of opposition politicians and students in Ethiopia has caused outrage and these actions should be decisively condemned .
The recent arrest and expulsion from Ethiopia of two European Commission officials , who were accused of attempting to help Yalemzewd Bekele , a lawyer and women 's rights advocate working for the European Commission in Addis Ababa , only serves to underline the gravity of the situation .
Neither should we forget about the fact that 111 people are still in detention following the mass arrest of opposition supporters during demonstrations held in June and November 2005 .
I call upon the Commission and to the Council to do everything in their power to initiate a broad dialogue in Ethiopia , which would involve the participation of the political parties , civil society organisation and the authorities , to agree on a permanent solution to the current political crisis .
We have to do all we can to make sure that the enduring principles of respect for human rights and the rule of law are re-established in that country .
In order for this to happen , the Ethiopian authorities must show the world that they are willing to resolve the current crisis .
The immediate and unconditional release of all political prisoners would certainly constitute such a gesture of goodwill .
author . - Mr President , the issue of human rights in Ethiopia has been the subject of numerous previous motions for resolution in this House .
Unfortunately , it seems that our advisory words of wisdom and strong condemnation have been falling on deaf ears as far as the Ethiopian Government is concerned .
However , who can blame it for behaving in such an arbitrary and totally unacceptable manner towards this Parliament when the Commission , for reasons best known to itself , invited Prime Minister Meles Zenawi to address the European Development Days specifically on governance issues ?
That inevitably sent out the wrong signal with regard to the EU 's policy on respect for human rights , democratic principles , the rule of law and good governance .
Perhaps the Commissioner might be kind enough to explain to us today what the logic was behind that invitation .
We all understand the difficulties Ethiopia has been facing in its troubled post-colonial history and realise that some blame lies clearly and squarely with the ex-colonisers .
We all want to help the Ethiopian people to achieve an acceptable standard of living , free of the evils of internal fighting and regional conflict .
However , the governing regime in Addis Ababa must understand comprehensively and unequivocally that the highly-desired political stability will not be achieved through continuing arrests , harassment , arbitrary detention , humiliation and the intimidation of opposition politicians , civil society activists , students and other ordinary citizens .
Such actions are , on the contrary , bound to lead to a deterioration of the already fragile political situation in Ethiopia , and the feared further worsening of the situation will become a certainty rather than a possibility .
I urge colleagues to support this motion for a resolution , and I wait with interest to hear the Commissioner 's comments on the issue of the invitation to Mr Meles Zenawi .
author . - ( PT ) The repression of students and of the Oromo , Amhara and other ethnic groups in Ethiopia ; the continuing imprisonment and mock trials of elected opposition leaders , trade union leaders , journalists , teachers , human rights and development activists , and many other Ethiopians who are fighting for freedom and democracy ; the manipulation by the Meles Zenawi government of the conclusions reached by the commission of inquiry into the massacre of 193 people in June and November 2005 , following protests about election fraud , and the persecution of the judges in that commission who refused to alter their findings and were therefore forced to flee the country ; the detention of the lawyer Yalemzewd Bekele , who was working for the European Union delegation , and the unjustified expulsion of European diplomats in violation of the Vienna Convention - all these events not only demonstrate how anti-democratic and totalitarian the Meles Zenawi regime is , but also expose its growing fragility and desperation .
Ever since the conclusions of the EU election observation mission in 2005 , the Member States ' governments in the Council and the Commission should have been working together to take action regarding Mr Meles Zenawi 's regime .
As Teshale Aberra , one of the judges who had to flee the country , said , the Meles Zenawi government is just as bad as , or even worse than , the Mengistu regime .
Ethiopia receives financial aid from the European Union , and therefore the European Union must demand the immediate release of all political prisoners . It must also demand that an international inquiry into the 2005 massacres be set up and that those responsible for the massacres be brought to justice .
The EU must adopt the appropriate measures provided for in Article 96 of the Cotonou Agreement , of which Ethiopia is a member , as this Parliament demands .
Such measures include freezing the European assets of Mr Meles Zenawi and members of his government and denying them entry visas to Europe .
All these measures must be designed so as to hit those who are primarily responsible , and not to hurt the Ethiopian people .
Our governments and the Commission must stop justifying their tolerant attitude towards this anti-democratic regime that violates human rights , on the pretext that it is an ally in the fight against terrorism .
We in Europe and the United States must stop deluding ourselves .
Ethiopia 's intervention in Somalia on the pretext of fighting terrorism has only served to entrench the Islamic Courts in Mogadishu , and the disastrous consequences do not stop there : discredited and lacking in popular support , Mr Meles Zenawi 's regime has left Ethiopia itself , Africa 's second most populous country , wide open to infiltration by terrorists .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , last month , Mrs Kinnock and I , together with two African colleagues , had the privilege of leading a delegation to Ethiopia , where we had talks with both the government and the opposition , as well as with members of the families of detained dissidents .
We are very concerned about the situation there .
We have found a complete lack of willingness - particularly on the part of the government - to learn any real lessons from the results of the elections , or , on the other hand , from the findings of a commission of inquiry into the parliament that the government had itself set up .
We have urged the Prime Minister to take these findings from the commission of inquiry as the starting point for a nationwide dialogue .
To that he gave no clear response ; on the contrary , indeed , we have discovered that the members of this commission have been subject to duress and that some of them have fled abroad .
If the report is published at all , it will no doubt appear in a polished-up and falsified form .
We are grateful to the President of the Commission for speaking to the prime minister in such very plain terms of the occasion of his visit , but it is unfortunate that the environment Commissioner should , by inviting Mr Meles to visit Brussels , undermine the Commission 's stance .
I think it important that we should , now that we are equipping ourselves with a new instrument for democracy and human rights , ensure that it is an effective one and one that enables us to support democratic political forces .
The new regulation must include a form of words to this effect , for how else are we to provide the opposition with legal counsel or help newly-elected parliamentarians who have no money to exercise their constitutional rights ?
It is for that reason that I call on not only the Commission , but also and in particular on the Member States to abandon their resistance to an effective instrument for democracy and human rights being drafted in these terms .
author . - Mr President , in these debates we regularly stress the importance of dialogue and frank discussion .
In Ethiopia 's case that dialogue will be a critical one , both in the sense of it being important and in the sense of our being critical of the Ethiopian Government 's current practices .
The omens are not good .
Some 193 citizens were killed in the riots in June and November 2005 .
The report on that inquiry remains unpublished , sanitised and unclear .
Since that time a number of Ethiopians have been imprisoned , and recently two EU officials were expelled from the country .
All this is not news to anyone involved in this debate , but things are stacking up and do not look good for Ethiopia .
Dialogue will indeed be critical and , as Mr Matsakis says , paragraph 7 of this resolution expresses regret at the forthcoming visit of Prime Minister Zenawi to Brussels to tell us about good governance .
This is an irony that would be funny were it not so tragic .
However , let us be positive .
The Commissioner will hopefully tell us today that this will give us the opportunity to speak to Prime Minister Zenawi and tell him frankly of our concerns .
I hope the Commissioner will confirm that this opportunity will not be missed when Mr Zenawi comes to Brussels .
Ethiopia plays an important role in the African Union and an important role in development .
We could work much better in cooperation with one another .
However , that cooperation , as colleagues have mentioned , should not be taken for granted and must be based on mutual principles and , importantly , adherence to them .
If we do not stick to our principles we can hardly expect others to , so I hope we can have a frank and open discussion with the Prime Minister when he comes to Brussels .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( DE ) Mr President , the outcome of the parliamentary elections on 15 May 2005 saw an atmosphere of political repression fall over Ethiopia once more , and once more too , then , we find ourselves gathered here in this House discussing that country .
Its manipulation of the elections and its repressive response to popular unrest have cost the Ethiopian Government respect at home and abroad and have cost the country itself its stability .
The only way to counteract this is to resume the process of democratisation and involve the opposition parties in it .
A year ago , the Ethiopian parliament set up a commission to investigate the murders committed in June and November 2005 , and we call on the Ethiopian Government to publish that commission 's final report without delay , without alteration and at full length .
The findings must be put before the competent courts and used as the basis for fair proceedings in them .
We also call on the Ethiopian Government to release all political prisoners without delay and unconditionally .
Mr President , we are well aware of the fact that all countries and societies around the world have the right to freedom and independence .
I should point out that today , we are talking about a very specific country , a country whose history is older than the history of many , or even most , European countries , who consider their roots to lie in the times of the Old Testament rulers King David and the Queen of Sheba .
This country , which also adopted Christianity earlier than many , if not most , European countries , is a country that is also entirely unique on the African continent .
It has maintained its sovereignty throughout its history , with the exception of a short period in the thirties , when it was conquered by a European state .
Even then , it maintained its independence in legal terms .
Even during that invasion , which was an attempt to impose colonial rule , Emperor Haile Selassie , the country 's honourable ruler , who was greatly respected throughout the world and in Ethiopia , represented his country when he was an expatriate and in exile .
In the seventies , Ethiopia was the victim of a communist plot , involving the Kremlin and Cuba .
Since then , it has not managed to return to normality .
I do not want to repeat that which has already been said about the current suffering of the Ethiopian people , but it really is our duty to aid this country and its society .
( PL ) Mr President , Commissioner , the European Commission has unfortunately behaved like a bull in a china shop by inviting the Ethiopian Prime Minister to the European Development Days .
This event , to which the Prime Minister of Ethiopia has been invited as a guest , began on the same day as the Parliamentary session and will end tomorrow .
The Ethiopian Prime Minister has even appeared as a speaker .
The European Commission has decided that it would prefer to turn a deaf ear to the reports of persecution that are emerging from Ethiopia .
However , we in the European Union cannot pretend that we are dealing with a normal country .
In fact , quite the opposite is the case .
We are dealing with a country which is a political prison for many journalists , trade unionists and human rights advocates .
We do not even know how large a prison it is , as the Ethiopian government systematically refuses to reveal how many political prisoners there are or how many people have been arrested .
Recently , members of yet another profession , namely teachers , were arrested .
Clearly the attitude of the European Commission and the Council towards Ethiopia must depend on whether Ethiopia upholds human rights and , first and foremost , whether it agrees to release political prisoners or not .
However , it should also be made clear that this is not only a matter that concerns the European Union .
The African Union must also take action .
That is why I stress that both unions need to deal with the issue .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , after the post-2005 election crisis the Commission , in close cooperation with the EU Member States and the international community , undertook efforts to defuse tensions and urged the Ethiopian Government to restore confidence in the democratisation process through the release of political detainees .
The EU , in line with the international donor community , has given priority to maintaining an open and structured dialogue with the Ethiopian Government as the most appropriate way towards improving the situation .
Following a visit to key political detainees , Commissioner Michel received commitments from Prime Minister Meles Zenawi during a dialogue in February that they would get a short and fair trial .
President Barroso met Prime Minister Zenawi in Addis Ababa last October to express the Commission 's concerns about the trial and the prisoners .
President Barroso pointed out that he expected the trial to be speedy , fair and transparent .
He also stressed that he did not consider a trial to be an appropriate response to the Ethiopian political differences .
Instead , he suggested reconciliation and dialogue as the only way forward in building confidence .
When two members of the Commission delegation were arrested and expelled from Ethiopia and a local employee of the delegation was arrested , President Barroso , Commissioner Michel and EU Member States immediately expressed their deep concern at these events , which clearly breached the Vienna Convention .
The Commission strongly refuted the accusation against the Commission delegation and its staff .
The Commission headquarters expressed its support and solidarity with the delegation staff and we were satisfied that this immediate and strong reaction resulted in the release of the arrested local agent on bail .
There have been some doubts as to the wisdom of inviting Prime Minister Zenawi to the European Development Days .
The Commission believes that dialogue and further efforts have to be pursued to convey EU concerns to the Ethiopian Government and to obtain commitments on democratic reforms and good governance .
The meetings and debates planned for the European Development Days will provide an opportunity to convey these messages directly and express our deep concerns .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
2 .
Bangladesh
The next item is the debate on the six motions for resolutions on Bangladesh .
author . - ( CS ) Ladies and gentlemen , Bangladesh is one of the world 's most overcrowded and poorest countries .
In the 1940s Bangladesh was divided into two sections on the basis of religion , which failed to ease an already complicated situation .
The subsequent war of independence with Pakistan only served to exacerbate the extreme poverty , and not only in the provinces .
In the country 's constitution , there is a special mechanism for placing power into the hands of the incumbent government during the preparation of elections .
It is known the world over that microloans have been a great success .
Less well known is that this success has , in this strongly Islamic country , been due especially to the commitment of women .
As in any vastly overcrowded and very poor country , there are huge problems with inadequate infrastructure and with religious and ethic intolerance .
I believe that these problems can be reduced and that the secular tradition can prevail .
A difficult problem in any election , and not only in developing countries , is the question of who is eligible to vote .
In Bangladesh the problem is exacerbated by the fact that a section of the population is illiterate .
The next most important thing after factually correct electoral registers is for candidates to have the opportunity to present their manifestos .
It is no wonder that the proposed text of the resolution also highlights this .
I should like to emphasise at this point that I do not believe that the recognition or otherwise of journalists by any country in the world can serve as a yardstick of democratisation .
In any event , freedom of the press is closely associated with the democratic competition of ideas and manifestos .
This is something that must not under any circumstances be compromised in the run-up to elections .
Similarly , it is the permanent responsibility of all governments to eliminate terrorist groups .
A more complex issue is how to define the word terrorist , and how to fight terrorism in a democratic society .
At the last meeting of the group for cooperation with Southeast Asian countries , which I had the honour of chairing , those in attendance expressed the view that it is possible for genuinely democratic elections to take place in Bangladesh .
The observations contained in the motion for a resolution made their mark in the meeting I chaired , and I believe that sending a European Parliament observation mission will help towards the democratic running of the elections .
The Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left supports the motion for a resolution before us , and I believe that we must support the process of democratisation in Bangladesh , including helping to make these elections as democratic as possible .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , Bangladesh , land of democratic tradition , of respect for human rights , of independence of the judiciary and of freedom of the press that it is , is today plagued by the rise of violent Islamic fundamentalism .
The last ' Reporters without Borders ' report reveals hundreds of attacks on freedom of the press .
This year alone , three journalists have been killed , at least 95 others have been attacked and dozens , if not hundreds , of correspondents have been forced to flee after being intimidated for writing articles that are deemed to be ' un-Islamic ' .
If it was my wish for Parliament urgently to voice its opinion on this situation today , it is because , right now , in Dhaka , Salah Choudhury is standing trial for sedition .
This journalist , the editor of the Weekly Blitz , is a fervent supporter of moderate Islam , who advocates openness and dialogue between religions and recognition by his country of the State of Israel .
For these reasons and for these reasons alone , he is in danger today of being sentenced to death .
We urge the Commission to follow the developments in this trial so as to ensure that the rights of the defendant , together with the international conventions on freedom of the press , are respected .
Since I have a few seconds left , I should like to declare my support for the interim government 's efforts to ensure that the pre-election process also complies with international democratic standards : the establishment of an appropriate electoral register , a truly independent electoral commission and , I shall come back to it once again , the balance and freedom of the media during the election campaign , of course .
It is quite clear that the country 's four private television channels have difficulty in putting forward a different point of view to that of the government if they want to keep their licences .
Two terrorist leaders have been arrested in Bangladesh ; continued efforts must be made to disarm the Islamic militias that are trying to put pressure on the voters on the eve of the election .
We expect the government to confirm its commitment in this regard , too .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , Bangladesh is an important partner for the European Union .
It is a country which has made significant economic progress during the last few years .
At the moment , its most famous citizen is Mohammad Junus , who received the Nobel Peace Prize this year for his contribution to the fight against poverty by means of a system of microcredits .
However , Bangladesh is not struggling just with poverty , but also with corruption and an increasingly antagonistic attitude displayed by followers of Islam .
The creation of the caretaker government headed by President Iajuddin Ahmed was met with protests from Bangladeshi society .
According to reports by external observers and the Awami League , the authorities illegally increased the voting lists for the upcoming elections by 13 million surnames .
The caretaker government must guarantee free elections which comply with international standards .
The independence of the electoral committee also needs to be guaranteed and the electoral roll simply needs to be credible .
An agreement between the Bangladesh Nationalist Party , the Awami League and the other parties on the creation of a common economic programme , which is vital in order to improve the living conditions and civil liberties of the people of Bangladesh would undoubtedly be a basis for political stability in the country .
Under the terms of key international human rights conventions , the interim government has to combat lawlessness , extra-judicial executions and torture , which are usually the work of the police or the security forces .
Meanwhile , the situation is as follows : last year three journalists were killed and nearly 100 people were victims of intimidation or sustained physical injuries .
Attacks on staff of non-governmental organisations are increasing from day to day .
Religious minorities , namely Hindus and Christians , are living in danger .
Rape and human trafficking involving women and children are commonplace .
The impression is that everything that has been achieved in terms of democracy in the country is disappearing as a result of the growing violence on the part of Islamic fundamentalists .
The Council and the European Commission should systematically monitor the human rights situation in Bangladesh .
They should also monitor the situation as regards freedom of speech and freedom of the press .
We hope that the planned European Union observation mission to Bangladesh , to supervise the forthcoming elections in January , will help to ensure that the election process is democratic .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , it was a fortnight ago that it all started , when the outgoing prime minister of Bangladesh , Khaleda Zia , made a controversial address on the television , whereupon violent clashes broke out in the capital , Dhaka , in which three people were killed and hundreds injured .
The opposition charged Zia with filling the key posts in her interim government with sympathisers , accused the head of the electoral commission of being biased and asserted that there were 13 million invalid names in the electoral register .
More violence broke out at the beginning of this week , with all transit routes to Dhaka by land or water being blockaded , journalists attacked and seriously wounded , 20 000 members of the security forces firing tear gas and rubber bullets in street battles , all of which left seventeen people dead and thousands injured .

There are increasing attacks by Islamists on adherents of other religions , and I condemn , on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats , the acts of bloody violence and the constant assaults by Islamic extremists on religious minorities such as Christians , Ahmadis and Hindus , and the suppression of press freedom , which other Members have already denounced .
Those in power - who belong to the Bangladesh Nationalist Party - and the Awami League opposition , must bury their personal animosities once and for all and embark upon purposeful dialogue .
A date has been set for elections , and it must be kept to ; the electoral commission must start preparing for them now , and that means , above all else , making sure that the electoral register is correct .
The conditions currently prevailing - which are tantamount to civil war - must be normalised as soon as possible , with the Islamists being disarmed .
The citizens must be enabled to avail themselves of their right to vote without fear of reprisals in order that democracy may be given a chance .
I welcome the Commission 's willingness to send election observers to Bangladesh , and this House should resolve to do likewise .
author . - ( FR ) Mr President , Commissioner , a few weeks ago , the European Parliament , in the context of its interparliamentary delegation for relations with the countries of South Asia , invited over a great many representatives of Bangladeshi civil society , and it was very interesting .
It was very interesting , firstly , to see the reaction of the Bangladeshi ambassador , who had been nominated , the poor man , that very day and who was getting to grips with what Parliament was all about on that occasion : he saw the devastation that democracy and transparency can cause when they are applied !
We did , indeed , learn many things that day , which was very useful because the representatives of your Commission who were present were not really keen , at the start of the morning , to go and ascertain what was taking place on the ground .
Having heard what we all heard , they were well and truly obliged , at the end of the meeting , to acknowledge that intervention was needed , so serious is the situation on the ground .
I shall not go back over what was said by my fellow Members regarding the poverty , corruption , violence and torture - torture inflicted not only by the squadrons of the various militias , but also by the police .
The figures in this regard are terrible : in 2005 , 2 297 cases of torture were recorded as having been carried out by the police .
I shall mention the case of the journalist , Mr Salah Uddin Shoaib Choudhury , who is in danger of being sentenced to death on the sole grounds that he expressed his opinion freely : this is totally unbearable !
I could also quote a figure that comes from your Commission , Commissioner : your own services estimate that more than 13 million invalid names have been added to the electoral register .
How can elections be contemplated when it is already clear that there will be such a huge amount of fraud , so much organised fraud ?
That is why , over and above the vote in favour that the vast majority of us are , I hope , going to cast today , the Commission really must provide itself with all of the resources needed to send out signals on the ground aimed at making the government quickly move the goalposts , so as to bring it into line with the democratic standards that existed in this country a few years ago , and to thus put a stop to the institutional violence that is sadly degenerating into social violence .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , it must be a top EU priority to ensure free and fair elections next year in Bangladesh , a traditionally secular and democratic country of 140 million people .
For many years since its foundation in 1971 , Bangladesh was the exception in the Islamic world as it pursued its independent course as a Bengali nation in a peaceful and democratic fashion .
Regrettably , since 2001 there has been increasing Islamicisation of Bangladesh as Islamists have attempted to fill the vacuum left by corrupt warring secular parties . The NGO Task Force against Torture has documented over 500 cases of torture and intimidation by radical Islamists who have also murdered supporters of the Communist Party .
Indeed , Hindus , Ahmadis , Christians , Chittagong Hill Tract tribal people and Buddhists have also been targeted .
Recent civil unrest took to the streets with violent outbreaks as the Awami League opposition doubted the impartiality of the electoral commission , the integrity of the voters ' list or even the impartiality of the original caretaker prime ministerial nominee .
The EU-Bangladesh Cooperation Agreement of 2000 is based on respect for democratic principles pursuant to Article 1 , and its breach can lead to the suspension of the agreement and with it the significant EU Generalised System of Tariff Preferences and EU foreign aid , which amounts to 70 % of Bangladesh 's total foreign aid .
The EU and all the major donors must now coordinate to keep up the pressure for reform and full respect for democracy , a free press and human rights for all of Bangladesh 's citizens prior to the parliamentary elections scheduled to take place next January .
We must send short-term political observers from the European Parliament in substantial numbers .
These elections are crucial and it is essential that the EU maintains a visible major presence throughout the Caretaker Government period , as otherwise some frustrated , power-hungry general might consider launching a military coup .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , as I am sure we are aware , the people of the Ganges and Brahmaputra deltas do not conceal their admiration for the Afghan Taliban and also want , in their country , to emulate Mullah Omar 's Emirate of Afghanistan .
In order to achieve their ends , these holy warriors resort unscrupulously to violence .
It was unfortunate that the government of Bangladesh did not take initial warnings about the rapid rise of these terrorist groups seriously enough .
Events have quickly proved that they are not a figment of the fevered imaginations of jealous opposition leaders or sensation-hungry journalists .
Many of them have paid the highest price for revealing the truth , and many others have been forced to flee the country .
In this situation , it is reassuring to know that two people have been arrested on suspicion of leading terrorist groups .
However , we must not be satisfied with that .
If we thoroughly examine the situation in this country , which for many years has failed to comply with recognised European standards in the field of human rights , in spite of drastic measures taken by the government to prevent extremist violence against religious minorities , we are still witnessing chilling and nightmarish events .
The country is also beset by many other problems , which is why I wholeheartedly support the Commission 's decision to send an Election Observation Mission and to ask the European Parliament to do the same .
on behalf of the IND / DEM Group . - Mr President , as Members of the European Parliament we claim to be committed to human rights .
I therefore hope we take a strong stance in relation to Mr Choudhury 's plight .
Mr Choudhury is a journalist facing charges of sedition in connection with a series of articles he published that Bangladeshi authorities deemed favourable to Israel and critical of Muslim extremism .
His points in favour of moderation and dialogue will surely be supported by every Member of this House .
Nothing he said is without grounding and in any modern-day democratic country such articles would considered objective and informative to the public .
This is not the case , however , in Bangladesh , where Mr Choudhury has been put on trial and could be executed for his articles .
He has received death threats and been assaulted , imprisoned , beaten and tortured .
Mr Choudhury is now facing an unfair trial and has little chance of seeing justice .
The presiding judge has commented in open court that Mr Choudhury has hurt the sentiments of Muslims .
It is clear that the judge is hoping for a death sentence .
As Members of the European Parliament , we cannot stand idly by while an innocent journalist is facing an unfair trial and probable death .
I am glad to see his situation specifically mentioned in this resolution , as well as support for free and fair elections in Bangladesh .
( Applause )
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , the Commission shares Parliament 's concerns and welcomes the opportunity to discuss Bangladesh today .
The country is at a critical juncture of its fragile democracy .
Much is at stake with the forthcoming elections in this densely populated country .
Regrettably , however , the institutional framework and the acrimonious relations between the two main political parties do not bode well for a peaceful and democratic electoral process .
Over the last weeks and months , the Commission and the seven Member States with representations in Dhaka , as well as the wider international community , have been intensely engaged with the main party leaders and election stakeholders , urging all of them to agree on an electoral framework that achieves the trust of all parties .
The EU regional Troika in February , local EU Presidency representatives and several high-level visits from the Commission and Member States have consistently emphasised the need for impartial guidance of the country by the Caretaker Government in the pre-electoral period , a neutral Election Commission , and a credible voter list .
As you might be aware , Commissioner Ferrero-Waldner has taken the political decision to deploy an EU Election Observation mission for these elections .
Preparation for the deployment of EU observers , including internal procedures between the institutions for financing the mission , are currently under way .
In her letter to the President , or Chief Adviser , she underlines the above issues as the key concerns of the European Union .
The mission would be deployed around six weeks before election day , and it would remain in the country for some two to three weeks after that day , in order to follow the post-election period , particularly in the light of the unfortunate possibility of post-election violence , especially against minorities .
The Commission shares Parliament 's concerns over the widespread violence against journalists .
The fact that the latest report by Reporters sans Frontières categorises Bangladesh as an extremely dangerous place for journalists unfortunately speaks for itself .
The Commission has consistently condemned the intimidation and high level of impunity that apply to violent acts against journalists in that country .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at the end of the debate .
3 .
Iran
The next item is the debate on the six motions for resolutions on Iran .
Author . - ( CS ) Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , no one can now be in any doubt that neoconservative policies , including the doctrine of global intervention , have failed .
They have failed in Iraq , Palestine and Afghanistan , and also in relation to Iran .
The US-led ' war on terror ' has strengthened Iran 's power and influence in the Middle East , and until there is stability in the region , Iran 's influence will continue to grow , along with its efforts to stand up to pressure from the West .
Furthermore , the more the West threatens Iran , the more it boosts radical forces in Iran .
At the same time , it cannot be ignored that the only country in the region that has pursued a clear policy of pluralism and has undergone significant internal change is indeed Iran .
If there is one country in the world that should not require external help to rid itself of extremism it is Iran .
If there is a regime that should not be given any motivation by the West to obtain nuclear weapons it is Iran .
US and British policy in particular , however , is doing precisely that , rather than engaging in sensitive political negotiation .
Iran should of course emphasise its determination to meet its international obligations .
I wish to point out once again , however , that Parliament should support human rights and non-discrimination anywhere in the world . I shall make one final remark : in the territory of the EU Member States , there are so many social problems building up with an unavoidable human rights dimension that debate on the issue should also refer to these states .
author . - ( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner , it is terribly sad that we have to keep on adopting resolutions on the violations of human rights that go on in one country or another .
Over the past two years , as many as six resolutions , statements and reports from various institutions and organisations on the subject of Iran have been adopted .
To our sorrow , we cannot avoid coming to the conclusion that the situation there has got worse rather than better .
There is no freedom of opinion or of the press ; the Internet is censored and independent newspapers closed down .
There are apparently more jailed journalists in the Islamic Republic of Iran than anywhere else in the Middle East , and torture is a daily occurrence .
Those of us who were members of the inter-parliamentary delegation were constantly assured , in many conversations , that the above assertions bore no relation to the facts .
Unfortunately , those on the receiving end of such treatment tell another story .
There is no respect for women 's rights ; for example , women are prevented from observing International Women 's Day publicly .
A demonstration on 12 June by women and men who had campaigned against the legal discrimination against women was broken up violently .
That there has been a first visit to this House by a delegation from the Majlis has been a step in the right direction in seeking dialogue with parliamentarians and the general public , and respect for human rights and human dignity was at the heart of this debate , in which we were told that all the accusations levelled against Iran were far removed from the truth .
We now call on the Iranians ' representative body - the Majlis - and the Iranian Government to do all in their power to confirm this by backing these statements up with actions .
The human rights dialogue between the EU and Iran has also ground to a halt , and we should try to ensure its resumption .
Perhaps , Commissioner , you might give some thought to the possibility of a radio and television station that would make possible broadcasts to Iran containing information about Europe and European policies , which would be of use to the people who live there .
Mr President , to repeat over and over again that the human rights situation in Iran is worrying is a euphemism , so scornful of basic freedoms and rights is Tehran 's theocratic regime .
How can one fail to establish a link between the election in June 2005 of the conservative and revisionist president , Mahmoud Ahmadinejad , and the growing trend of repression and persecution , the victims of which are not only the Arab , Azeri and Kurdish minorities and the religious minorities - Christians , Jews , Baha 'is and Sufis - but also homosexuals and women , who are not a minority , but who continue to fall victim to countless forms of discrimination ?
If I had to mention just two points in our resolution , I would point out , firstly , that Iran holds the world record for the highest number of executions of young people , bread or bicycle thieves and homosexuals .
I would then point out that the government has declared that the Centre for the Defence of Human Rights , which was cofounded by the 2003 Nobel Peace Prize winner , Mrs Shirin Ebadi , is unlawful .
European diplomacy must make itself heard on such concrete examples as these .
Given that the Iranian Government dares to state that the punishment of death by stoning no longer exists in the country , I call on the Commission to take up the case with Tehran of the 11 people who have been sentenced to death by stoning , and I have here the names of the nine women and two men sentenced .
Tehran must waste no time in bringing us proof and in backing up its words with action .


author . - ( DE ) Mr President , you may well be surprised to learn that I agree with much of what Mr Strož had to say in this speech , but such is indeed the case , for I do believe that we have to paint a very nuanced picture of Iran , and that is why we have drafted a very wide-ranging and exhaustive resolution , as evidence , on the one hand , of how very concerned we are about the situation there , and also of how seriously we take that country and how important we believe it to be .
It is one of the oldest cultures in the world , and has been a world power for millennia ; we must endeavour , by means of astute policies and diplomacy , to re-integrate it , step by step , into the international community , among those countries that co-exist as neighbours .
If that is to happen , though , there must of course be some fundamental changes in Iran .
The issue of minorities has also been brought up , and it is , in Iran - which is actually a multi-ethnic state , and so one cannot actually speak in terms of minorities - the various nations and ethnic groups have done a good job of living together since ancient times .
It also showed greater religious tolerance than did many other states in the region , but the position today is such that the state 's official Islamic ideology makes life very difficult for minorities such as the Azeri or adherents of other religions , not least for other strands of Islam such as the Sufis .
On the other hand , though , there is certainly evidence coming out of Iran indicating that more and more self-confident women are going into politics , that a new generation is going down completely new paths and that this implies a great deal of hope for the future .
We must therefore consider this multi-faceted structure as it is and without isolating it .
We have to seek out contacts with the various communities and ethnic groups , and with every generation of this people , while at the same time making it clear that we do not accept under any circumstances rule by the police , the suppression of opinions , or the persecution of people by reason of their religious or other convictions , and that we repudiate all the more so the anti-Israel utterances of President Ahmadinejad , under whose leadership - it has to be said with some regret - conditions in this great country have taken a turn for the worse .
Taking energetic action to address that state of affairs is our duty as Europeans ; if we are to do that , we need to cooperate with the United States of America , and I hope that one consequence of the latest political developments will be that cooperation with them on this issue will improve .
author . - ( PL ) Mr President , during the last year , and despite numerous undertakings by the Iranian Government to promote universal values , the civil rights , political freedoms and human rights situation in this country has deteriorated .
We are receiving more and more information about the use of torture and the inhumane treatment of prisoners .
The increasing number of reports concerning arrests of and threats against journalists is a particular cause for concern .
Since the start of the year , at least 16 journalists have been arrested , which places Iran amongst the worst countries in the world in terms of restrictions imposed on the freedom of the press .
We are also concerned by the fact that Iran , in spite of the European Union 's efforts , has not agreed to a second round of the dialogue on human rights which began in 2002 .
The time has come for the European Union to get tough and decisive in its talks with Iran on the issue of human rights .
Iran will only become a legitimate partner of the European Union and of the whole world if it gives everyone access to civil rights and political freedoms .
( SV ) Mr President , Iran is a nation with thousands of years of cultural history behind it , a country of great riches and with a lot to offer its people and the world .
Yet what does the current regime offer its people ?
Oppression , imprisonment , unemployment and censorship !
President Ahmadinejad took office on 3 August 2005 , since which time the situation has deteriorated .
The present government offers its people ferocious corporal punishment .
Six hundred children keep their mothers company in prison .
Prisoners may have only three square metres in which to move around , but they are the lucky ones compared to those subjected to the death penalty .
Iran even manages to execute more people than the USA .
One hundred and eleven people have been executed in the last 12 months .
The absolutely most flagrant breach of the Convention on the Rights of the Child , to which Iran is indeed a signatory , however , is the death penalty for minors .
A regime that does not allow young people to do their penance and mend their ways has no future ; it will fall .
Iran has great potential , but while the regime there engages in persecuting academics , journalists and political activists instead of exploiting their potential , then the country and its people will continue to suffer .
Many hands have been stretched out to Iran , and the European Parliament is stretching out another to it today .
Release the political prisoners , the journalists and the representatives of minorities mentioned in today 's resolution .
These are not big demands , but if they are met , the way can be paved for an improved dialogue .
Why is the Iranian regime so scared of women ?
Let them participate , be elected , work , live and play their roles on the same terms as men .
To do this is to double the potential for development in a society .
There is hope .
Already , UN delegations are being permitted to inspect various facilities , and a few political prisoners have been freed .
However , the new government must seize the opportunity of adopting a policy that no longer shuts out the outside world and that gives women democratic rights .
That is the future .
on behalf of the PPE-DE Group . - Mr President , three weeks ago I attended the granting of an honorary doctorate to former President Khatami of Iran at my former university in my home town of St Andrews - the oldest Scottish university and one of the oldest and most venerable European universities .
In his valedictory lecture , former President Khatami appealed for a dialogue of civilisations , a dialogue of religions .
That is , surely , the only way we will achieve that essential understanding between our respective positions .
It is in that spirit that I support this motion .
We appeal to the Iranian authorities and the Iranian people to understand how difficult it is for us to accept the numerous and repeated infringements of such clearly basic human rights as religious rights , women 's rights , children 's rights , minority rights , rights to justice , rights to freedom of speech and thought , and press freedom , as listed in this resolution .
We urge the Iranian authorities to respond positively to our appeals in order that we can proceed to a positive dialogue , which can only be to the benefit of Europe and Iran , and of peace and understanding between our peoples .
on behalf of the PSE Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , during the new academic year , which began at the end of September this year , over a dozen students in Iran were denied access to higher education because of their political beliefs .
Others were informed that they could begin their studies if they signed a kind of statement of loyalty to the current regime .
According to Human Rights Watch , the Iranian authorities have denied at least seventeen students access to higher education : six in 2005-2006 and eleven in September this year .
Since July 2005 , disciplinary committees have suspended at least 41 students for at least two semesters .
Human Rights Watch also has the surnames of 35 students who have been convicted since 2005 for their political activities in student unions .
The brightest young Iranians are seeing their right to higher education restricted because of their political convictions and world view .
This is not simply a sign of this regime 's authoritarian stance , but is also particularly damaging to the development of Iranian society and goes against Iranian national interests .
The European Union should implement a grant fund which would allow young Iranians who have been barred from studying in Iran due to their convictions , to continue their studies in higher education institutions in the European Member States .
It is also particularly important for the European Union to set up a radio and television network broadcasting programmes in Farsi , which would provide information about the culture , politics and society of the European Union .
on behalf of the ALDE Group . - Mr President , in the last year we have suddenly witnessed a deterioration in the situation regarding respect for civil rights and political freedoms in Iran .
This has been acknowledged by the Iranian authorities themselves in a move which in itself is a healthy sign .
A report prepared by the judiciary provides clear and detailed evidence of human rights violations , including torture and the maltreatment of prisoners .
In addition , there are numerous reported cases in Iran today of executions of juvenile offenders and persecution of liberal and secular academics and journalists .
Furthermore , freedom of religion , freedom of the press and the rights of women , as well as minority rights , are not properly respected .
The authorities in Tehran have to realise that there can be no excuse for violating the basic human rights of its proud people and that , if such violations continue , this will only harm Iran 's attempts to achieve stability , progress and prosperity for its own citizens , and will no doubt further adversely affect its relations with the West .
on behalf of the UEN Group . - ( PL ) Mr President , what we have here is a catalogue of the most despicable acts which we most frequently encounter when discussing various deplorable dictatorships .
Of course , these acts include religious persecution , namely the persecution of Christians .
A press report appeared fairly recently on the execution of a fourteen-year old boy , who said ' I am not dying because I am a sinner , but because I am a Christian . '
The death penalty is applied in an incredibly light-handed manner .
It is cruel and includes the stoning of minors and the persecution of national groups other than those whose representatives are in power .
These are all matters which we constantly debate without ever finding a solution .
We have to stop and think .
It has been suggested today that it is clear that we should cooperate with the United States , as the USA is a power which is prepared to intervene at moments when the European Union will not sanction a military intervention , at least until it has its own military capability .
We have to develop an approach .
Perhaps it would help to send out mass information to the people in these countries to show them that opportunities for development exist other than those exercised against them by their regimes .
Member of the Commission .
Mr President , the Commission welcomes and supports the thrust of the draft resolutions concerning the Human Rights situation in Iran .
Our assessment is that serious violations of human rights have continued to occur in the country during 2006 .
In fact , there has been no progress in the EU 's main areas of concern , and in many respects the situation has worsened .
The list of examples is long and grim : an increased use of the death penalty and the occurrence of juvenile executions continue to be of grave concern ; ethnic and religious minorities continue to suffer from discrimination ; the status of women remains poor ; freedom of expression has been further curtailed ; and the closure of newspapers , intimidation and prosecution of journalists and the clampdown on bloggers have all continued .
The European Union has raised these c