Resumption of the session
I declare resumed the session of the European Parliament adjourned on Thursday , 4 December 2002 .
The final draft agenda as drawn up pursuant to Rules 110 and 110a of the Rules of Procedure by the Conference of Presidents at its meeting of Thursday 12 December has been distributed .
Mr President , I understand it is not possible to request a change , but may one protest against a change made by the Conference of Presidents ?
Today we should have been debating the Napolitano report on the role of regional and local authorities in European integration .
It is a vitally important issue , and Parliament should have been ready to give its opinion on this to the Convention before the end of this year .
For example , this week the Fisheries Council is debating cod stocks and the common fisheries policy .
Scotland , which is hugely interested in that , at the moment has a walk-on role .
The role of the regions in Europe matters deeply to people all over Europe and this Parliament has , by a stitch-up between the big parties , declined to debate it , although we have had it before us since July .
It is outrageous that this has been taken off the agenda .
Mr President , this is a very acceptable suggestion , but there is a risk that , yet again , the Members ' general opportunity to question the Commission at question time will be curtailed .
Will question time be extended by a compensatory period please ?
The plan , Mr MacCormick , is not to have them in competition with each other but to extend , if necessary , the appropriate sitting time .
Tomorrow at noon we will award the Sakharov Prize .
At 5 p.m. in room WIC 100 , we will celebrate the fifteenth anniversary of the Sakharov Prize in the presence of many of the previous winners .
After the ceremony , at 6.30 p.m. , there will be a special exhibition on the fifteen years of the Prize which will take place in the area outside room WIC 100 .
I have raised this matter at the Conference of Presidents on every occasion on which I have met with the Turkish authorities .
I have no more information than you have in respect of your correspondence .
However , when I speak tomorrow afternoon I will return to that matter on the assumption that our wishes will not , at that stage , have been fulfilled .
Wednesday
As regards the Council and Commission statements on safety at sea and measures to alleviate the effects of the Prestige disaster , I have received a request from the Group of the Party of European Socialists for resolutions to be tabled to wind up this debate .
Mr President , this disaster , without going into the issue in depth and in view of the information becoming available to us , currently involves at least four Community countries : Spain , France , Portugal and Denmark .
It does not just involve maritime safety , but it is a transversal issue which involves at least four committees ( Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , Fisheries , Development and Cooperation and Legal Affairs and the Internal Market ) .
Therefore , not just in view of the dramatic situation in Galicia , but also thinking of the whole of the European Union , we must provide a response and also consider something which is important and which I hope has the agreement of the Group of the European Peoples ' Party , at least it did last week : the creation of a committee of enquiry .
A major and historic decision was taken at the Copenhagen Summit .
A number of issues of specific institutional interest to Parliament arose .
I will inform you of those .
These matters can be further explored by the groups in the debate with the Danish Presidency .
One is an agreement in principle that by the end of January we shall have worked our way through the procedures for the appointment of the 10 new Commissioners from the accession states , and for the appointment of the new Commission following the departure of the Prodi Commission .
Work is already in hand regarding this matter .
A number of suggestions were put forward by committees and groups , but we must close this process by the end of January .
I would like to point out to the groups that by that time we need to bring closure to the calendar for the year 2004 on the issues of the appointment of the Commission , dates of election and our own internal procedures .
Secondly , we have an indication that there has been considerable progress - for which I thank colleagues - on drawing up an interinstitutional agreement on better regulation and law-making .
We have a commitment in principle across the institutions to try to bring closure to this matter before the spring summit meeting in Brussels .
We have several months to work through the remaining issues before the deadline .
I put the groups and various committees involved in this matter on notice in respect of that .
Thirdly , a conclusion was reached that the European Convention should draw up its own final report in time for the European Council meeting at Thessaloniki .
Again , in anticipating our work into the next calendar year , we need to bring forward , on time , any proposals we have on substance and timing to try to influence what happens then and in the period after that .
With regard to the Prestige , I noted that Parliament would seek to give as much urgency as possible to the question of financial solidarity and urge the Commission to bring forward specific proposals to the House .
I also pointed out that we would treat such proposals with appropriate urgency when the matter is presented to us .
Finally , on human rights issues , I placed considerable emphasis on the dialogue with Russia on the question of human rights in Chechnya .
My speech is available and the groups may wish , on institutional points in particular , to raise some of these issues in the course of our debate with the Council .
I believe everyone in the House shares your appreciation and joy that Mr Paya Sardiñas has finally been given a visa so that he can attend tomorrow 's ceremony .
Mr President , last week I saw on Danish television Parliament 's President in close communication with the member of his own party who is now the sitting President of the European Council , and I imagine , without being able to lip-read , that there were two related subjects that might have occupied these two colleagues .
The first was Turkish accession to the EU , and the second was the issue of referendums .
I shall not go into details regarding the first point but merely observe that the Turkish Government has now obtained a very effective lobbyist in the form of the United States of America 's bellicose President who gets on the ' phone to both parties . What , however , was the problem for the Prime Minister and what emerged at our group meeting in Copenhagen was the fact that people back home could confuse Turkey 's accession with the new treaty .
Since , moreover , Parliament 's President is a type of specialist in referendums , my question is as follows : what , in actual fact , was talked about ? What advice did Parliament 's President give the member of his own party in Denmark ?
You do not need to resort to lip reading .
Just read the record .
We will provide you with a copy of my speech .
I will be happy to do it a second time .
As you said , it is not the first time that I have been asked to do this .
We have not had a specific response to the reply we gave on the last occasion .
I will come back to you on this matter .
As you know , Mr Scarbonchi , the decision in principle to attend has been taken .
One of the key issues on the minds of group leaders has been the security of those who may go .
This is a serious responsibility .
We can discuss the matter again and review the current security situation at our Conference of Presidents meeting this week .
The principles on this matter are clear but the need to protect Members ' security is also paramount .
My office will contact you for further details in order to follow up on that matter .
Mr President , on a point of order , whilst welcoming the forthcoming enlargement of the European Union , I note that 1 January 2003 is the 30th anniversary of the accession of the United Kingdom , Ireland and Denmark , each of which has made a distinctive contribution to this Union .
In Britain the 30th anniversary is regarded as the pearl anniversary .
Some might regard Britain as the grit in the oyster that has created the pearl .
What is being done on 1 January to mark the 30th anniversary of the accession of these three great countries ?
I have no idea what you and your colleagues are planning , Mr Perry .
I plan to be with my family .

Mr President , as of yesterday , train No 299 no longer exists : the glorious , legendary poor man 's Orient Express , which ran from Brussels-Midi through Luxembourg , France and Switzerland to Milan in Italy , has been withdrawn .
This was a historic train , used by countless migrants , and it was a useful alternative mode of travel for us Members of Parliament too , Mr President , for those who , for various reasons - health , time or , we must not be ashamed to admit , even fear - did not and still do not want to travel by air .
By a unilateral decision of the Belgian State Railways , this train has been withdrawn .
It is not clear why this should happen , at precisely the moment when Europe is trying to promote rail travel over road travel .
This is therefore a decision which is to be disputed on two different grounds .
As far as Italy is concerned , we are doing our part .
Senator Giampaolo Bettamio , whom many of you will remember as a valuable member of the Parliamentary Bureau , has submitted a question to the Minister for Transport and Infrastructure .
I urge you , Mr President , to make vigorous representations to the Belgian Government , calling for a reversal of this decision .
It seems cruel that such a decision should be taken ten days before Christmas , given that this train was used greatly by migrants going home precisely for the Christmas festivities .
Thank you in advance for your help , Mr President .
Mr President , I am speaking to propose that this Parliament express its condemnation and rejection of the farcical presidential elections which took place in Equatorial Guinea .
The lack of democratic guarantees and the obligation for the voters to indicate how they had voted led all the opposition candidates to withdraw their candidatures two hours after the beginning of the false electoral process .
As you know , the current government of Teodoro Obiang did not allow the presence of observers from this Parliament nor international observers at these elections and , therefore , we believe that there are ample reasons for expressing a very firm and categorical condemnation of this electoral parody , which reflects the dictatorship suffered by the people of Guinea .
Therefore , in the expectation that the plenum will express its opinion , we believe that , by means of its President or whatever channels he deems appropriate , we must express our condemnation of the lamentable electoral farce which took place yesterday .
Mr President , forgive me for insisting : in this House we have discussed every imaginable subject but we have still not held a specific debate on the issue of world hunger .
If we do not do anything now , a million people are condemned to die in a few months , but if we continue to do what the international community has done up until now , these famines will reoccur cyclically .
We cannot continue to send agricultural surpluses which are constantly destroying the fragile agricultural economies of these countries .
We have carried out ' everything but arms ' ; this is laudable , but entirely insufficient .
We therefore need a specific , in-depth debate , which will lead to forward-thinking decisions in accordance with our current needs .
Mr President , as you may be aware , there were a series of disgraceful riots in Oldham in the summer of 2000 , provoked by members of extreme right wing groups such as the British National Party , the National Front and Combat 18 .
Film footage that appears to be that compiled by the local police has got into the hands of the local British National Party who are distributing it .
Apart from the understandable security concerns of those involved , the apparent collusion between members of the local police and the British National Party can only cause concern to those who hope that the perpetrators on both sides will be dealt with by a system of justice that is blind to politics .
I hope you will raise the matter with the British authorities .
As I hope you have already done as well , Mr Ford .
Mr President , three or four days ago , the Italian police handed over an Iraqi family to the liberal democrat government of Syria .
The head of the family had been condemned to death 20 years ago for belonging to the organisation known as Muslim Brothers .
We fear that the sentence might already have been carried out in Syria .
This family was held at Malpensa airport for five days , was not allowed to have any contact with any other people and was then sent back to Syria without being informed of their right to apply for asylum .
I call upon the European Parliament and its President to ask for more detailed information from the Italian Government .
Mr President , I wish to draw your attention , and that of the Commission and the House , to the extremely serious events that have been taking place in East Timor , because this House has always supported the process of achieving independence and peace in East Timor , which is like a son or a daughter to this House and to the European Union , and to which we are committed .
Extremely serious and somewhat mysterious uprisings and revolts have occurred in East Timor , which warrant the attention of the European authorities .
I would ask the President to consider contacting President Xanana Gusmão in order to find out what is going on in East Timor , given our great concern for that country , which has only recently gained its independence .
Mr President , I should like to point out to the House once again that , despite UN Security Council resolutions on Iraq and despite the fact that Saddham Hussein 's regime appears to have kept to the dates set in Resolution 1441 and handed over a 12-page report on his weapons systems , President Bush is still telling anyone who will listen that they are unreliable and that he has decided to bomb Iraq .
The other day , he even said he would have no hesitation in using nuclear weapons .
At the same time , we have learned that the United States are funding Iraqi opposition parties , including the Conseil suprême de la Révolution islamique en Iraq , to the tune of USD 92 million .
Those who appear to be fighting Islam and the Islamic revolutions are in fact funding them .
Nor should we be surprised if the words of Bush senior come true .
He said that , if it is in the interests of the United States , they will support and create terrorist organisations .
I should like your comments or at the very least some sort of intervention to make Bush accountable for his actions , before he sends the whole planet up in smoke .
I do not need to comment on everything that is said , but I will point out that these are matters that can be raised on the agenda and in the appropriate committees of the House .
The next item is the report ( A5-0425 / 2002 ) by Jean-Louis Bourlanges , on behalf of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs , on the typology of acts and the hierarchy of legislation in the European Union ( 2002 / 2140 ( INI ) ) .
Mr President , on behalf of my group I congratulate Mr Bourlanges on the remarkable degree of consensus he has managed to build in the committee around the main proposals in his report .
It is a difficult subject .
As Mr Amato said , there is nothing quite as complex as simplification .
In trying to address the issue of simplifying our hierarchy of acts in the European Union , Mr Bourlanges has taken a very complex , difficult subject and tried to bring a certain rationality to it .
For our part , we support his dual approach of , firstly , trying to rationalise the hierarchy by broadly defining three categories of acts : constitutional acts , legislative acts and implementing measures .
There are obviously subcategories - we cannot simplify too much , unfortunately - but nonetheless there are these three main groupings .
The other prong of his approach concerns the terminology or vocabulary , for instance regulations should in future be called ' laws ' and directives in future should be called ' framework laws ' .
That seems sensible and would make our acts much more comprehensible to the public .
I come to a point which is of particular importance , and which Mr Bourlanges touched on towards the end of his comments .
It is this category of implementing act where we delegate the right to adopt certain types of act to the Commission .
There is already a problem of terminology about what we call these acts , but nonetheless when we , as Parliament , and the Council , as a legislative authority , delegate powers to the Commission , currently exercised in the context of the comitology system , we need some fundamental change , some further steps forward on what has been agreed so far .
Mr Bourlanges has indicated what we agreed in the committee , indeed amending his own original draft report , but coming to a text which will have a broad majority in this Parliament .
The position we agreed was that yes , we as a Parliament , are willing - with the Council - to delegate such implementing powers , provided that we have the opportunity to call them back where necessary .
It is not that we want to immerse ourselves in all the technical details of implementing measures .
It is not that we want to substitute ourselves for the executive , but we need the guarantee that we can call back the powers if we do not like the way they are being exercised by the Commission .
We have proposed that if either the Council by a qualified majority , or Parliament by a majority of its Members - in other words , not a narrow majority on a Thursday afternoon of 29 to 36 - decides to call back an implementing measure , then the Commission must either withdraw the measure , or their original measure will be subject to the full legislative procedure under codecision to confirm , amend or repeal the act in question .
This is a simple system , one that would enable us to delegate far more than we do now , but it will also ensure democracy and transparency .
I commend it to the House .
Mr President , Mr Bourlanges should be congratulated on having drafted a good report on an extraordinarily complex set of questions .
It is a report which will be of great interest to the Convention , which is itself studying these questions .
The primary achievements are : firstly , to make a clearer distinction between legislative and executive acts ; secondly , to rationalise the choice of the instruments available so that force will more clearly follow form and , thirdly , to bring in a clearer class of subordinate legislation which should contribute not only to the quality of primary legislation but also to the parliamentary scrutiny of what is passed .
My main amendment on behalf of my group seeks to insist upon a separate amendment procedure for the second part of the Constitutional Treaty .
It is essential that the policy chapters are susceptible to a softer form of revision than the existing unanimity , plus national ratification in all Member States .
If we fail to bring in such a softer procedure , it may never be possible to alter the political chapters .
If the Union insists on the same procedure for the first and second parts , what is the point of splitting the Treaty in the first place ?
The PPE-DE and PSE Groups used to support the lighter procedure and I trust that their spokesmen will be able to enlighten us as to why they now seem to have changed their minds .
Mr President , as always , every time Mr Bourlanges puts forward proposals , he rouses the entire European Parliament and all those who follow these types of issues to extremely interesting and stimulating intellectual effort .
I would sincerely like to thank him for this , not least in that his proposals contain a number of points which my group considers to be important and positive .
I cannot say the same for all his proposals , however , so I will focus on those which we feel to be most problematic .
The Convention is faced with the issue which the Maastricht , Amsterdam and Nice Intergovernmental Conferences before it were unable to resolve , in other words the question of the hierarchy of acts and the distinction between the legislative and the implementing regulatory functions , which needs to be expressed more clearly .
This is , as it was intended to be , the scope of the Bourlanges report , but we feel that the report has exceeded its mandate in including more problematic issues which , in our opinion , should have been discussed in more depth by Parliament and which we certainly cannot accept as the last word on the matter .
I would mention , in particular , the proposals Mr Bourlanges makes regarding the constitutional revision procedure , which we as a group cannot endorse .
Indeed , we advocate the subdivision - described by the rapporteur - of the European Union 's normative system into three parts : the constitutional , the legislative and the regulatory .
However , we feel that we cannot support the proposals he makes regarding the constitutional revision procedure because they are contradictory .
We feel that it is not acceptable to stipulate the need for unanimous agreement by the Council and the representatives of the Member States and then say : ' Oh alright then , not everyone has to sign ' .
We cannot have it both ways : either we accept the principle that it is possible to revise the Treaties even without the unanimous support of all the Member States or we do not .
Clearly , we or , at least , the majority of the group , are firmly in favour of the former .
Another position which I feel it is important to stress concerns the legislative bloc .
We feel that Article 308 should be amended because , as it stands - with adoption by a unanimous decision of the Council alone - it cannot possibly meet the need for flexibility in the definition of the competences of a 25-Member State Union .
Furthermore , as regards the more specifically executive elements , we are opposed to the idea of a special organ or of specialised agencies with the task of monitoring the technical implementation of Community law . Our experience in this area has almost always been negative .
Lastly , as regards the specific issue of comitology , I would just like to stress one point , namely the fact that the European Parliament and the Council are given a deadline of three months within which to make a decision .
We feel that this is too long and that it would extend the implementing procedure unnecessarily .
In any case , it has proved difficult to apply effectively .
This is a question which we need to highlight and explore further , and I hope that this will not be Parliament 's final word on the matter .
Mr President , I must begin by apologising for being delayed , thank to the vicissitudes of the European travel system .
Mr Bourlanges 's report is , in my view , an extremely virtuoso piece of work and , I must say , as an individual , I admire it very much .
However , it reflects a very different tradition of political thinking from that in my own country .
After all , what he has done is to create a theoretical template into which the workings of the European institutions and , in particular , certain aspects of the relationship between the European Parliament and the other institutions should be inserted .
I believe this is the wrong way around .
Rather , the best solution to the matters and problems he raises is to decide on the particular procedures , processes and mechanisms needed to handle most effectively the particular issues concerned and then to define and describe the workings of the European Union in that way .
Quite regardless of the subject matter , some of which we Conservatives like and some of which we do not , we shall be voting against the report because we believe it looks at its subject matter the wrong way around - in a way that we believe is wrong for Europe .
Mr President , I am in favour , intellectually , of the process of streamlining and simplifying , so well argued by Jean-Louis Bourlanges .
I am in favour because he takes account of the long theoretical work that this Parliament has been developing since Maastricht , because this is a parliamentary acquis that must be included in the text of the Convention and lastly , because this work has resulted in clear instruments and effective decision-making procedures , which are crucial to the smooth functioning of the future Union .
Unfortunately , Mr Bourlanges , in the text 's philosophical and theoretical subconscious - for example , in paragraph 5 , second indent - we can discern a terrible distrust of the small and medium-sized States which makes me unwilling at the present time to adopt the report , for various and quite straightforward reasons .
It is the differences between the large States on the major issues that have impeded the Union 's progress .
It is not through any lack of will on the part of the small States that the United Kingdom has not signed up to the euro or to the Schengen area !
And nor can the small States be held responsible for the absence of a Social Europe , the small size of the budget , the lack of reform of the CAP , the crisis in structural policy or the limitations of the judicial instruments of the area of freedom , security and justice .
We cannot , then , where the size of States is concerned , recall the perennial response of the unforgettable chief of police in Casablanca , which was to ' round up the usual suspects ' !
It is not square kilometres , longitudes , latitudes and per capita GDP that determine how important countries are to the common interest , the European interest !
For this very reason , these criteria cannot be used to impose finalised constitutional solutions , leaving anyone who does not agree standing in the hallway , in other words , one step away from the door leading out .
Perhaps Mr Bourlanges , with his intelligence , knowledge and unswervingly pro-European attitude , should have explored this point further and fought harder to find a reasonable and consensual solution .
I hope he will do this , at least by tomorrow .
Mr President , I should like to say thank you to the rapporteur for his tireless enthusiasm for European development and for his splendid and very detailed report .
I would nonetheless draw attention to two points about which I disagree .
The first point concerns the procedure for revising the treaties .
I completely agree that , against the background of the work in the Convention , it is clear that , in the future , we must use the Convention method for treaty amendments .
That is something we have in any case learned from this process .
I must nonetheless declare myself to be in complete disagreement with the rapporteur 's proposal with regard to changing the ratification procedure itself .
I do not believe that it would be in keeping with the prevailing spirit of our Community if we were to take control of the EU 's development away from the Member States .
I am in actual fact afraid that such a procedure would in itself stand in the way of development in this Europe of ours because people back home would be very sceptical about giving Europe more competences if , for example , they were not to feel that they were in control of what was going on .
I think , therefore , that we have to recognise that Europe is founded upon its citizens and nations but that the sustaining , constituent units of our Union are the Member States and that this must naturally be reflected in our ratification procedure .
We ought quite simply to stick to the procedure we have at present .
The second point concerns the place of the social dialogue in the Community .
The rapporteur is trying to have a procedure of approval by the Council and the European Parliament introduced whenever the two sides of industry have arrived at a proposal .
I believe that such a procedure would give rise to an irrelevant third party in the social dialogue .
The idea of the social dialogue is , of course , precisely that the two sides of industry should enter into binding agreements with each other and that there should be no irrelevant parties - in this case , legislators - involved in such agreements .
If we are serious about beginning a social dialogue and perhaps , in time , creating proper European agreements , we must recognise that it is the two sides of industry themselves which must negotiate and that the legislators must stay outside the process .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as it happens that I am the last to speak , by the same token I shall be the last to compliment Mr Bourlanges on his report , but I am not alone in doing so .
This report is indeed remarkable in many aspects .
First of all , because it covers in depth one of the fundamental points of the issues raised at Laeken .
Secondly , because of its rigour , effectiveness and the concise proposals that Parliament formulates in the report , which do indeed lead to genuine simplification of our legislative system , which the rapporteur himself , Mr Bourlanges , described as rather chaotic .
Lastly , I must say , because of the extremely rich , clever , skilful pen of your rapporteur , whose talent contradicts each day what a great French diplomat used to say .
This diplomat , Mr Talleyrand , who Mr Bourlanges knows well , used to claim , quite wrongly , that spirit may be very useful but does not lead anywhere .
On the contrary , Mr Bourlanges , your spirited report leads to a very well-argued resolution .
I would like to express the Commission 's full approval of most of the conclusions of this resolution , in accordance , furthermore , with our own communication , which I prepared with President Prodi and my colleague Mr Vitorino here on 5 December last with regard to the institutional framework .

Mr President , I would like to emphasise three points .
The first concerns the actual principle of the organisation of the legal structure of the Union in three blocs - constitutional , legislative and implementing - which would provide the operation of the Union with the clarity that is sorely lacking today .
This reorganisation is indispensable if we are to clarify the legislative role of each institution : the responsibility of the European Parliament and the Council for laying down legislative acts and the primary responsibility of the Commission for ensuring that legislative acts are applied and adopting implementing acts .
Naturally , adoption and revision procedures for future constitutional treaties are also important . The Commission , like Parliament , would like to call on the Convention as a model for these procedures more frequently from now on .
Over and above procedural issues , Parliament and the Commission share the same point of view on the need to include sectoral policies within the constitutional treaty .
Yet again , I must reiterate that we cannot have strong institutions with weak policies .
My second point , ladies and gentlemen , which is fundamental to this report , concerns the creation of a genuine legislative bloc .
The time has come to call a spade , a spade , as you say yourself , and therefore to talk about European laws .
These laws will be adopted by a legislative authority divided into two equal arms ; they will be adopted by means of a single procedure , the egalitarian codecision procedure that Mr Leinen rightly focused on earlier on .
Here , at last , is an option that would provide all the citizens with a clear , transparent plan , although it is clear that certain aspects of the codecision procedure would need to be streamlined .
Furthermore , specific adjustments certainly need to be made in the area of organic laws or budgetary acts , and your report , Mr Bourlanges , paves the way for this to take place .
My third point concerns the role you would like the European Commission to play in implementing legislation .
I am not talking here about actual governmental functions , although I would note in passing that we should also clarify the exercising of these functions , which must be shared between the Commission , which proposes , and the Council , which decides , with appropriate information provided to the European Parliament .
This applies to the fields of police and justice and to the field of common foreign and security policy .
With regard to Community competence to implement European legislation , however , we , like you , would like this to be clearly awarded to the Commission and monitored equally by Parliament and the Council , in other words by the two arms of the legislative and budgetary authority .
Mrs Randzio-Plath has emphasised this point , moreover .
We need to carry out fundamental rationalisation to know who does what in the European Union and introduce greater transparency and accountability into the exercising of these implementing competences .
It is in this regard , ladies and gentlemen , that I must inform you of two concerns the Commission has on two points in your report .
The first was raised by Mrs Frassoni earlier .
It relates to the possibility of awarding at least part of these implementing competences to an authority other than the Commission .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must avoid encouraging or facilitating what could be perceived as dismantling regulatory power in the European Union .
The second point that concerns us , and Mr Corbett and Mrs Bérès , amongst others , have raised it , is that of granting Parliament and the Council a generalised right of veto with regard to implementing measures .
I am indeed talking about implementing measures .
This point is currently the subject - although some of the details may be different - of a reasoned discussion within the context of the preparation of the draft interinstitutional agreement on improving legislation , and my colleague , Mrs de Palacio , will discuss it here tomorrow .
I shall not repeat the Commission 's position , as it is already well-known .
Allow me simply to say that , as regards implementing measures each institution must be able to exercise its prerogatives autonomously , in harmony with the other institutions , and must avoid burdening the citizens and economic entities with the risk of legal insecurity .
Mr President , in conclusion , I would like to congratulate the members of the Committee on Constitutional Affairs and your rapporteur most sincerely on the inspired work they have achieved with this report .
We shall have to fight to impose the ambitious conclusions arising from the report .
Mr Bourlanges , ladies and gentlemen , there is some distance between the Bourlanges report , as you are able to adopt it , and the conclusions of the Convention working group headed by Mr Amato .

In order to bridge this gap when the future constitutional treaty is drafted , it is essential for the Commission and Parliament to continue to take the same line within the Convention .
You can count on Mr Vitorino and myself for that .
This is an element that Mrs Kaufmann and Mr Duff raised earlier , which makes Mr Bourlanges ' report all the more useful and relevant .
The next item is the report ( A5-0436 / 2002 ) by Mr Coelho , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the initiatives by the Kingdom of Spain with a view to adopting :
1. a Council decision concerning the introduction of some new functions for the Schengen Information System , in particular in the fight against terrorism ,
2. a Council regulation concerning the introduction of some new functions for the Schengen Information System , in particular in the fight against terrorism .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Schengen Information System ( SIS ) is a system of computer networks on which the information provided by the Schengen States is stored and consulted by the police and customs authorities of other Schengen States .
The SIS is the largest database in Europe and has a dual function : firstly to maintain public order and security and , secondly , to deal with immigration , providing support for measures intended to compensate for the free movement of persons .
In this context , two Spanish initiatives were submitted to us in the aim of giving the SIS new functions , primarily for combating terrorism .
I must express my regret that this report , for internal European Parliament reasons , confines itself to these two Spanish initiatives and does not also cover , as initially intended , a resolution on the Commission communication on the development of the future SIS-II , which contains proposals to increase the system 's capacity , and to introduce new technical and research possibilities . I am sorry , in particular , because the two Spanish initiatives seek to include improvements in the current version of the SIS that must necessarily reflect the long-term aims of SIS-II and , consequently , must be considered to be an integral part of the process of transition from SIS-I to SIS-II .
Having made a thorough study of the Spanish initiatives , we have reached the conclusion that , although we are unable to subscribe to them fully , they can be accepted if some amendments are made to them that are basically designed to ensure that guarantees of the protection of citizens ' rights are not called into question , thereby responding to the European Parliament 's main concern throughout this process .
Some proposals contained in the Spanish initiatives are acceptable , such as access by Europol or by Eurojust , provided that appropriate guarantees are put in place to ensure the legitimacy and the legality of any use of data .
This being the case , the conditions laid down in Amendments No 7 , concerning Europol and No 10 , which I tabled , concerning Eurojust , must be met before access can be granted .
If this access for new users is made possible , the purpose for which it is granted must always be respected , limiting this access to information which they have the right to access and ensuring that at least the same if not a greater level of protection of our citizens ' rights is in place .
It is also important that Europol and Eurojust 's needs to access the SIS data are more rigorously examined and justified .
The proposals for the full recording of searches are to be welcomed , but it seems appropriate to specify in the Article what information must be recorded .
A legal basis must also be provided for the operation of the Sirene offices , an idea that I had already suggested in my report of June 2001 , and which forces these offices to remove data whenever this proves necessary .
On the other hand , these two initiatives contain other proposals that , in our opinion , must await the development of SIS-II , when appropriate guarantees are put in place .
This applies to the proposal to extend access to data on missing , stolen or lost identity documents .
Although I have no objections in principle , I feel that , in the absence of additional measures to protect the rights of persons whose documents have been stolen , whose identity is used illegally or those whose data are simply input incorrectly into the SIS , the European Parliament cannot , at this stage , approve this proposal , which is likely to aggravate the problems of citizens whose identity has been usurped .
The same applies to the proposal to add additional data on wanted persons and to incorporate identification material in alerts on persons , notably photographs and fingerprints , on which adequate guarantees must first be adopted .
The Commission has commissioned a feasibility study to be undertaken on the development of SIS-II , which should be available in March 2003 .
I hope that the European Parliament will then have the opportunity to deliver an opinion on these conclusions .
I wish once again to express my unhappiness at the fact that this feasibility study will not be looking into the possibility of combining the Schengen , Europol , customs and possibly Eurojust databases into one database , in the aim of eliminating duplication , streamlining resources and improving accuracy ; a common database that would be made available to different users in a different way , guaranteeing restricted and specific access to the various areas of the database .
It appears that there is already political agreement on the need to create a new SIS - this is a Council decision with a legal basis for the development of SIS-II , and with the necessary budget .
The way in which this will be managed will be determined in a future document .
I wish to recall that this has been the clear position of this Parliament : this management must be undertaken by the Commission and must be subject to parliamentary and judicial control .
It is to be hoped that SIS-II will be developed by 2006 .
Given the danger of this development taking longer than planned , however , I think it is acceptable and appropriate for us to be making some improvements - at least those that are possible at this stage - to the SIS in force .
Lastly , Mr President , I wish to thank all my colleagues in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , whose amendments have contributed to improving this report . I should also like to thank the shadow rapporteurs for their cooperation and , particularly , the socialist shadow rapporteur , Sérgio Sousa Pinto .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I wish first of all to congratulate the rapporteur , Carlos Coelho , on his excellent report , which , in clear and concise terms , contributes to improving the Council 's draft initiatives on the new functions of the Schengen Information System .
In fact , I can even add that some of the amendments proposed by the rapporteur are already included in the texts of the Council working group studying these initiatives .
The draft initiatives in question will be discussed for the first time at the Justice and Home Affairs Council of 19 December , in the Joint Committee with Iceland and Norway , and the Commission is willing to support several of the concerns expressed by the rapporteur and which , I am sure , Parliament 's plenary will support .
In particular , I agree with the opinion on the need to limit Europol 's access to the categories of data recorded under Articles 95 , 99 and 100 of the Schengen Convention and to ensure that the data in question will be neither copied nor downloaded .
This access must not transform the SIS into a research tool and nor must it be in any way disproportionate to the reasons for such access being granted .
In my opinion , this type of access can be particularly useful in giving Europol the opportunity to request additional information from the Member States in specific cases they are investigating , in the context of the fight against terrorism , for example .
This is , as a matter of fact , the type of information that Europol is already authorised to request and obtain directly from Member States .
With regard to data protection , the Commission believes that the new provisions concerning the SIS , which falls partially within the sphere of Community competence , particularly with regard to Article 96 , must be studied in light of their compatibility not only with the Council of Europe 's 1981 Convention on data protection , but also with the content of Directive 45 / 96 / EC .
Similarly , the study of the proportionality of certain measures can be facilitated through consultation with the competent authorities , whether they are acting under the third or the first pillar .
In this regard , we particularly appreciate the opinion of the Joint Supervisory Authority on these draft initiatives , with which we largely agree , including the reference to the fact that extended access must be granted to the authorities responsible for issuing residence permits , to the data of Article 100 of the security information system where identity documents are concerned ; safeguards must be in place , however , to ensure that such access will not infringe the rights of citizens whose identity documents have been stolen .
I believe that this matter , raised by the rapporteur and which is extremely significant , cannot be resolved solely by developing new technical solutions or by introducing new functions , as Mr Coelho said , for SIS-II , which , in principle , will become operational in 2006 .
This matter must be addressed now and must above all be accompanied by the necessary information to the citizens about the existence of the Schengen Information System and on the conditions governing its use , including the need to delete some details in the event that documents are stolen or lost .
As to Schengen Information System-II , as the rapporteur said , the Commission was given the task of developing the new generation SIS in January 2002 and we anticipated a global approach to its functions in the communication that we presented to the Council and to Parliament on 18 December 2001 .
To put it succinctly , I should like to say to the House that the timetable for the preparation of SIS-II has so far been met and that the feasibility study is due to be concluded in March 2003 .
This will enable us better to help candidate countries prepare for the future elimination of internal borders , which can only take place when SIS-II becomes operational .
A report by the Commission services is now being finalised , describing in detail the current state of play of this study , which will be conveyed to the European Parliament and to the Council at the beginning of next year .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Coelho , I wish to begin by congratulating the rapporteur on his work .
The report makes a balanced evaluation of the two Spanish initiatives on giving new functions to the Schengen Information System , which is especially important in the fight against terrorism .
Following the attacks of 11 September 2001 , the Council , together with the Commission , drafted a package of measures intended to increase the level of security in Europe and to ensure the highest degree of effectiveness in combating terrorism .
Some of these measures have a direct effect on the Schengen Information System .
Since SIS-II will only be operational in 2006 , improving the current system is an urgent need that must be seen as part of the process of transition to the new system .
These new functions will , of course , have to be adopted in total compliance with our citizens ' individual rights , freedoms and guarantees , with strict control of the use of personal data available in the SIS .
We all understand the need to have efficient information systems , which are equal to the task of the challenges we face from international crime , but we can never use this as an excuse for disrespecting or ignoring the fundamental principles on which the Union is founded as a Community governed by the rule of law .
We are therefore attempting to amend certain Articles of the Schengen Convention in the aim of giving it new functions .
Giving Europol and the national members of Eurojust the opportunity to access certain data in the SIS is one of the most important practical proposals of this initiative .
The need to improve cooperation in the field of justice and home affairs and , in particular , the linking and crosschecking of information from databases , is one of the aims that the European Union and the Member States must pursue .
Against this backdrop , the fact that the SIS was created to support the Member States in areas involving public order and domestic security , areas that are covered by the action of Europol and Eurojust , leads us to approve the principle of exchanging information underlying the proposal contained in the Spanish initiative .
Nevertheless , as emphasised by the Schengen Joint Supervisory Authority , the body responsible for monitoring the SIS , access to the database by Europol and the national members of Eurojust raises doubts in terms of data protection and can only become a reality if the basic principle of the legitimacy and legality of access to the database and its use is respected .
In this context of having some reservations about the initial Spanish proposals , we welcome the rapporteur 's introduction of amendments that we believe respond to the concerns expressed by the Joint Supervisory Authority and by various members of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
The European Police Service will therefore have the right to consult and study SIS data only for the purposes for which these data were provided .
As to access by the national members of Eurojust , these will have the right to consult SIS data only if this right is compatible with the purposes for which the data were provided .
National members of Eurojust will have to record all searches they undertake and will not be able to supply data to third countries or to other bodies .
Other proposals contained in the initiative were rejected , in my opinion rightly so , by the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms at the proposal of the rapporteur , because they did not provide sufficient guarantees , and it would therefore be preferable to continue to await SIS-II .
This applies primarily to the proposal seeking to give the bodies responsible for issuing and studying permits the opportunity to access the data contained in the SIS .
For the reasons I have given , the report Carlos Coelho has presented deserves the applause and the support of the Socialist Group .
Mr President , following the friendly observation directed to me by Mr von Boetticher , I wish to say that I am in no doubt that there are criminals outside Europe but that they are nonetheless small fry in comparison with those within the European Union 's own institutions .
I merely need to quote the name , beginning with a ' B ' , of a future President of the European Council who is to take office in just over six months ' time .
There is of course a type of criminal beside whom the small fry we have outside the EU pale into insignificance .
That was an aside .
My main criticism and my attitude to the proposals before us are expressed in a minority opinion on the report .
They are based on the wonder I have always felt at the European Union 's and its institutions ' ability to empty the language of meaning and , in certain cases , to make the language mean the opposite of what was intended .
Opposition to the proposals before us is based on the fact that surveillance technology is being reinforced but that insufficient attention is being given to the rule of law , in spite of protests to the contrary .
I merely need to cite an example in the form of Article 101a of the proposal concerning Europol 's access to the Schengen Information System .
A number of basic requirements are made of Europol , but there is no reasonable guarantee whatsoever that Europol will comply with those requirements .
There is the supervisory body provided for by Article 24 of the Europol Convention , but all that may be said with certainty about this supervisory body is that it is genuinely powerless in relation to the huge scope for abuse in the overall system .
I must add , moreover , that what makes matters more alarming from the point of view of the rule of law is that the powers in question are linked to an extremely unclear concept of terrorism .
I am able , in this Assembly , to say that the old Danish proverb applies here about selling elastic by the metre and , as my fellow countrymen know , that is something which only people of a very trustworthy character can do .
There is no reasonable likelihood of the bodies concerned being of a sufficiently trustworthy character .
The rule of law will sustain irreparable damage .
The next item is the recommendation for second reading ( A5-0404 / 2002 ) by Mrs Damião , on behalf of the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs , on the Council common position for adopting a directive on the protection of workers from the risks related to exposure to asbestos at work .
Mr President , you have given me the floor as rapporteur but in fact the name on the report is that of Mrs Damião .
I would like to begin by sincerely thanking her for the hard work that she has done on this dossier .
Sadly , she is ill and is only slowly recovering .
I know I speak for everyone when I say I wish her the fullest and speediest possible recovery .
I would like to thank the Council too for the adoption of a common position which strengthens the Commission 's original proposal and also incorporates a number of the European Parliament 's first reading amendments .
Parliament particularly welcomes the inclusion of a new point in the proposed directive to prohibit all activities exposing workers to asbestos fibres , except demolition work and disposal of waste products resulting from demolition and removal work .
The whole thrust of the proposal is to protect workers engaged in those activities and repair work , which will bring workers into contact with asbestos locked up in the built environment for many years to come .
It is with this in mind that in the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs we have adopted three amendments at second reading , designed to strengthen still further the common position .
A quick word about each of those amendments : Article 3 ( 3 ) of the proposal derogates from important elements of the directive in respect of workers whose exposure is of a sporadic and low intensity .
This was too open-ended for the Employment Committee and , therefore , we wanted to pin down that definition of sporadic and low intensity still further .
Amendment No 1 does this by specifying that Member States , in accordance with their normal tradition and practice , will consult with both sides of industry and lay down practical guidelines for determining work of this kind .
We think that is an important step in the right direction .
Amendment No 2 makes provision for breaks for workers obliged to wear individual breathing equipment because of their potential exposure .
Again , we think this is an important step .
It is extremely uncomfortable to work for long periods in individual breathing equipment .
The Council had some resistance to Amendment No 3 initially , but we felt it was important that we included a specific mention of sanctions and , in the end , we have included a text which has been used quite often in other social and employment dossiers in the past .
We are quite pleased with that as well .
Overall , we have had very good cooperation with the Danish Presidency on this dossier - to such an extent that we feel we can reach agreement at second reading with the assurances we now have from COREPER that the Council will be willing to accept these three amendments adopted in the Employment Committee .
It is my hope that , with these three amendments adopted and voted upon tomorrow , the Danes can take this forward as an ' A ' point on 20 December and they will be adopted very quickly .
I say I hope that will be the case because the deadline for amendments on this dossier closed only a few minutes ago .
I hope that no groups have taken advantage of that deadline to table amendments .
If they have , I can say with absolute certainty that those amendments will not be carried in the House - we know that from the margins in the Employment Committee .
But it would delay the adoption of this dossier beyond the Danish Presidency into the spring - the earliest would be March under the Greek Presidency .
That would simply lead to a further delay of weeks , if not months , before this directive could be agreed .
That would put back its final adoption and implementation within the European Union and during that delay additional workers would inevitably be exposed to asbestos fibres and , over time , might die as a consequence of that exposure .
So I hope no groups will take advantage of that deadline - if any have , I hope they will , even at this late stage , withdraw those amendments .
Therefore , I would hope we could include this on the voting list tomorrow .
Everyone has had the amendments agreed in committee for a couple of weeks now in translation .
That would allow the Commission to deal with this dossier at its meeting tomorrow afternoon and that , in turn , would allow the Danes to deal with it on 20 December .
If we do not find that additional amendments have been tabled or if they are withdrawn , I would ask you , Mr President , to use your good offices to have this added to the voting list tomorrow lunchtime .
Mr President , I would like to express to the rapporteur , Mrs Damião , my best wishes for a speedy recovery , and to congratulate her and Mr Hughes on their excellent work on such a sensitive and technically difficult dossier as asbestos .
I want also to express my satisfaction at the unanimous conviction that the protection of workers against the risks of exposure to asbestos must be improved .
The Commission attaches the greatest importance to all measures designed to protect the health and safety of workers .
We have emphasised this interest in the social agenda and confirmed it in the Commission 's communication on a new Community strategy on health and safety at work .
It is with great satisfaction that I can inform you that the Commission fully accepts the three amendments that Parliament has proposed in this second reading .
I would like to congratulate the House for the quality of the amendments presented , which are an expression of the European Parliament 's preoccupation with the risks and effects of exposure to asbestos and the need to increase the levels of protection of European workers still exposed to asbestos .
The Commission is convinced that the three proposed amendments improve the text and contribute to a better application of the directive .
You are aware of the great breakthrough already achieved by the Council 's common position : the banning of all activities which expose workers to asbestos fibres during the extraction of asbestos or the manufacture and processing of asbestos products , or the manufacture and processing of products containing intentionally added asbestos , with some unavoidable and very limited exceptions .
Finally , I would like to thank Parliament , as well as the Danish Presidency and the Council , for their work to date on this issue .
We should not forget that the effects of exposure to asbestos have dramatic repercussions for workers ' health and even for their families .
With the quick adoption of this important directive , we will demonstrate that the health and safety of our workforce is at the top of our agenda .
Mr President , I wish to thank Mrs Damião for all her work and I hope that she will get well soon .
Every year 4 500 people die from asbestos-related diseases in the UK alone .
It is predicted that 250 000 will die in the European Union of these diseases in the next 35 years .
Medical and scientific evidence demonstrates that there is a real need for this directive .
I am delighted that the production and marketing of asbestos will be banned across the EU from 2005 .
Thankfully , it has already been banned in the UK .
However , there are still millions of tonnes of asbestos in Europe 's buildings throughout the European Union .
Those buildings will have to be demolished at some point , and the asbestos will have to be removed , repaired or maintained , with the consequent effect on the health and safety of all those asbestos workers .
I welcome the fact that this directive will lower the exposure limit values for asbestos .
I emphatically support the three amendments Mr Hughes has talked about .
However , I was extremely disappointed that the Committee on Employment and Social Affairs changed its mind after first reading ; my amendments , which were not accepted , would have halved the exposure limit value .
The committee 's reasoning , as I understand it , was that , since the Council had not accepted my amendments , there was no point in going to conciliation as it would not have accepted them in future .
However , we know from experience that the Council quite often changes it mind during the conciliation procedure , and it seems a great shame that we did not pursue those amendments .
Had it saved just one asbestos worker 's life , it would have been worth it .
Nevertheless , I decided against retabling the amendments because I did not have the support of the Committee on Employment or the other groups in this House .
Even though I would have liked to have seen the directive go further , it is still a very good directive and will save asbestos workers ' lives across the EU .
For that reason , I will advise my group to vote for this directive , because it is greatly needed .
Mr President , I should like to say thank you to the rapporteur and to those who have planned this Assembly , for it is the first time in a long time that this House is being given permission to debate at a reasonable hour an important subject concerned with the working environment .
We are used to meeting close to midnight , so it is splendid to be here today and see everyone awake .
We all know that asbestos is one of the greatest threats to workers ' health in the EU .
It is estimated that , over the next 35 years , up to 500 000 deaths will be directly related to the serious illnesses caused by asbestos .
I think that experience with asbestos and the debate in Parliament and elsewhere show very clearly how incredibly important it is that we take the precautionary principle very seriously .
For many years , this principle was not taken seriously , and we can see the consequences today .
I am therefore also pleased that all the groups in Parliament have chosen to support this directive .
I cannot refrain from saying today that I should also like to see Liberals also being supportive in connection with other problems concerned with the working environment and showing a desire , which they have not always displayed , to take other problems in this area just as seriously as they have shown they take those arising from asbestos .
Overall , the present proposal provides workers with better protection , and I am pleased that many of Parliament 's proposals have been approved by the Council .
It is now proposed that employers should provide education programmes so that workers are clearer as to how they can protect themselves , and it is great progress that employers ' responsibility for this area has been made so very clear .
I would also now call upon the Member States to go still further than the directive , and I believe that the three amendments adopted by the committee will improve the directive still further .
It would , of course , also be splendid if the Council could express a positive attitude today , for it would mean that , quickly and within the coming week , we could bring our reading of this directive to a close , something which I would call upon us to do .
There are many things we could have done better but , if we conclude the procedure now , it could save a number of workers from these very serious illnesses .
I therefore hope that the Council will approve the amendments and that we can obtain a directive as quickly as possible .
Mr President , like my colleague , Mrs Thorning-Schmidt , I was looking forward to a midnight speaking slot , as this is a health and safety issue !
It is quite symbolic that we are speaking about this matter at a reasonable time because it goes so much further than just health and safety .
This morning in the United Kingdom , in our flagship news programme , the Today Programme , unusually the question of asbestos was raised at another reasonable hour .
It was raised because of the matter that Mrs Thorning-Schmidt raised , namely the implementation of this directive .
So effective has the work been on this particular directive and matter , and so effective is the way the debate has gone and the agreement between the political groups that Member States are now looking carefully at the way we implement the directive .
This morning the Health and Safety Executive set out for the United Kingdom exactly how this directive would be implemented , the way that even small- and medium-size enterprises would find a way through this health and safety legislation .
It is important ; it has huge agreement , but we must also understand the real dangers .
Not only will the Member States start to implement this - and we must monitor it carefully - but candidate countries are using asbestos at a level we can only estimate , but it is quite a dangerous level .
So we must set the tone through implementation of this directive , pay tribute to the way Parliament has discussed this and ensure that we in the EU Member States and the candidate countries make something of this directive to reflect the level of debate in this House .
Mr President , although 13 countries have banned and , for the most part , done away with asbestos , because it is a proven carcinogenic , Greece is still applying Community legislation which allows asbestos to be used until 2005 , thereby endangering the lives and health both of workers in the sector and society as a whole .
Environmental protection and protection for public health are clearly not the European Union 's priorities , despite what it may say .
Its priority is to pursue maximum profits for big business .
The asbestos scandal is a blatant example of the cruelty of the capitalist system and it is high time action was taken to ban the extraction , processing and use of asbestos products .
At the same time , measures need to be taken to protect public health from asbestos and to compensate workers in the sector for the damage which their health has suffered all these years .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0384 / 2002 ) by Mrs Breyer , on behalf of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , on the Communication from the Commission on foods and food ingredients authorised for treatment with ionising radiation in the Community ( COM ( 2001 ) 472 - C5-0010 / 2002 - 2002 / 2008 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , I would like to thank the rapporteur , Mrs Breyer , for her report which responds to the question put forward by the Commission .
The question was which foods should be allowed to be irradiated in the European Union ?
The Commission put this question to Parliament and the Council following a consultation of industry and consumer organisations and other interested parties .
The consultation received a polarised response .
Stakeholders were either totally against this technology or in favour of it .
There would seem to be no common ground between these two camps .
Currently , the European Union-wide positive list of products authorised for irradiation treatment contains only dried aromatic herbs , spices and vegetable seasonings .
For the completion of this list , the Commission presented three options for discussion .
The first option proposed allowing the irradiation of shrimps and frogs ' legs , as these foods are often imported from subtropical and tropical countries and a certain microbe content can hardly be avoided .
The second option proposed to allow the irradiation of a number of foods in addition to shrimps and frogs ' legs , all of which have been , and continue to be , irradiated in the Member States in substantial amounts .
Such foods include dried fruits , cereals , chicken , offal , egg white and gum arabic .
The third option proposed that the current positive list should be regarded as complete , which would mean that only dried aromatic herbs , spices and vegetable seasonings could be irradiated in the European Union .
The report adopted by the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy provides the possibility of adding further products to the current positive list if the safety of these products can be proven .
The adoption of Amendments Nos 2 and 3 tabled by the rapporteur and other Members of Parliament would , however , result in the third option , which is the most restrictive one .
The Commission will take note of Parliament 's conclusions but must await the reaction of the Council before making any formal proposal .
However , I would like , on behalf of my colleague , Mr Byrne , to take this opportunity to clarify a few points .
First , I would like clearly to reiterate that the Scientific Committee on Food has concluded that irradiated foods are safe .
This opinion is based on many scientific studies and is shared by the World Health Organisation and scientific bodies .
Therefore , additional toxicology studies are not required , as the views of the scientific community are very clear on this issue .
There are many misconceptions about this technique .
I would stress that not all foods can or will be irradiated .
This is a similar situation to cooking and freezing : not all foods are cooked and not all foods are put in the refrigerator .
Irradiation is just one method of food preservation .
For some foods it is better than other techniques , for others it is not .
The European Union has very strict labelling rules for irradiated foods .
Even if a compound food contains only small amounts of irradiated ingredients , this fact has to be clearly indicated .
We also have the technical tools to enforce correct labelling .
The Commission has financed the development and standardisation of methods for the detection of irradiated foods .
These methods are used by the food control authorities to check foods on the market .
The first report of the Commission on food irradiation , published recently , shows that the overwhelming majority of foods on the market are correctly labelled .
This means that consumers can choose freely between irradiated and non-irradiated products .
I would also like to reiterate that current legislation already requests Member States to report the results of their checks on irradiation facilities and on food products .
If products are detected by the food control authorities which do not comply with legal requirements , they have to be removed from the market .
Finally , I note that the report stigmatises third countries , in particular the United States and Brazil , for using this technique .
I consider this to be inappropriate as our own Scientific Committee considers irradiated foods to be safe .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I will start by asking you to excuse my voice , which is affected by a cold .
This report finds us again debating the extent to which food is irradiated in the Community and the ways in which this should be regulated .
The end of the 1990s saw the adoption of a directive , after lengthy debate , which allows only dried aromatic herbs and spices to be irradiated in the EU .
The EU is now , again , faced with the decision as to whether only herbs and spices should continue to be permitted to be irradiated , whether this list should be extended to include a few foods with problematic hygiene conditions , such as frogs ' legs and prawns , or whether the list should include foods permitted to be irradiated by the transitional arrangements in the individual states , such as potatoes , poultry , vegetables , prawns , shellfish , frogs ' legs or protein .
The Commission - as the Commissioner has just made clear - lists these three options in its communication and thus more or less leaves it to us in Parliament to decide which of them to approve .
In its report , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy has in fact come to a contradictory decision on the subject , which , I believe , the Commissioner has briefly addressed .
On the one hand , the demand is made in item 3 that we should take note of the Commission proposal and regard the present list as complete , and the view is expressed that further herbs , spices and seasonings derived from plants should be allowed to be irradiated in the EU only if this is scientifically recognised as being harmless and efficient .
At the same time , in item 4 , the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy proposes that irradiated products , which are numerous in some Member States , should be added to the positive list in so far as this technology can make certain foodstuffs safer .
What this actually does is to make clear our lack of an unambiguous position , as , on the one hand , we state in item 3 that we want a very restrictive decision , whilst , contrariwise , in item 4 making it clear that we favour a decision that goes further .
Parliament , though , is quite clear about its position , expressed in item 5 of the report , which is that each foodstuff must be subjected to detailed analysis before any proposal is submitted to add it to the positive list , the object being to demonstrate that each of the conditions for authorising food irradiation have been met in accordance with Annex I of the 1999 directive .
The Commission communication makes clear , and the Commissioner has just said equally clearly , that there is in fact no consumer demand for food irradiation , that indeed the greater part of the food industry rejects it and declares it to be superfluous .
Even Eurotoc , an independent association of consumers promoting healthy eating - with whose chefs we are all familiar - has made it clear that the irradiation of food is incompatible with its conception of its own purpose and gained , within only a few days , quite enormous approval for its resolution rejecting food irradiation .
I think this makes it clear that the directive on irradiation deserves to be strongly criticised and its presuppositions refuted .
There is one thing that we must be clear in our own minds about , and that is that irradiation only makes any sense if it is used to conceal and draw a veil over hygiene conditions that are unacceptable to our way of thinking and are perhaps simulating for the benefit of consumers a quality which is in fact absent .
Only then does it make sense to treat food with radiation , as , if hygiene conditions were good , there could be no misgivings about the products and they would not need to be irradiated .
My second point is that irradiation is principally about keeping foodstuffs fresh throughout long journeys .
Prawns are a prime example of this , in that they are taken from northern Germany to Morocco to be peeled .
That too - as we have heard from the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism - should of course be seen in a very critical light in terms of an environmentally sound transport policy , and our committee has often called for the mainstreaming of environmental policy .
I cannot , by way of conclusion , do other than to reiterate that in items 3 and 5 the committee has adopted very divergent positions , and tomorrow 's vote will show whether we will take our stand on the side of consumers and of consumer protection , or whether we will make concessions to the industry , which has engaged in energetic lobbying over recent weeks .
I believe that we should all be aware that irradiation should be viewed in a highly critical light , that it can also involve certain risks , not all of which we may at present be aware , and that consumers reject it .
I hope that our decision tomorrow will be in favour of consumer protection , enabling the Commission and the Council to get on with their work , that we will also somewhat clarify the Committee on the Environment 's rather contradictory report , and will be able to come up with an unambiguous position , one that will serve as a basis for further work by the Council and the Commission .
Mr President , my group takes a rather different view from that of the last speaker .
We believe that it is right for Parliament to be consulted .
We believe that in a number of areas which are contentious - for example , the dangers of non-ionising radiation - not enough is known within the science for us to pass this by .
My group will also support the amendment , which other colleagues and I have signed in the name of the Socialist Group , for the deletion of paragraph 4 .
Why do we do that ?
Not because we necessarily disagree with the Scientific Committee on the issue of whether radiation can be safe for foodstuffs , but because it is not the whole story .
The question is , why is this being done ?
Is it really for the benefit of the consumer ?
Is it something for which there is a consumer demand ?
If that was the case , we would not have as many cases as there are , certainly in my country , of illegal and covert irradiation . This has been carried out because they do not want consumers to know about it .
They particularly do not want people to know about and reflect upon the trade which is more concerned with cost-cutting than with the end product in terms of consumer satisfaction .
Mrs Breyer referred to shrimps being taken from one market to another , peeled in one continent and brought back to another .
This is not due to safety concerns or the attractiveness of the product : it is all about the profits that go into this business .
In the light of the Commission 's options as presented , we , like the rapporteur , take the view that the list should not be further extended at this stage .
The onus of proof continues to be on those who wish to do these things .
The proof has not yet been provided .
It seems that fresh food and safe food do not always go hand in hand .
Every year , many people die as a result of poisoning by Salmonella and Campylobacter in chicken , for example .
These bacteria can be controlled by chemicals , such as methyl bromide , which is toxic .
A major disadvantage of using this method is that traces of these toxic substances can be found in food .
Food irradiation forms a good alternative in order to kill microorganisms and prevent subsequent food poisoning .
If we want to eat fresh produce , then it is impossible first to treat it thermally .
However , in order to prevent vegetables , fruit and cereal products from going off , we can irradiate them .
This is therefore a great way of keeping produce fresh after all .
However , it would be unfair to say that food is irradiated for the wrong reasons - in order to give it a better appearance , or to disguise any imperfections .
Any harmful substances already produced by the microorganisms cannot be eliminated by irradiation .
Hygiene and sanitary regulations therefore need to continue to apply during production and agricultural processes .
How , though , do we now know that this fresh produce is also safe ?
First of all , experience has taught us that food irradiation is common practice in countries both inside and outside the European Union .
Moreover , the safety of irradiated food is borne out by the record of fifty years of research by the World Health Organisation and the International Atomic Energy Agency , among others .
The irradiation of food does , however , result in new substances being formed , as is also the case when food is cooked .
Only in the case of fats is it not entirely clear whether irradiation could have adverse health implications .
This requires further investigation .
From the above , I conclude that there is a technical need for food irradiation , that there is no danger to public health , that it is useful for the consumer and that it is not an alternative to hygiene regulations .
The four conditions laid down in the 1999 framework directive are thus met .
I would therefore like to make provision for adding , inter alia , vegetables , fruit and cereal products to the positive list .
In the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy , the resolution has been improved by the incorporation of amendments .
I do , however , still have a comment on labelling .
Labelling should not function as a warning sign .
Once it has been proven that the product is safe , a warning is no longer relevant .
This would wrongly give the consumer the idea that something was wrong with the produce after all .
To avoid any confusion , the designation that this product has been irradiated for hygienic reasons may suffice , just as it is stated on a carton of milk that the latter has been pasteurised .
Let me end by saying that I would conclude that food irradiation is necessary in a number of cases in order to let fresh food and safe food go hand in hand .
We should therefore not reject food irradiation out of hand but respect it for what it is .
Five years ago , Mrs Bloch von Blottnitz was the rapporteur for food irradiation .
At the time , the Commission wanted to take swift action and irradiate far more foods than simply herbs and spices .
At least now we are discussing it first , which is an improvement .
Different arrangements exist in the fifteen countries .
In my own country , the Netherlands , potatoes are irradiated but I have never seen this displayed on the label .
European law is not applied properly in this area .
Irradiation is not necessary .
There are many alternatives .
If labelling were honest , consumers would not buy the products .
This is also the reason why there is fraudulent labelling .
Cyclobutadiene is a substance that is always detectable when food is irradiated .
It is therefore perfectly possible to label properly , as the substance is always detectable .
This is the Achilles ' heel of the irradiation industry , for consumers do not want it .
If the substance were labelled explicitly , this industry would die a slow death .
Mr President , I rather liked the introduction from the Commissioner on this .
I thought he got it right , with one exception : he was misreading paragraph 3 .
It is not as negative as he suggests .
The original text from Mrs Breyer , which welcomes the Commission 's suggestion that the current list be regarded , has now become ' notes the Commission 's suggestion that the current list could be regarded ' .
That has been changed quite significantly .
You need to look at all the changes that took place in committee .
After all , food has been treated with ionising radiation for some 50 years , as the rapporteur rightly said .
In my country , the UK , products include vegetables , fruit , cereals , poultry , fish , shellfish - not too many frogs ' legs !
All that range , to a certain degree , is given this treatment .
Different countries have different lists .
The common ground between us is that it must not pose a health hazard , is of benefit to consumers and is labelled .
If there is a need and if it is safe , then why not ?
That is the committee 's broad view .
Well , it is safe .
The WHO says so . The EU Scientific Committee on Food says so , and it therefore is an element of consumer protection in itself .
There is a need , for instance , in hospitals , to protect the food of some very vulnerable patients from dangerous bacteria .
It can protect food from contamination . What it cannot do is to reverse contamination or putrefaction in food .
The Commission came forward with a perfectly sensible communication - a discussion paper - with its options of the current EU list , plus shrimps and frogs ' legs , of the current wider Member States ' list , or of the current EU list alone .
I suspect the answer is somewhere around the first and second options , but we are not at this stage dealing with the legislative proposal .
The Commission is in listening mode .
We needed cool , calm reflection on this .
That is a thousand miles from the threat of Armageddon that we saw in the original report , with spectres of dangers , such as the long journeys that are actually of benefit to the developing countries in exporting their goods .
The picture of the radioactive sources posing safety risks and risks to security through the acquisition of radioactive materials by terrorists seeking to make dirty bombs has been banished from the committee 's view .
We are looking for something a little more measured .
The report in its original form was more like the description of the Merovingian dynasty as despotism tempered by assassination .
The reality is that we have a process that is safe if used properly .
It can bring benefits and it should be considered carefully with proper risk assessment and risk management , but without scaremongering .
The amendments that Mrs Grossetête and I proposed and the committee supported bring this report back to where the Commission might prefer it to be .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want to thank the Commission for the clarity with which it has presented the situation as regards the treatment of foodstuffs with ionising radiation in the European Union .
I am also grateful to the Commissioner for the clarity of what he has had to say about this problem area .
As long ago as 1999 , when we were working on the directive , our fear was that the Commission would not succeed in producing a comprehensive positive list by 31 December 2000 .
And what has happened ?
It will soon be 31 December 2002 , and , rather than discussing whether or not to adopt the list , we are again going over the discussions we had in the days before the directive was drawn up .
Things cannot , I believe , be left as they stand , and the situation is unacceptable .
The Commission , in its communication , notes that both the FAO and the WHO regard it as scientifically proven that irradiation is quite safe for consumers .
The WHO , indeed , urges that it be used more , as the procedure reduces risks to the consumer .
The Scientific Committee on Food notes , with reference to 17 product categories , that treatment with ionising radiation is harmless , and those categories include all those products treated to date in the countries of the European Union .
It states that there have been no occasions on which the critical dose has been exceeded in the European Union .
It is noted in the Commission communication that the most important conditions for treatment with ionising radiation - licensing , labelling and control - have been met and that the methods for detecting irradiation have been validated , in other words , that they also meet requirements .
I am slowly finding it intolerable that we are constantly , in this context , being told that there is the possibility of cheating , that there is room for fraud and so on .
The detection methods are in place .
We can determine whether products have been treated , be it legally or illegally .
Why , then , do we constantly have to go over this discussion again and again ?
We see , then , that all the conditions have been met for a positive list to be drawn up and for the Commission to deal with it .
The Commission , though , is getting cold feet .
The reasons for this are apparent from the survey that it has carried out , which , to take one example , discovered that the food manufacturers do not want this treatment .
Why , then , do they not want it ?
As the communication makes perfectly clear , they fear a boycott of their products , as the European Union and this discussion itself have been permeated by an ideology which ignores all the scientific findings and simply refuses to accept all that has been worked out and set out to date .
And so we go back to our discussions and to bemoaning this dreadful state of affairs .
It is then that the hygiene argument is produced .
I helped draw up the directive on hygiene conditions in the handling of fresh meat .
I would be the last person to want to cut anything out here , but we discussed HACCP when we worked on the current version of the food hygiene directive .
It is perfectly clear to us that this is not acceptable everywhere , and that we have to use other methods as well in order to make products safer for consumers .
That is what this procedure is there for .
The only acceptable approach is for the Commission to draw up the positive list very quickly , and , moreover , not in the form it has now proposed .
The real need is for change in the situation in the European Union .
We cannot afford to keep on being weighed down by this ideological ballast .
The next item is the debate on the report ( A5-0386 / 2002 ) by Mrs Langenhagen , on behalf of the Committee on Budgetary Control , on Special Report No 2 / 2002 of the Court of Auditors on the Socrates and Youth for Europe Community action programmes ( RCC0002 / 2002 - C5-0257 / 2002 - 2002 / 2125 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , it was not automatic that this House should decide to debate the Socrates and ' Youth for Europe ' Community action programmes here today .
It is the case that our new Rules of Procedure state that a topic adopted unanimously by a committee no longer needs to be discussed in plenary , and the Committee on Budgetary Control welcomed my report and adopted it unanimously .
I took the view , however , that Socrates and ' Youth for Europe ' , being topics of overall relevance to many areas of European policymaking , have to be presented to a broader public , as this public has had various grumbles and complaints about the way they have been managed .
These aches and pains have ended up under the care of the European Court of Auditors , which details in its Special Report a range of major weaknesses that it has uncovered .
The Court of Auditors confirms that some resources have not been used in accordance with the programmes ' objectives , and that , in some cases , the goals have not been clearly defined .
The necessary advance financing was not in place for certain projects , and this made the work of the project leaders and participants substantially more difficult , if not , indeed , impossible .
An increasing number of schools , universities and other bodies are turning their backs on these programmes , and I can well understand that they do not lack good reason for doing so .
Moreover , the disproportionately high cost of administration and the cumbersome administrative procedures bear no relation to their usefulness .
The resources made available cannot be allowed to simply get caught up in the administrative machinery instead of finding their way to the people for whom they are made available in the first place .
Other faults found included delays in the payment of grants , deficiencies in overall coordination , and the absence of real structures for monitoring and evaluation , mainly as a result of the programmes ' complexity .
That the Commission has delayed presentation of its evaluation report is truly beyond comprehension .
It is this that caused the consequent delay in the subsequent report from the Court of Auditors .
That is actually inexcusable , as this involved an assessment of a report covering the period from 1995 to 1999 and it will soon be 2003 , nearly four years later .
In 1999 we were prepared to follow up the first programme by launching a second , which was to take six years between 2000 and 2006 , without giving due time to evaluating the problems I have mentioned .
Despite this , my report on the Special Report and on the Socrates and ' Youth for Europe ' programmes has something very positive to say .
I have no doubt that these programmes are important for transnational cooperation in the united Europe , and indeed necessary for it , and that they supplement the education system .
But that is not all : these programmes are , at the end of the day , about Europe 's citizens , whether they be students or young workers , and they are being drawn ever closer together , as exchanges of views , what is termed active dialogue , and targeted teaching on European affairs , are promoting mutual understanding in the areas of social affairs , European policy and the economy and are moving deeper European integration further forward .
In the five-year programme that ran from 1995 to 1999 , funds totalling EUR 920 million were released for Socrates , and EUR 126 million for ' Youth for Europe ' - quite considerable sums .
This amount doubled in the following programme for the years from 2000 to 2006 .
That is remarkable .
Rather than reducing its significance , the fact that we are on the threshold of enlargement makes our task of considering Europe 's young people and their education an even greater one .
I therefore call for the so-called technical assistance offices to now , at last , be replaced by public organisations and for clear delimitation of competences between the Commission and the national offices to be guaranteed , in order to eliminate the differences in the individual Member States .
The national offices must be equipped with adequate human , material and financial resources in order to effectively perform the tasks entrusted to them .
For we are , after all , agreed that good education is the basis for future economic success and for Europe 's ability to compete in the world .
The report lists specific measures to deal with the problems ; these represent a step in the right direction and are intended to ensure that , in future , the predominant characteristics of the Socrates and ' Youth for Europe ' programmes will be greater efficiency , transparency and enthusiasm .
Mr President , speaking on behalf of the Socialist Group , I would like to warmly congratulate the rapporteur , above all on the highly critical comments she has made .
In order to nip in the bud any tall tales about post-2000 implementation , I would also like just to remind the Commissioner - and I know this is not exactly his area of competence - that , as at 6 December this year , we had EUR 500 million left over in the B31 budget line covering education and youth programmes .
EUR 500 million , Commissioner - and I would like to tell you what it means when money is paid out in this area so slowly as to become indefensible .
It means that class war is being waged .
Under those circumstances , the first to be prevented from taking part in programmes of great value to Europe are students from poorer backgrounds .
As a representative of the Socialist Group , my comment on that is that these are not bureaucratic difficulties that just happen to have cropped up ; people are actually being prevented from receiving anything , and that is something we quite emphatically will not stand for .
When it comes to the giving of discharge for the coming year , Commissioner , we will be casting an eye over what happens when payments are made in future , and what will be done about delays to this programme , and I also hope that our rapporteur will be examining it with great care .
Otherwise , the devil will take the hindmost - in this instance , those whose parents ' income is rather more modest , to whom we feel we have especial obligations .
Mr President , I too wish to associate myself with the words of my colleague , Mr Herbert Bösch , congratulating Mrs Langenhagen on the content of her report , and say that the issue of simplifying these programmes and making them more transparent - and this is discussed in the report by the Court of Auditors - is by far the most important and decisive issue for their success .
I think that when we embark on a process of creating new agencies - and I believe that several dozen agencies are now being thought of to create programmes on a similar scale - I think that before embarking on this process , we ought to think very carefully about the problems we want to resolve , if an agency is indeed to be different and will resolve issues that these scientific and technical offices have not been able to resolve .
I think that what is more important than thinking about the agencies is considering how to make this entire matter more straightforward , accessible and uniform in all the Member States so that everything can be processed more rapidly , both in terms of payments , as expounded on by Mr Bösch , and also in terms of the concept of the programme itself .
And this invitation to consider the matter is particularly what I wanted to convey to the Commission .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was closed at 8.20 p.m. )
Foot and mouth disease : lessons to be learned and proposals for the future
The next item is the report ( A5-0405 / 2002 ) by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , on behalf of the Temporary Committee on Foot and Mouth Disease , on measures to control Foot and Mouth Disease in the European Union in 2001 and future measures to prevent and control animal diseases in the European Union [ 2002 / 2153 ( INI ) ] .
.
( DE ) Mr President , Commissioner Byrne , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start with very warm thanks to all the colleagues who did serious work in the committee and on the report .
I am especially grateful to our chairman , Mrs Redondo , to the secretariat , which did excellent work , to the scientific service , and to the Commission .
February 2001 saw what was no doubt the most serious outbreak of foot and mouth disease Europe had ever known .
It affected Ireland , the Netherlands , France and , in particular , Great Britain .
In Great Britain alone , where the epidemic indeed broke out , official estimates state that 6.5 million animals were killed in the course of combating it .
Other sources mention up to 10 million .
The Netherlands lost 285 000 animals and France , where there were four outbreaks , 65 000 of them .
The consequences were catastrophic for everyone concerned .
It makes no sense for any future policy on epidemics to be based solely on the slaughter of animals as a means of eradicating the virus , and no such approach will any longer be tolerated by the people of the EU .
At the beginning of this year , our Parliament set up a temporary committee - not , as some Members unfortunately persist in believing , a committee of inquiry - which had the aim of helping to create an improved policy that would work not only at EU level .
One of our tasks was to use numerous public hearings and on-site visits to analyse the events in the Member States affected , to evaluate them fairly and take what we thereby learned as a means of drawing relevant conclusions as regards a Europe-wide policy on foot and mouth disease .
This also means that we have no judicial function , nor are we able to resolve scientific disputes .
In our report , we cannot pass judgments , let alone condemn anyone in advance for things we cannot prove anyway .
This was not within our remit and we were not equipped for that purpose .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am quite sure that any other government in the EU would have had similar problems to grapple with had it faced a comparable scenario , with between 50 and 70 simultaneous outbreaks across the whole country , and with sheep being affected as well .
We now know that , after economic and trade policy considerations led to vaccination being stopped in the EU in 1992 , the emergency plans that have been elaborated have been defective , being designed for only a few outbreaks rather than for a worst-case scenario of this kind .
The fact that the International Office of Epizootics , the OIE , would only restore the designation of ' FMD-free without vaccination ' twelve months after the last vaccination meant that the watchword was ' kill rather than inoculate , or just inoculate in order to cull afterwards ' .
That this has been cut to six months since May this year represents a massive step forward .
We advocate three months .
I want now to list some of our most important demands .
Not only must future policy include effective emergency plans for the combating of epidemics , but all the Member States must check how their communications networks and decision-making structures would perform in an emergency , and run cross-border emergency exercises in real time .
It is also essential that plans should take far greater account than hitherto of the psychosocial effects of any policy on the farmers affected by the epidemic and on all those banned from moving animals .
Greater attention must be given to bio-safety .
Every single farmer must be careful about what he feeds to his animals , from whom he buys them , and how quickly he brings them and his old stock together .
For it was a farmer 's irresponsible working practices that caused the epidemic to break out in Great Britain .
There must be further improvements to the animals ' traceability and therefore also to the way they are identified .
It is also important to do everything possible to prevent illegal imports of animal products from countries where foot and mouth disease is endemic .
The Commission has already decided that , for example , travellers from these countries may no longer bring products of this sort into the EU .
But our most important demand in terms of action against future epidemics is that emergency vaccination should be regarded as the recourse of first choice , the object being to allow the animals to live on and assess products from them on a regional basis .
This would be a crucial improvement on what was done in the past , as there continues to be no dispute about the absolute absence of any health risk to humans from the meat of inoculated animals and from other products derived from them .
This , then , is an area in which there is an urgent need for people to be informed .
There is , though , one thing that I want to make clear . Infected stocks will always be slaughtered , as will any animals put at risk by contact with them .
Economic considerations and the demands of the internal market , among other things , mean that there will be no early return to general vaccination , nor has it been called for in the hearings to date by any reputable expert .
Do not , then , raise people 's hopes too high .
To do so would indeed be irresponsible .
Nevertheless , there needs to be further research towards finding an appropriate and durable marker vaccine capable of covering all serotypes and enabling an undoubted distinction to be drawn between inoculated and infected animals .
I might mention that , in Germany until 1990 , only cattle were inoculated , to the exclusion of all other animals .
Ladies and gentlemen , I am convinced that a policy such as that which we are proposing will put an end to images the like of which were broadcast around the globe last year .
Let me just say something about the voting .
Vote for my amendments and for those tabled by the Socialist Group !
They will do away with a whole array of accusations that have been levelled at the British Government , charges that we as a parliament - or so I personally understand parliamentary practice - are not entitled to bring in this way and are thus not justified .
Being a politician myself , I can quite understand that they were made in an excess of political enthusiasm , but please do your infighting at home .
For that purpose , the European Parliament is the least suitable of all platforms .
And one more thing : there are fourteen Member States in the European Union besides Great Britain .
It is important , ladies and gentlemen , that not only the British Government , but also the Council , the Commission , the candidate countries , the OIE and other states , such as , for example , the USA , Australia , Argentina and South Africa should be able to take our report seriously .
The combating of epidemics calls for a worldwide strategy , as foot and mouth disease is an international disease and not a British one .
It is my view that we , representing the peoples of the fifteen Member States , have achieved outstanding success in discussing this problem area as it deserves to be discussed , and in coming up with final conclusions that point the way ahead .
What is , unfortunately , certain is that there will certainly be another outbreak of foot and mouth disease .
The question is only that of where and when it will occur and with what intensity .
Against that , we must be armed .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have come together today having completed several months of work , hearings , visits on the ground , meetings with experts , farmers , with men and women , in fact , with all those who have had first-hand experience of the foot and mouth crisis , who have been deeply affected by it and , who above all , never want it to happen again .
This was very much the aim of our work : understand what happened , analyse events from every angle - economic , social and psychological - in order to learn lessons from this and minimise the risks and the effects of this type of disease in the future .
Some would have liked the main aim of the temporary committee 's work to be to seek out the guilty party or parties , which is an understandable reaction when one is desperate and appalled by what one is going through .
This , however , was not the specific aim of our committee or the reason why it had been set up .
Can we accept the fact that , in a report that is intended to be the product of the most objective investigation possible , there are some very subjective elements and some irrational guesswork ?
I think not .
The very credibility of our work as parliamentarians depends on this and that is why our group tabled a number of amendments designed to restore balance to the report .
Apart from a few petty political digressions , we must acknowledge that our work has been very rewarding and worthwhile , the large number of direct contacts enabling us to gain a better understanding of the problems of managing the crisis and its countless consequences .
We must point out that the epidemic was a traumatic experience for tens of thousands of people , particularly because the memories that we may have of foot and mouth disease are of an epidemic which is undeniably serious , but not to the point of destroying entire regions and leading to the slaughter of millions of animals that individuals had put so much effort into feeding and caring .
Having succumbed to new rearing methods and more movement of animals , we were unable to cope with this crisis and respond as we did 50 years ago when we isolated infected herds , since the number of infections was already too great by the time the epidemic was identified .
Of course , with hindsight , we can always say ' We should have done this or that ' , but we must not forget that , at the time , we were facing a crisis and that solutions had to be found urgently in tandem with institutions , local communities and populations who were unprepared for this type of situation .
Even experts believe that this crisis would have been of the same tragic proportions had it broken out in any other European country .
The unfortunate experience of the United Kingdom has enabled other Member States to be more vigilant and better prepared to deal with the disease .
What do we do now ?
What decisions must the European Union take ?
The rapporteur , several of my fellow Members and the Commissioner have just explained .
First of all , prevention is essential , and this prevention involves providing better information , on-going training of farmers - who were not always able to identify the disease early enough - animal traceability and more animal health professionals who can be called up more easily .
Vigilance within Europe 's borders is essential , but we must also increase our controls on imports , both at land borders and at ports and airports .
We are at the heart of global trade and people are travelling more and more , and so we must take into account this international dimension .
We must also provide solutions in a crisis by anticipating responses with more appropriate emergency plans , by encouraging emergency vaccinations wherever possible , whilst remembering that slaughter is the only possible outcome when livestock has been infected .
The final comment I would add is that research is an area which we are entitled to expect to provide us with some results , on the condition that we provide it with the resources .
To sum up , I would like to reiterate , in the wake of the maritime disasters which have struck Europe once again , that our reports , whilst full of good intentions , are not worth a great deal if the European Union and the Member States do not shoulder their full responsibilities by swiftly implementing the recommendations that we make in this Chamber .
We now await the report on which the Commission is currently working and hope that it will support the conclusions of our temporary committee .
Lastly , I would like to thank and to congratulate the rapporteur , the chairman , and all the Members who contributed to the report , as well as the committee and all the staff involved in this work .
About a year ago Mr Sturdy put to me the idea of setting up a committee to investigate the recent foot and mouth disease crisis .
I immediately agreed to the suggestion and am still happy that the lists of signatures that subsequently circulated in Parliament included the names of two members of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats and two members of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
I continue to believe that it was a good initiative .
Rarely in my career as an MEP have I experienced the degree of interest awakened throughout Europe by this committee .
Wherever we went , in the United Kingdom or in the Netherlands , the interest was overwhelming , and to my mind it benefited the European Parliament itself .
I should also like to express my appreciation to Mrs Redondo as chairman , for her competent leadership , and to Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , who was an excellent spokesman for the committee 's work , not only in his report but also in his tactful contributions during the many meetings .
What have been the high points for the ELDR Group over the past year ?
Firstly : prevention is better than cure , and we strongly support the call for better border controls .
If we compare the situation in the United States , New Zealand , Australia , Japan , etc ? with that in Europe , we find that controls on the external borders of Europe are abominable .
If I arrive at an airport there are scarcely any checks on my luggage , in complete contrast to the situation in other continents .
I consider it essential that such measures should also be applied in Europe .
There has also been much discussion about whether or not to re-introduce prophylactic vaccination .
I opposed this .
None of the experts we consulted was in favour .
Generally speaking , one cannot assume that a single vaccine exists that will offer protection against the hundred or so different foot and mouth disease strains that are found .
It is therefore an illusion to think that there will never be another outbreak .
I am , though , strongly in favour of emergency vaccination from the very beginning and at the same time of the consumption of the products of perfectly healthy animals locally or in the European Union .
It is impossible to explain to the public why healthy animals should be destroyed and I am glad that the Commission has announced that it is to change policy on this matter .
As regards financing : the Commission has been a little parsimonious .
Agenda 2000 assigns an annual amount of EUR 41 million for the combating of infectious animal diseases .
The foot and mouth crisis cost almost a billion .
We were fortunate in that the euro exchange rate was rather low and that there were surpluses in the agriculture budget , but that cannot of course continue indefinitely .
It would therefore be good if the Commission were to reflect on insurance systems .
And while we are talking about the Commission : we have heard appreciation from all sides for the Commission 's role in the foot and mouth crisis .
Having said this , I must mention a down side : even before the temporary committee was set up , the ELDR Group had submitted two amendments to the 2002 budget .
One on research into marker vaccines and one on insurance systems , specifically to counter the competitive distortions in Europe , whereby farmers in one country have to pay for the outbreak of infectious animal diseases , and in another country they do not .
As far as I know , not a single contract has yet been signed , despite the fact that today is 17 December and that I had pointed out to all the Commission services back at the beginning of the year that the budgetary authority had already given its approval .
That is the only jarring note I have to sound in this speech .
Mr President , as a member of the Temporary Committee on Foot and Mouth Disease , I have a very high opinion of its final report , which Parliament is to discuss today .
The rapporteur 's drafting has made the final report fair and a polished piece of work .
The advice given by experts to the many hearings was characterised by a consensus that the progress of this disease was to be resisted .
Taking into consideration the fact that foot and mouth disease is present all over the world , continuing globalisation and deregulation , that is to say , the increase in worldwide trade , which is already very extensive , and in passenger traffic , mean that the European Union has to reckon with a growing danger of foot and mouth disease being introduced from infected areas .
Whereas , formerly , three types of FMD were present across Europe , and successfully combated by means of ring-vaccination , Europe now faces the danger of the disease being imported from a wide variety of sources .
The problem here is that - much as with influenza - vaccination only works if the vaccination is derived largely from the same strain as the disease .
There is little point in prophylactic vaccination against virus strains , as it is impossible to know in advance which actual FMD virus is being brought in .
What does make sense , on the contrary , is what is advocated in the report - the carrying-out of emergency vaccination in the event of an epidemic , which of course presupposes that it is possible to ascertain rapidly the actual strain of the disease involved .
This position is a controversial one , but , in the absence of effective action against epidemics in the areas from which they come , and given the current state of research , I can see no alternative and no other option .
I would emphasise that emergency vaccination is meant to help prevent foot and mouth disease from spreading .
It is for that reason that my group has tabled a motion to the effect that a worldwide strategy to combat foot and mouth disease should be worked out among the FAO countries .
What we demand of a policy came to us loud and clear in the many conversations we had with cattle farmers , with representatives of local authorities and associations , and with members of the public who were deeply unsettled and , in ethical terms , outraged .
Associated with this is the necessity of using suitable measures to at last halt the burgeoning live animal transports across Europe .
This is far from being only an animal protection issue ; it is about preventing diseases .
There are circumstances under which the Community must involve itself in national preventive strategies , as each EU country belongs to the common internal market and can maintain important relationships with third countries .
All the Member States must be able to call upon the services of adequately qualified veterinary personnel in the prevention and treatment of animal diseases .
Further scientific investigation is needed into issues associated with emergency vaccination against FMD and the continued use of inoculated animals .
It is not possible to justify sending ten million animals to what is , at the end of the day , a senseless death , if ethically and economically preferable procedures are in the offing .
My fifth point is that I expect the Commission to come up with proposals for better legal protection for the affected parties in order to compensate for the great financial losses and resultant damage in the regions .
In conclusion , I would like to say that I would like great public awareness of the review of the common agricultural policy , and not only in the most arduous , and bleakest , times of crisis .
Mr President , I wish to congratulate the rapporteur on his report , which is extremely important .
It is vital that Parliament gives a very strong signal that vaccination should be a tool of first resort in any future outbreak .
I am very glad that our committee has come to that conclusion .
I am also glad that we support a change in the law so that there is no automatic incentive to slaughter rather than to vaccinate .
We recognise that in Britain over ten million animals were slaughtered - many unnecessarily - because of the overriding priority that was given to the narrow economic goal of regaining export status as quickly as possible .
It is right and proper that we make constructive proposals for the future handling of foot and mouth outbreaks .
However , it is also right - where it is called for - that we are strongly critical of the past handling of foot and mouth outbreaks .
I , therefore , disagree with the rapporteur that it is inappropriate and unjustified to criticise the UK Government .
Such criticism reflects the evidence we heard , and if we do not learn from the past , there is no guarantee of any better action in the future .
For that reason , I am saddened by attempts from the British Government to water down this report , to rewrite history and effectively to whitewash the past .
Amendments by the PSE Group follow closely the briefing that all UK MEPs have received from the British Government , that argues , for example , that there is no evidence for allegations of violations of animal welfare .
That is untrue .
I would remind them of evidence given by the Royal Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals to the National Audit Office inquiry , which says : ' In many cases there was very good circumstantial evidence that an offence had been committed . '
The government says that a veterinary inspector worked closely at every slaughter .
In fact there was often one vet supervising ten slaughters simultaneously - an impossible thing to do .
The government denies that farmers were intimidated in connection with the culls and it asks for evidence .
We have evidence in plenty .
I would remind them that the committee went to Knowstone in Devon precisely to gather that kind of information .
They allege that the lessons learnt in the inquiry show that the contiguous cull was effective in curbing the disease - again , untrue .
The National Audit Office demonstrated that the epidemic had already peaked before the contiguous cull policies could have had any effect .
They allege that the firebreak or pre-emptive culling was legal - again , not true .
It is made very clear in the UK 's new contingency plan that firebreak or pre-emptive culling requires ' the passage of the new animal health bill ' .
That bill had not been passed last year and , therefore , such provision did not exist for legally enforceable mandatory firebreak culls .
People would have a lot more respect for this government if it could just bring itself to admit that it got things wrong .
It matters , because for as long as it does not admit that , then there can be no guarantee that in the event of another outbreak the government will not act in the same way again .
I hope that our report is one step in the process of ensuring that such devastation can never be allowed to happen again in the United Kingdom or anywhere in the European Union .
Mr President , the final report before us today , which was adopted unanimously by the temporary committee , represents the fruits of a most thorough investigation and consultation process , including numerous public hearings and visits to affected areas .
Since I have lived all of my life in the countryside and have been actively involved in farming and the politics of farming , I fully sympathise with those farmers and their families who were devastated by the outbreak .
We in Ireland were spared the worst because of our geographical location and , in no small measure , because of the extreme exemplary precautions taken by the Irish authorities - a fact referred to in today 's report .
There are many lessons to be learnt from the experiences of the outbreak .
The rapporteur has done an excellent job in highlighting these and in showing how to avoid the mistakes of the past .
I am pleased that the Commission has been most cooperative with the temporary committee throughout the period of its work .
I seriously hope that the committee 's final recommendations will be fully reflected in the forthcoming legislative proposal .
In particular , I would urge that close attention be paid to those areas where resource gaps have been identified .
I await with interest the evaluation report by the Commission as to whether the Food and Veterinary Office in Ireland has the right staff and infrastructure to enable it to carry out its duties effectively in the long term .
In conclusion , I sincerely hope that this lengthy exercise will bring about some very tangible results .
We have an array of legislative measures which should go a long way to preventing future outbreaks and , more importantly , to ensuring that any such outbreak does not reach the proportions witnessed last year .
The Member States , as well as the Commission , have clear responsibilities in this area .
Legislation on catering waste , animal transport , animal welfare , surveillance and disease control must be properly implemented and monitored .
I fully support measures leading to a ban on all meat imports from non-EU countries where foot and mouth is endemic and likewise support stricter controls on illegal meat imports .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it was essential that we learned from the foot and mouth crisis which struck the United Kingdom in 2001 , because it reached such unprecedented levels in the UK , as a result , in particular , of mistakes - on the part of the British Government as well as the Commission - in the area of contingency planning , because it posed such a serious threat to other European countries and , lastly , because it gave us a terrifying reminder of how quickly this disease can break out , how fast it can spread and of the damaging economic and psychological consequences that it can have .
Our committee has , on the whole , done a good job .
The Kreissl-Dörfler report particularly emphasises , and this is a crucial point , that the sheer size and specialisation of herds , the livestock density in certain regions , the closure of local abattoirs and the astonishing increase in the transport of live animals are factors which , in the absence of prophylactic vaccination , enable the epidemic to spread like wildfire .
When we come to examine the future agricultural policy guidelines , we must remember this , in order to ensure that we encourage farming that is evenly spread throughout the countryside and that we refuse to encourage regions to specialise to a major degree in high-density holdings .
It is therefore clear , for example , that the withdrawal of milk quotas - which the European Commission appears to favour - might very soon lead to the end of milk herds in areas that have natural handicaps , such as mountainous or rainy areas , and the increase of livestock density in plains .
We must therefore ensure that we maintain a network of family-run farms of a manageable size ; this is the best possible way to prevent foot and mouth disease .
Our temporary committee was right to recommend emergency vaccination as the best way to combat the epidemic , since this avoids the mass slaughter which , understandably , caused such great public outcry and was so distressing for farmers .
When hundreds of millions of people are starving , it is unacceptable to destroy the meat of millions of healthy animals , which is what happened in 2001 .
With emergency vaccination , a pen will be set up near the source of the epidemic where the animals will be vaccinated , animals which could then potentially be destroyed and used for consumption without the pressure of an emergency situation .
On this point , however , I regret the fact that the Commission did not make bolder proposals .
With the progress made in vaccinations - we now have vaccinations with a broader spectrum , longer-lasting vaccinations and marker vaccinations which make it possible to distinguish vaccinated animals from infected animals - it is now possible to give Member States the freedom to authorise or even make compulsory prophylactic vaccination , in other words preventative vaccination , as applied before 1992 , where the risks of epidemics are the highest .
This possibility should be left to the discretion of the Member States , which are best placed to assess the consequences of specific risks for their livestock .
I also regret that the report does not call more clearly into question the current framework , laid down by the International Office of Epizootics , the rules of which are obviously too rigid , too restrictive and too dogmatic as far as the conditions for granting ' FMD-free area ' status are concerned .
It is obvious that they are excessively in favour of New World countries , which have a large amount of open space , where the land is less densely populated and which , therefore , face less of a risk of a disease spreading .
It is an absolute necessity that these rules are developed .
Mr President , we are now destined to live under the constant threat of further outbreaks of foot and mouth disease , as new strains are constantly coming to the fore .
This is especially true of Europe , which is surrounded by countries where foot and mouth is endemic .
This is particularly true of Turkey , which represents a constant danger , and the rest of the Middle East and North Africa too .
There have also been a number of outbreaks in Asia and Latin America .
The globalisation of the live animal trade can therefore only encourage and accentuate the globalisation of diseases and viruses .
This explains why short journeys are preferable , why a certain inappropriate form of extreme specialisation which increases animal transport over long distances must be rejected , why rearing and fattening on the same farm premises is preferred and why slaughter must be carried out in the producing region . These methods are dictated by common sense and are the best possible way to prevent the development of new diseases .
We must remember this , Mr President , Commissioner , when we come to debate the future CAP , if we want to avoid a repeat of the nightmare of 2001 .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is now a year since the Temporary Committee on Foot and Mouth Disease began its investigations in order to provide solutions and make proposals for the future in relation to this problem which , as well as causing serious economic damage to the European cattle sector , caused significant moral damage to all cattle breeders and had a great impact on society in general .
We all remember the great number of animals which had to be culled following the outbreak last year which seriously affected the United Kingdom and the Netherlands .
And the main task of this committee was to prevent situations such as that caused by this disease from reoccurring in Europe .
During this year of intense work , the committee has listened to the opinions of dozens of experts in all fields , from economic to veterinary , dealing with logistical and political aspects , Community and international legislation , as well as tangential aspects such as tourism , goods transport , emotional aspects , etc .
Many of the people invited to the committee occupied very important posts during the management of the last outbreak of the disease .
But the committee also gave the owners of farms affected and the local authorities and associations in these areas the opportunity to express their opinions during the various visits organised both to the United Kingdom and to the Netherlands .
Furthermore , as chairperson of this committee , I have held several meetings on this disease , together with the rapporteur , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , with experts and top officials from non-Community countries , such as Paraguay , Argentina and Brazil .
The fruit of all this work is the report being presented today for the vote of this House .
The report produced by Mr Kreissl-Dörfler has achieved a broad consensus amongst all the political groups and we hope that , in the same way , the other Members of this House will find sufficient points of agreement to approve it by a majority without substantial changes , with the approval of some of the amendments presented .
One of the essential aspects included in the final report of the committee I chair is emergency vaccination , which is considered to be an essential method for controlling any future outbreak of the disease .
The current policy of the European Union - to quell outbreaks of this disease by culling the cattle of the farms in which any infected animal has been detected and that of neighbouring farms where there is a likelihood of contagion - cannot continue in the current form .
The policy of emergency vaccination must be part of a strategy which allows animals to live .
The current policy of not vaccinating prioritises the political and commercial aspects and this is something that must change on an international level , taking the approach initiated by the International Office of Epizootic Diseases and the FAO .
The future policy must also take account of the social and psychological impact of an epidemic of foot and mouth disease on the public and must not ignore the consequences it causes in all sectors , such as tourism , commerce , social aspects and emotional aspects .
In its report , this temporary committee advocates emergency vaccination and not preventive vaccinations , since , ladies and gentlemen , these could be considered as a backwards step in the policy of eradication for the scientific , technical , economic and commercial reasons which both we and the Commissioner have expressed .
Ladies and gentlemen , another of the most important aspects of the work of this committee relates to the control of imports .
The European Parliament must insist on a policy on meat imports which imposes zero tolerance in order to guarantee that not a single kilogram of unexamined meat originating from a third country enters the European Union .
This House should insist on this issue and must remind the Commission that it cannot ignore the problem of illegal imports .
The great food crises are always based on non-compliances with Community legislation .
Furthermore , I believe we must congratulate the Commission on having acted so quickly with the legislative proposals the Commissioner has just announced , with regard to control , identification , the quality of products and vaccinations .
In the same way , the temporary committee is asking the Commission to draw up a global strategy for diseases and zoonosis in the European Union .
For all these reasons , I would ask that the House give this report its majority support .
I would especially like to congratulate the rapporteur , with whom I have found it so easy to work ; all the members of the Temporary Committee on Foot and Mouth Disease , who have worked hard , and whose work and criticisms have been constructive ; I would also like to congratulate in particular the secretariat for its rigour and for its bold work and our interpreters , without whom this committee would not have been able to carry out its work .
Mr President , we have read the detailed report on foot and mouth disease in Great Britain and elsewhere , but we believe that this disease broke out and spread as the natural consequence of a number of factors .
The first factor is that animals and products of animal origin can be transported with complete freedom - or should I say unaccountability - throughout the world nowadays , thanks to the globalisation demanded by big business looking for ways to make a fast buck .
The second factor is that cross-border veterinary checks on movements of livestock between Member States of the European Union have all but been abolished .
This basically means that animals can move unchecked from one country to another , as can any dangerous diseases they may be carrying .
This is compounded by a third factor , the abolition of government veterinary services , staff cutbacks and the generally scant importance attached to government control mechanisms , all as a result of the demand by big business for any controls to be minimised between or within countries which might obstruct the need for livestock to be moved quickly , together with the profit generated .
Finally , and this is not unrelated to what I have just said , there is the feed factor - with no controls whatsoever on feedingstuffs - which appears to have helped foot and mouth disease to spread .
This is not a minor factor , as we know from previous crises in the livestock sector in the European Union , such as dioxins in poultry and bovine spongiform encephalopathy .
We are under no illusion that crises such as these , which threaten livestock and public health , will keep on happening as long as production is governed by the profit motive and the rules of production , movement , and trade imposed by multinational and other capitalist enterprises in the sector .
Any structural or other measures taken will be no more than fragmented measures which work until the next crisis strikes .
The only long-term solution which will not jeopardise the agricultural economy of the Member States or wipe out entire livestock holdings is to abolish capitalist profit from production and introduce adequate border and other controls , contrary to the demands of the multinationals which have managed to get them lifted .
Mr President , the end of December is a time for drawing up a balance : what went well this year , what went wrong , and what needs improving .
Sometimes one 's conclusion is : if only I had ?
After a year of the Temporary Committee on Foot and Mouth Disease I conclude : if only we had not agreed the policy of non-vaccination in 1991 !
The costs of that policy have been greatly underestimated .
But worse still is the fact that the non-vaccination policy with the accompanying culls where there is an outbreak , fails to meet any ethical test .
Mr President , Noah 's ark was filled not with production factors , but with living creatures .
As the stewards of creation we must take that to heart .
Parties who do not wish for such a test , should pay the penalty at the ballot box for the consequences of a foot and mouth outbreak .
Much more far-reaching consequences than simply economic ones are involved .
To call the combating of the foot and mouth crisis a veterinary success , as has been suggested from the liberal side , is to lose all sense of proportion .
The combating of foot and mouth was not a success , neither veterinary , nor economic , nor in terms of communication .
The report admits that .
An exception is a clause on Friesland , where according to the draft text there was optimum involvement of regional experts .
Fact and fiction have been confused here .
An amendment that I submitted jointly with fellow MEPs Mr Maat and Mr De Roo attempted to restore a correct version of events .
For years prophylactic vaccination protected our livestock .
The argument that vaccination is pointless because of the number of variants of the foot and mouth virus is about as cogent as maintaining that flu jabs in human beings do no good .
If we consider the real costs of the non-vaccination policy , only one conclusion remains , moreover : preventive vaccination is not only the most ethical but also the most economical solution .
In conclusion I should like to compliment the rapporteur on his courageous , lucid and valuable report .
Mr President , first of all I should like to thank the rapporteur and also the chair of the committee , Mrs Redondo , most sincerely , since both come from countries where there has been no foot and mouth disease and yet have managed to produce this report with great involvement in the subject .
The same also applies to our secretariat , since our work as a temporary committee consisted to a significant degree precisely in visiting people who had been affected .
Without the enormous commitment of our secretariat we would not have been able to do that and that means that this committee occupies a special place in the work of Parliament .
Mr President , Mrs Redondo 's words are close to my heart .
She said that current policy is focused too much on political and economic values , and insufficiently on human values , if one looks at foot and mouth disease , and one must try to change course in that respect .
I wholeheartedly agree with her and I am able to speak on behalf of the inhabitants of the affected areas in my country : the Veluwe and Friesland , who greatly appreciated the fact that parliamentary colleagues visited these areas and listened to them .
It gives them the feeling that in this instance European democracy really came into its own .
That strikes me as essential , partly also with a view to the forthcoming elections in 2004 .
At the same time , we must realise that we have been through a disaster in which seven million animals were destroyed , an economic loss of over EUR 10 000 million was incurred , and that in some areas , for example around Carlisle , many more people are presently taking anti-depressants than previously .
Such was the impact .
I will just mention the story of the school in Oene , where performance at primary level declined .
That indicates the impact this crisis had on people .
This means that if we are to take European citizens seriously , we must change policy .
In that sense I am glad that Commissioner Byrne at least has indicated that he appreciates this .
It is essential , however , that if we do not adopt general vaccination , emergency vaccination should become standard in the case of an outbreak , as the Commission has said , and that even after emergency vaccination the farms involved should receive the same treatment as if there had been a cull .
That means that the area would be cut off for no longer than 3 months and that there will be free marketing of products .
That is crucial if a future policy is to succeed .
It also means that the Commission has a serious responsibility , as a result of which it will not be able , in the proposals it may present tomorrow , to avoid the fact that new rules on this matter must also be agreed in the OIE , in order to bring deadlines into line and to ensure that products from vaccinated animals can be marketed , since that has nothing to do with food safety and everything to do with ethical behaviour in agricultural policy .
I have already indicated that this committee tried to give European citizens a voice in European politics .
As a committee we tried at least to give the crisis a face , to show what befell people , what befell animals and to demonstrate that those things are politically relevant .
In that respect I look forward to the new debate on the Commission 's proposals .
The Commission and the Council have a heavy responsibility .
They cannot brush aside this report by Parliament .
They must take this report on board in their policy , or else we shall find ourselves in new difficulties regarding democracy in Europe .
First of all , my sincere thanks to my colleague , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler .
He has done a splendid job , and his objective approach has made it possible to bridge political differences .
The foot and mouth crisis has left deep scars , the culls have brought unhappiness to countless families but have also led to public indignation and rage , sometimes impotent rage at the authorities .
Also rage at Europe , which forbade the vaccination of livestock in the area surrounding affected farms .
The European Parliament is today presenting a closely argued view , a view that I can endorse entirely .
Yes , we are against the unnecessary culling of healthy animals .
Yes , we want vaccination in the event of foot and mouth outbreaks .
Yes we must persuade supermarkets to sell the meat of vaccinated animals as a matter of course .
Yes , there must be emergency action plans .
We must introduce a global dimension , a clear statement must be issued by the OIE and there must be effective monitoring of imports , including at airports .
And yes , we must improve the structural health of the sector : good hygiene , no more ramshackle transport and an end to subsidy policy that gives too much encouragement to the movement of animals .
We must also ensure good monitoring at all times .
I am in complete agreement with all these points .
We cannot leave it at that , however .
A political wish list is not enough .
As long as the European Parliament has no say in the agricultural field , there is a risk that our resolution will remain a paper tiger .
Unless we link this resolution to concerted pressure in the Convention , all our efforts will have been in vain .
Worse still , we shall have awakened unfounded expectations and we shall be fuelling renewed Euroscepticism .
In the Netherlands , the 2001 foot and mouth crisis was a kind of harbinger of the political upheaval in 2002 .
We must also at any rate learn the political lesson .
Confidence in politics suffered a heavy blow .
An important reason was that political responsibility remained vague , since who was actually responsible for the non-vaccination policy ?
Was it the government , was it the EU or the international bureau for infectious diseases ?
It was all very vague .
Ministers pointed to the EU , the EU Commissioners pointed to the national governments and the OIE .
For citizens , the complex structure of responsibilities was scarcely comprehensible , and that created the impression of politicians who took up positions but subsequently preferred to hide behind others .
Politicians who shirk responsibility destroy the credibility of politics .
This game of buck passing has backfired badly on Europe .
The hundreds of angry letters and angry e-mails were the signs of a human but also an interinstitutional tragedy .
A future foot and mouth outbreak must never lead to a mass slaughter of livestock .
In the period ahead , we must direct all our efforts to this end .
This requires a foot and mouth policy in which responsibilities are clearly established , at regional , national , European and international level .
Parliaments must be involved .
Our aim must be a foot and mouth policy that is not anonymous .
Responsibilities for choices and for compliance must be clearly established , and it is our task to communicate these .
I hope that this report may contribute to this process and again thank the rapporteur .
Mr President , I should firstly like to thank the chairman of the committee , Mrs Redondo , and the rapporteur , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , for an outstanding piece of work .
Unfortunately , the work has not shown unambiguously that there is any alternative to the present non-vaccination policy .
It is very clear that there are neither vaccines nor laboratory capacity and that , overall , everything is missing that would be necessary to enable us to abandon the non-vaccination policy .
This means that , if a decision on vaccination is to be made , it will be a political decision and not a decision based on scientific and veterinary fact .
I want finally to say a little about the consequences in terms of trade policy .
The reactions have been very clear .
When there is an outbreak of foot and mouth disease , the importing countries - or third countries - exclude all imports of fresh meat from the whole of the EU .
The Commission must be required very clearly to ensure that third countries , particularly the United States , accept that the EU consists of Member States and of regions , especially following enlargement in 2004 .
If foot and mouth disease occurs in a particular country or region , it is not therefore necessary to halt all imports of fresh meat from the whole of the EU .
On the contrary , supply and demand become totally chaotic when that happens .
That is why I want very clearly to call upon the Commission to renegotiate the agreements , which are nowhere near specific enough at present .
If a new case of foot and mouth disease should occur , the agreements must be in place , particularly with the United States , so that exports from those countries that do not have foot and mouth disease can continue .
Mr President , foot and mouth disease was not created by human error , as was the mad cow disease BSE , but is a long familiar natural phenomenon .
It used to be considered normal for every cow to be affected by it occasionally , thereby building up immunity .
Later people attempted to eradicate once and for all that disease that was infectious , expensive , dirty and painful for livestock by means of vaccination .
Without extreme globalisation and the world market the disease and the way in which people believe they can combat it would never have attracted so much attention .
The rich American market does not want meat from animals that have been sick .
Simply because , without marker vaccine , we cannot easily distinguish such animals from vaccinated livestock , people became confident that the disease would gradually be eliminated entirely .
Just as people believed this of human tuberculosis .
Export interests have replaced animal welfare and human ingenuity .
Unfortunately the mistake was made not only by a number of companies or whole Member States but also by the European Union as a whole .
For ten years Member States and our farmers have been pressured from above into collaborating in something that is neither sensible nor acceptable .
Virtually no one had expected that during the latest outbreak in the United Kingdom and the Netherlands extensive mass slaughter of healthy livestock would be necessary in order to ensure that nowhere in the immediate vicinity could any animals be found that might be infected .
Even rare and exotic breeds or the pet animals of country children were compulsorily killed .
Quite rightly many people declared authorities that compel such behaviour insane and withdrew their confidence .
Thus far Ministers of Agriculture and the European Commission may have admitted that things may change in the distant future but they have not yet changed course entirely .
Vaccinations are seen at most as an emergency measure for healthy livestock that cannot be destroyed quickly enough .
As is often the case government power is more stupid than human society as a whole .
So many people are protesting .
It is the task of Parliament to put an end once and for all to the misguided policy of preventive culling and not rule out once and for all the option of prophylactic vaccination .
Thank you .
Mr President , foot and mouth disease is a highly infectious disease for our livestock , but completely harmless to humans .
I come from the Netherlands where our cattle were prophylactically vaccinated for over 60 years .
The United Kingdom , Denmark and Ireland do not have this tradition .
After their entry into the European Union they lobbied for 20 years for the abolition of prophylactic vaccination in Europe .
Unfortunately they were successful .
Export interests were placed above all else .
In both Great Britain and the Netherlands , we have seen the dreadful consequences for animals , farmers , part-time farmers , the tourist sector , in short the whole of society .
The proposal of the temporary committee is to make emergency vaccination easier .
That is a good idea .
There is also a proposal to force supermarkets to sell vaccinated meat in future .
The latter smacks of a planned economy and will not work .
The Netherlands produces far more meat than the Dutch themselves can consume .
What is necessary is a return to prophylactic vaccination .
At least for those countries , like the Netherlands , that wish to do so .
New techniques , such as marker vaccines make it possible to distinguish between a sick animal and one that has been vaccinated .
That means that even the sacred exports can be maintained .
It is a mystery to me why the majority in Parliament does not opt for this approach .
For me this report is only half a step in the right direction .
Nevertheless , half steps in the right direction are better than no steps at all , and I shall vote in favour of the report .
But I am bound to say that I find it a great pity that our agricultural colleagues in particular have made the interests of direct exports paramount .
Mr President , I am very glad to say that the health crisis is behind us , but its side effects are unresolved .
The first thing we must do is understand .
Unfortunately , at this juncture , we can still only speculate as to the source of the infection and the factors that caused the disease to spread .
Nevertheless , we can still learn our first lesson , namely the importance of a policy of proximity , which may mean bringing the activities at all stages of the process closer together or maintaining public services at local level in order to avoid transporting animals , which appears , in this case , to have played a significant role .
It is clear that we cannot repeat a slaughter on such a huge scale .
The report also puts forward proposals that we shall support such as the revision of emergency plans in conjunction with all partners , a training policy , an effective exchange of information between Member States and an increase in resources for research into marker vaccines .
These prevention programmes should also take into account the conservation of genetic resources while wild species , game and dying breeds must be protected through specific measures .
Lastly , prevention programmes will only be effective if adequate compensation is guaranteed .
Mr President , as someone who was at the forefront in instigating the setting up of this committee , I would personally like to thank President Cox for his invaluable help and all those Members who have made this report and this committee such a resounding success .
I would particularly like to thank Mr Kreissl-Dörfler for his unstinting work , his readiness to listen and his even-handed approach .
The visits to the UK and the Netherlands allowed us to listen to everyone who was affected .
I believe that the European Parliament has delivered what my own parliament in Westminster would not .
What we have in this document is a fair and balanced report on the terrible devastation and suffering the disease brought to my country .
Let us not forget that foot and mouth disease is no respecter of borders .
This blight could have appeared in any European country and could still hit at any time in the future .
Looking at the situation in the UK , the British Government quite simply got it wrong .
Mr Adam may try and blame everything on the farmers as usual - and he talked much about the farmers getting it wrong - but what about the government getting it wrong ?
There is no denying that mistakes have been made .
That could be accepted by British farmers - we all make mistakes .
What is not acceptable is that this government still refuses to accept they got it wrong and still refuses to apologise to those who suffered .
Look at Mr Adam 's amendments and look at the latest British Government briefing - they have learnt nothing !
This disease did not just affect farmers , it affected hotels and tourism ; it affected butchers and traders across Europe .
We must not allow this terrible slaughter of 10 million animals to happen again .
I am pleased that this report contains a sensible and workable approach to vaccination in the future .
Our visit to the Netherlands demonstrated the great benefits of emergency vaccination .
This would remove the necessity for the huge funeral pyres and burial pits that were hallmarks of the British Government 's handling of the outbreak .
Those unforgettable pictures must stand as a lasting reminder of what could happen again if we do not learn the lessons of this most terrible disease .
I am pleased that this report sets out plans for the future .
It is vital that we have a workable and effective contingency plan in place .
This report goes a long way to developing a positive approach for the whole of Europe .
The European Commission has worked hand in hand with the committee , and it is no coincidence that tomorrow it will come forward with its proposals for the future .
I commend Commissioner Byrne 's team for their work .
I would make one final plea to the British Government : please listen and accept this report so we can plan for the future .
The suffering caused last year by foot and mouth disease was simply unacceptable and it must never be allowed to happen again .
I hope you will all support this report and the measures contained within it .
Europe 's farmers and Europe 's rural communities deserve to know that they are valued .
They deserve to know that Europe 's politicians are prepared .
I hope that you will give this your support today .
Mr President , no one on the temporary committee will ever forget the aftermath of that great foot and mouth plague of 2001 .
When we travelled the country we talked to the victims , those who could not be compensated , as well as those who were , those who could restock and begin again , hopefully in a more balanced and less intensive system of livestock production , and those whose lives were utterly changed , who had , as Mr Sturdy said , lost their dreams .
I would like to be able to agree with every word in this report and I salute the rapporteur 's attempt to produce , as the Commissioner called it , a balanced , straightforward and future-oriented account .
Where should it begin ?
It has to begin with the outbreak itself , with what actually happened and with the apportionment of blame .
A balanced report is one in which all those responsible accept some measure of the blame , including the UK Government .
I would point out to the House that there have been five separate reports in the UK alone , two by local authorities severely affected by the crisis .
There have also been reports by the National Farmers Union and others who were participants in the whole tragedy .
So to say that this is the first time we have looked at this is quite wrong .
Mr Kreissl-Dörfler has produced an objective account and one which seeks to be fair in its allocation of blame and responsibility .
I am sorry that some of the amendments that have been tabled run counter to that intention .
We should not be attempting 20 : 20 hindsight .
We should not be using shock logic to invent legal rules that were allegedly broken .
When I hear Mrs Lucas speaking I am reminded of a Russian historian who once said to me that the wonderful thing about the past is that things are always changing there .
You never know what is going to happen .
The past is being rewritten here .
That is not right .
Some of the allegations in Mrs Lucas 's speech were factually incorrect and should not be in this report at all .
I prefer to look ahead .
I would like to think that we can salute others who have not been mentioned so far in this debate , in the blame culture in which it has been shrouded .
Firstly , the foreign vets , more than 2 000 of whom came to the UK and tried to help us solve the problems with the outbreak .
Also the farmers , the officials , the police who struggled through those terrible days in March and April before we knew where and how we could bring this under control .
Let us look ahead now : at inspections , movements of animals dead or alive , a fresh look at different kinds of agriculture , based on accountability , lessons learned - yes , including the lesson in objectivity which Mr Kreissl-Dörfler and the Chairwoman tried to bring to our committee and which persuaded most , though perhaps not all of us .
Finally , I would like to thank the Commissioner .
It is right that it should be this Commissioner with his concerns and priorities who is replying in this debate .
Essentially , it is a matter , not just of animal health , but of human health and welfare as well .
Mr President , as a representative for Cumbria - the area most affected by this disease in Europe - to think back 20 months is to remember the distress of farmers who , in many cases , saw their animals being slaughtered - although there was no evidence that they were infected - and , in particular , the distress of those who made their living from tourism in the Lake District .
All too often the cries of those people whose economy depended on tourists and whose contribution to the economy was worth six times that of the farmers went totally unheeded .
We saw the pictures on our television sets : visitors were turned away because of the mass culling ; animal welfare concerns were being disregarded ; the fires were making a nonsense of the policies adopted by this European Union in its attempts to address the concerns about dioxins spreading in our atmosphere .
People were really upset by the illogicality of the situation : mountains , hills and footpaths were closed for no reason .
At the same time , you could walk along a country road and the sheep and lambs would stick their heads out through the fences .
People felt a sense of anger and despair .
This must never happen again .
I am glad that this report makes clear that the UK Government 's policy was wrong , and that we should be thinking about emergency vaccination if this situation occurs again .
I also believe that , in order to take account of the wider considerations and in view of the relatively small role which farming has in our economy these days , we also need to look at preventive vaccination as a long-term solution to difficulties of this kind .
Mr President , Commissioner Byrne , I recall how we discussed foot and mouth disease at the Brussels conference all of a year ago , when I was still Chairman and followed what you had to say on the monitor .
I must say that our positions have now grown closer together , whereas at that time they were still rather more divergent .
I explained the position of the Committee on Agriculture and Rural Development , which was that a policy of culling and keeping countries free of the disease would not enable us to solve this problem .
At that time , the Commission still took another view .
I concede that the international organisations took yet another line on the question of when inoculation should take place .
Now we have moved on a bit , and I call that progress .
I believe that targeted vaccination will enable us to limit the damage , in material but also in cultural terms .
The scandals associated with foot and mouth disease and the burning pyres gave the world an image of Europe that we must not allow to be repeated .
Let me just say something on the subject of prophylaxis .
I am not in favour of constant prophylactic vaccination , but we must also make it clear that control vaccination always amounts to prophylactic vaccination .
The right time for this has to be identified , and this is where the Commission has to watch out .
We also have to give the Member States leeway to enable us to have ring-vaccination and control vaccination at an early stage .
That does not , however , necessarily include ongoing prophylactic vaccination , to which I wish to express my opposition .
Mr President , this committee and its report have been an extremely good exercise .
I would like to congratulate all my colleagues , particularly Mr Sturdy for initiating it , the Chairman Mrs Redondo Jiménez and the rapporteur Mr Kreissl-Dörfler .
A lot has already been said about ' to vaccinate or not to vaccinate ' , be it prophylactic vaccination , ring vaccination , emergency vaccination or contingency vaccination .
The one thing we have agreed upon is that we are not going back down the route of prophylactic vaccination .
At least that is what this report is saying , and I think that makes sense .
After all , when we are talking about vaccination , we talk about cattle only , but it was the transport of sheep in the UK , Ireland , France and elsewhere that actually spread the disease the last time , and we must not lose sight of that .
I would like to concentrate on one point that concerns me greatly and that is the future availability of veterinary resources , particularly in remote regions of the European Union .
There is sure to be another outbreak of an exotic disease - if not foot and mouth - with the movement of people and animals and modern travel today .
How we handle it and how it is detected is absolutely critical .
If we do not have the vets on the ground , particularly in remote areas where it is not viable to have veterinary practices , we have no detection system for the future .
I urge the Commission to take particular interest and to evaluate the availability of veterinary resources for future disease management within the EU generally .
Identification of animals , issues of transport , insurance and many other matters came up apart from the vaccination issue .
I urge sensible handling of transport and the individual identification of animals .
I congratulate Joe Walsh and Brid Rogers for their great cooperation , which resulted in the worst of this outbreak being avoided in Ireland .
But , if we go down the route of identifying and tagging each individual sheep , apart altogether from a flock identification tag , and then removing it when the lamb goes to the fattener , we could be left with sheep with three or four tags , or you would be removing tags and adding others : something we are trying unsuccessfully to sort out in Ireland at the moment .
Finally , I would like to thank the Chairman for accepting our point on the protocol for the movement of non-susceptible animals and , in particular , the promise of a review of the movement of equines during future outbreaks , as horses are not susceptible in this case .
Mr President , we are dealing with an excellent parliamentary report which is flexible , courageous , balanced and positive , in a very difficult field .
I therefore congratulate the rapporteur , Wolfgang Kreissl-Dörfler , on this magnificent piece of work , and I would like to highlight the following points I agree with :
Firstly , it brings up to date areas which were not covered , such as the vulnerability of sectors like tourism .
Secondly , it introduces flexible innovations in relation to emergency vaccination , rejecting the obsolete elements of the current regulations .
Thirdly , it criticises the shortcomings , but in a positive manner .
Fourthly , it points out the insufficiencies of information policies .
Commissioner , in view of paragraphs 20 and 21 and of what I experienced myself during the dioxin crisis , mad cow disease and now the Prestige , I believe the Commission should take its ability to directly provide Europeans with information very seriously .
Fifthly , I very much agree with paragraphs 81 and 82 on compensation .

And , finally , Mr President , although it does not fall within the competences of the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , nor of this parliamentary report , I would like to draw attention to the annual report of the Court of Auditors for 2001 , because it makes some criticisms in relation to corruption and , for the sake of combating corruption in relation to CAP subsidies , very good account must be taken of this .
Mr President , firstly I would like to add my congratulations to the rapporteur and to all involved in bringing about this report .
It is a balanced report and has been a good initiative .
It has been good for this Parliament because it has proved that it could produce a report that the national parliament was afraid to .
I would like to comment on one of the Commissioner 's remarks .
He said that the effect was the same as other diseases or previous outbreaks of foot and mouth and we need to act , but the question is how do we act ?
That is what has to be addressed .
This report and investigation brought home the wider effects .
Coming , as it did , on the back of BSE in the United Kingdom , this disease wrecked the rural economy and destroyed many farmers in the UK .
I come from Northern Ireland , and Mrs Doyle has referred to the fact that she comes from the Republic of Ireland .
The reality is that we were very lucky .
Let us not underestimate this .
We were not all that good , but we were very lucky . A load of sheep left Longtown market , went all the way across the Irish Sea , were dropped off at Larne in the middle of the island of Ireland and it took a long time to detect them .
Let me be clear : we need better controls there as well .
What will remain with us is the sight on our TV screens of the burning pyres .
It brought home to us how horrific the situation was .
There has to be a better way of controlling it .
Ring vaccination has to be the way in which we look at trying to control it . We should put in place more resources and more finance for research and development to achieve a traceable vaccine , so we know that animals have been vaccinated .
I will finish by re-echoing what has already been said on border controls : border controls are totally inefficient .
Meat is being brought into the European Community , into the United Kingdom and other countries , and it is not being caught .
We are going to have to deal with this as other countries have done .
They have been more effective than we have been .
We must ensure that our ports and airports are properly controlled in every way .
The truth is that this disease can strike anywhere and at any time .
I hope it does not , but we must be ready if it does .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , nowadays , an outbreak of foot and mouth disease even in one small part of one Member State has very rapid and grave effects on the Community as a whole .
The loss of considerable numbers of animals as a result of the slaughter of whole herds and the profound disquiet and insecurity felt in society as a whole in the countries affected and also throughout the other parts of Europe , meant great financial loss in the affected areas , not only for farming , but also for the economy as a whole and tourism in particular .
The control of disease can today be understood no longer as merely a means of preserving the stock of farm animals or of defending specific commercial interests , but must also take into account the population 's changed lifestyle , their mobility , and their changed attitudes towards the environment and the protection of animals .
With these things in mind , the Temporary Committee on Foot and Mouth Disease engaged intensively with the whole range of problems associated with epidemics , including their effect on the public and the economy .
Whilst we do not need to reinvent the wheel , there is much that we can do better when it comes to limiting risks and minimising damage to the economy , while at the same time taking account of the welfare of animals and the sentiments of the public .
This is not just about a few cows and sheep .
We are all affected ; this is relevant to all of us , and it helps not a bit to make sweeping assertions about who is guilty and who is not .
I would also like to unambiguously refute the accusations - and there have been some - levelled at farmers , be it in Great Britain or any other country .
What is important is that all imports should be controlled , that plans for emergencies should be kept up to date , and that the Commission should actively involve itself in them without delay .
Mass slaughter cannot be a solution , and I wish to put the case for emergency vaccination as being the very least we can do , and , apparently , the best means of getting a speedy grip on the disease and sparing the animals ' lives .
We all know that meat from vaccinated animals is completely safe and therefore capable of being marketed .
I would like to express my gratitude to our rapporteur , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler .
I would like to thank Mrs Redondo Jiménez , who chaired our committee , and also the Commission , and those of its members who were of assistance to us .
I trust that you will all now go and enjoy a nice juicy steak !
Mr President , in this Chamber we are very frequently engaged in debating what we consider to be the great political issues .
But I seem to remember that when we were elected in 1999 our greatest concern was how we made our debates relevant to our electors .
I want to tell you that the area that I represent here in Parliament - the constituency of Wales - is a country that was markedly affected by the foot and mouth outbreak .
This debate is very relevant to people in my constituency who suffered from what has been described as a community tragedy .
There was an impact on a really human scale .
We sometimes do not recognise the sense of isolation that was felt by many farmers and by other people living in rural areas because of the devastating economic and other impacts of this outbreak .
I therefore want to begin by thanking the committee for visiting Welshpool , Builth Wells and Sennybridge and meeting people within my constituency who said to Mr Kreissl-Dörfler that the European Parliament was the only official body that came to listen to their views .
That addresses , in my view , the issue of the relevance of the European Parliament .
Setting up the committee has been a worthwhile exercise .
Secondly , I am sorry we had such difficulty in establishing the committee .
I am sorry it was such a struggle .
I am sorry that the British Government was so anxious about its own position - that there might be any criticism of its position - that we struggled for some six months to get the committee up and running .
We all recognise that it was just one group that was opposed to setting up the committee .
Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , though coming from that group , has been a paragon in approaching this issue in a non-political way .
His report is first-rate .
His report has endeavoured to address the real core issues that are of concern .
Contrary to the views of the people who said that this exercise was going to be irrelevant , Commissioner , we are looking forward to your statement tomorrow , and to having a statement that addresses the concerns outlined by the committee that have emerged in the course of the last year .
Others have touched upon the details .
I do not want to do that .
All I want to say is this : this is a report that had almost universal support in committee .
I am sorry that some additional amendments have been tabled because we should cling to the consensus that is within the report .
It is the best example , in my view , of the European Parliament addressing the concerns of voters in a practical way .
It is a huge example for the future relevance of the European Parliament .
It is a tragedy that at the last minute there are some people who still feel it is appropriate , rather churlishly , to protect the reputation of the UK Government .
We are engaged in much more important things than that .
I ask you to look at the report as it came out of the committee and to respond accordingly , Commissioner .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Temporary Committee on Foot and Mouth Disease has had some important observations to make on the handling of last year 's crisis .
It has defined necessary strategies for the future , which also incorporate important suggestions for the legislative work on which we are about to embark .
Taken as a whole , this is a good result for cooperation across group lines , for which I wish especially to express warm thanks to the rapporteur , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , and to the committee chairman , Mrs Redondo Jiménez .
There is no doubt that the primary and principal requirement in animal husbandry , to be adhered to in the areas of breeding , veterinary health , hygiene and prophylaxis , is that keeping a system of animal husbandry as self-contained as possible can make an important contribution to the protection of animals and also to their health and to that of human beings .
I do believe , though , that public debate must also pay closer attention to the need for a distinction to be drawn between epizootics that endanger human health , and epidemics in which we are exclusively concerned with the health of animals and with their welfare and with the protection of valuable stocks .
Despite last year 's crisis , let us not forget that it was in the control of epizootics hazardous to human health that past decades saw great successes achieved by dint of massive economic efforts on the part of all concerned .
In fact , it was and still is absurd that the practice of vaccination against foot and mouth disease was stigmatised in the public eye at the same time as prophylactic measures , including treatment and vaccination of animals , are in daily use as part of the necessary repertoire of modern and responsible husbandry of many animal species .
What are we supposed to do if the worst comes to the worst ?
Are we supposed to use protective emergency vaccination at the right moment ?
I would add flexibility in ring-vaccination .
Vaccination and testing should , in principle , be the primary option and should become standard practice . The trade restriction should be reduced to three months at most , as advised by the Scientific Committee as long ago as 1999 .
I will add one very important point , quite without reference to the forthcoming legislative work .
If all the participants in the market could agree among themselves that infected farms that wanted , and were obliged , to avail themselves of these new tools , would not be left high and dry and would not end up enduring the scorn of the market if they used this strategy for the future , then we could save ourselves all this bother .
I believe that what is needed is to achieve social consensus on the part of everyone involved .
If that is done successfully , we will have been able to develop a strategy for the future capable of encompassing the protection and health of animals and enjoying acceptance on the part of society .
Mr President , as some colleagues may know , I live in Cumbria at the heart of last year 's foot and mouth outbreak .
I and many of my friends , neighbours and constituents lost our animals .
For us the pyres were not on the television screen , they were over the garden fence .
I would like to make one thing absolutely clear : the vast majority of those affected were good farmers whose husbandry bears no relationship to that of the few described by Mr Adam .
Because of my own involvement I have , quite rightly , not played any direct part in the inquiry 's proceedings , but it seems clear to me that its findings make a valuable contribution to drawing the right lessons from the 2001 outbreak .
I would merely like to make four comments .
Firstly , what occurred in Cumbria , in the United Kingdom - and I have said exactly the same in debates in the UK Parliament and House of Lords - was exacerbated by mistakes made by the United Kingdom Government 's handling of the outbreak .
Secondly , while those whose physical assets were destroyed received compensation , those whose livelihoods were damaged to a similar extent by administrative measures introduced to fight the disease received nothing .
This loss , which flowed directly from what the government was doing and was entirely foreseeable , was equally real .
Their contribution to the fight against the disease was equally valid .
In my view , an injustice has been done to them .
Thirdly , the evidence now emerging in Cumbria suggests that the public health consequences of the outbreak are much wider-ranging and much longer-lasting than was supposed at the time .
I would like to end with an appeal beyond this House to the Commission and the governments of the Member States : learn the lessons of 2001 .
Do not let other people go through what we did last year .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too wish to start by thanking our rapporteur , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , for his collegial cooperation in the temporary committee .
I am equally grateful to Mrs Redondo , who guided the committee very constructively and with great diplomacy and calmness .
I would also like to thank all my colleagues .
Our discussions with officials , experts and victims , as well as our visits to affected sites , helped us to engage in depth with the crisis caused by the outbreak of foot and mouth disease and , in general , with diseases and the means whereby they are dealt with and controlled , as well as with their prevention and with vaccination policy in Europe .
I am also most grateful to the Commission for always having been there with us and for doing its bit .
What makes foot and mouth disease especially problematic is that it is highly infectious and is therefore easily passed from one animal to another .
It is therefore absolutely vital for appropriate measures to be taken to combat the disease as soon as there is an outbreak , so that we never again have to see the sort of images that quite rightly prompted society 's displeasure .
At this point , I would like to say , on a rather critical note , that the report could have made it clearer that a crisis of this sort could have been prevented if appropriate control measures had been taken and if the existing EU regulations had been adhered to or , in certain cases , transposed in the first place .
The important point here is that outbreaks of diseases such as this one can only be avoided if there are sufficient numbers of well-trained inspectors and if everyone concerned observes minimum standards and safety measures .
Furthermore , I would like to point out that it is the Member States that are responsible for extending the inspections carried out under their veterinary systems and for relevant research .
We should stress this again and again .
I therefore see it as self-evident that bureaucratic procedures and an inadequate information policy must no longer be allowed to be the causes of the spread of a disease .
Nevertheless , it must be clear to all of us that unfortunately epizootics can break out again in future , whatever is done to prevent them .
Mr President , Commissioner , the message from this morning 's debate was that ' prevention is better than cure ' .
No to prophylactic vaccination ; yes to ring-vaccination .
The recurrent refrain was that , in future , all-round improvements to systems will be required as a matter of necessity .
In terms of the number of animals culled , the course taken by foot and mouth disease in the European Union in 2001 made it , no doubt , the most serious outbreak ever .
The Temporary Committee on Foot and Mouth Disease worked hard , and very efficiently , over the course of several months , and those involved were complimented and thanked this morning .
It is important that any future changes in policy should take as their starting point an analysis of how the disease has been handled up to now .
European producers and consumers attach equal importance to the transposition of Community legislation , Community finance and , in particular , to the drafting of proposals for the prevention and control of diseases in agriculture .
What I will now say , I say as one who comes from the region bordering on the Netherlands , with a very high number of granivores .
We must , yet again , draw attention to the need for better networking when cooperating on an acute case of the disease .
Political requirements are important , Commissioner , but real work on the ground , on farms , done by veterinary surgeons and the inspection authorities , using the necessary crisis plans and an emergency room , is an absolute necessity if decisions are to be taken quickly and efficiently .
Perhaps I may conclude by giving the example of my constituency , where many institutions have caused a great stir among farmers by participating in a large-scale test of how they would manage a foot and mouth crisis .
You have to think of it as a practice exercise for firefighters , a call-out without a fire .
What was called for was the most rapid reaction in case X , and this cross-border cooperation between the Netherlands and Germany achieved a really most impressive result .
Let us all hope that this exercise never has to be done for real .
We are backing the Commission 's proposals .
We look forward with eager anticipation , hoping that we will , in future , have a policy on epidemics that will gain greater acceptance among farmers and consumers than has been the case in the past .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I hope that , at this juncture , over and above the measures which need to be adopted immediately , two things will be discovered which are more important than the race to adopt emergency measures , namely how the epidemic started and why it spread so quickly .
Mr Kreissl-Dörfler 's report - although acceptable in every other way - does not give us a definitive answer on these points , whereas what does emerge , once again , is the disturbing weakness , the shortcomings of the European Commission 's veterinary control systems , a weakness which has been admitted by the Commissioner himself with great intellectual honesty , which is tantamount to saying that the lessons of the BSE crisis during the previous legislative term have not served much purpose in this respect .
It is , however , reassuring to know that the Commission unanimously intends to give due importance to the recommendations which emerged from the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy , of Agenda 2000 , as regards animal health , transport and feed , in terms of precautionary and preventive measures to avoid epidemics and , most importantly , in terms of future controls on imports .
We agree as regards vaccinations : mandatory vaccinations are not yet feasible ; preventive , emergency vaccinations are more appropriate but there must be well-coordinated emergency plans : not plans generated by emotion on the spur of the moment at the height of a crisis but plans which take into account the situation throughout Europe and the historical development of the disease , so that such disasters can be understood and prevented - prevent being a word which needs to be stressed once again in this House .
Mr Sturdy said just now that , even today , there are people who do not understand how all this could have happened or where the epidemic came from .
At this juncture , at the end of the work of our committee of inquiry and at the end of this debate , it would , in any case , be reassuring to be able to say that we know , most importantly , what to do to prevent a similar scourge occurring in the future .
Mr President , I also wish to thank the Chairman and rapporteur of the committee , Mrs Redondo Jiménez and Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , who have been excellent in the way they have handled this committee .
In particular , I thank them for allowing the committee to visit Northumberland , in my region , where the disease originated .
I do not have time to cover all the issues now but I want to point out in particular that it is very likely that the disease was caused by illegal imports of meat .
One of my great concerns is that , although this is well known , we still do not have proper controls in place at our ports and airports to prevent further illegal meat imports .
There is much anecdotal evidence in the UK that large amounts of illegal meat are still entering the country .
I would ask the Commissioner to address that in his response tomorrow , because it is a time bomb waiting to go off .
The disease could easily happen again anywhere in Europe .
People were particularly grateful to have the opportunity to submit their comments to the committee members in person .
Never again must we see the enormous funeral pyres all over the landscape of the north-east of England , which had such a devastating effect on the tourist industry and all related industries , not just agriculture .
Above all , despite the efforts of some Members of this Parliament , I hope that we will learn the lessons from the outbreak of this disease and ensure that it never happens again .
Mr President , I am very pleased to have the opportunity to respond to this valuable and important debate on this report .
A number of issues have been raised by many speakers which I ought to address - even if only briefly at this stage .
Firstly , on the question of control of imports , many - if not all - of you have addressed this important issue .
It is of critical importance to ensure that not only is there legislation in place to deal with this kind of issue but also that the controls are in place to ensure that the legislation is properly implemented .
It is the job of the Commission to bring forward legislation on the control of imports .
It is , however , for the control authorities in the Member States to ensure that legislation is fully and properly implemented and not , as Mr Santini suggested , a function of the Commission to ensure that controls are in place .
We must ensure that we identify who is responsible for what , so that we can clearly indicate to those who have the responsibility that they must exercise those functions properly .
With regard to legislation , since 1972 we have legislation in place at EU level in respect of imports of commercial products .
It is illegal to import goods in contravention of that legislation .
More recently , we have put in place legislation on personal imports , which will be operational from 1 January 2003 .
I , like you , call on Member States to ensure that their control authorities make sure that these pieces of legislation are properly and fully implemented .
This issue is also addressed in the hygiene regulations before Parliament at the moment .
Therefore , cooperation of all parties in this is of critical importance in trying to ensure that another outbreak does not happen in the future .
The second issue that was raised with some passion is vaccination .
I noted what Mr Whitehead said about the past constantly changing .
However , in this instance there is one point that I have had to address on many occasions .
It was again raised by Mrs Corbey and Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf .
It is the function of the Commission in the application of vaccinations .
Two Member States out of the four that had the outbreak of foot and mouth disease sought permission from the Commission to administer emergency vaccination .
That permission was granted - there is no doubt about that .
One of those two Member States did not apply it all , the other did , but then decided that the animals that were vaccinated should be killed .
They had permission from the Commission to vaccinate and keep the animals alive .
However , for reasons associated with trade considerations - they are not irrelevant and I do not criticise them - that Member State decided to vaccinate and then cull those animals .
Any of the Member States involved could have applied vaccinations of their own volition , based on their own legislation , without any need for permission from the Commission .
At this stage , I should like to clarify that issue , rather than to leave in the minds of some people that there may have been some fault on the part of the Commission in failing or in refusing to allow Member States to respond to this outbreak by using vaccination and leaving animals alive .
That did not happen , although it could have been done because the Commission authorised this in very clear terms .
I repeat that one of the Member States involved decided not to use vaccination at all and the other decided to use vaccination but nonetheless - for trade considerations - went ahead and culled the cattle involved , even in circumstances where it could have allowed those animals to remain alive .
I am very happy that a number of speakers praised the work of the Commission .
I am sure that the people who work with me , my collaborators who are here , take pleasure in that also .
They have worked very hard on this .
I am very pleased that the two institutions have worked so well together in this instance , as Mr Jonathan Evans said .
We have tried to ensure that what we do here at European Union level - whether in Parliament or in the Commission - has relevance for people .
In this instance , the debate and the report have been of relevance to citizens of the European Union .
I also hope that the legislation that will be published tomorrow will respond not just to the needs and desires of Parliament , but also the needs , desires and the wishes of ordinary citizens of the European Union .
You will see many of the issues you have raised in your report echoed in our legislation which will be published tomorrow , because we have worked closely together on your report and in the drafting of the legislation .
One further piece of legislation to be published tomorrow governs the individual identification and traceability of sheep .
That will also contribute to providing some kind of security against an outbreak of this type in the future .
Finally , I congratulate Mrs Redondo Jiménez for chairing this committee and Mr Kreissl-Dörfler for the excellent work he has undertaken and for the cooperation that he and his people offered not only to myself but also my officials .
This is a clear example of the two institutions working very well and effectively together for the benefit of the citizens of the European Union .
Am I right in thinking that Mrs Thors wishes to speak on this matter ?
In accordance with our Rules of Procedure , you are perfectly entitled to take the floor in your capacity as rapporteur , but you can only do this just before the vote on your report .
I therefore suggest that you wait and I shall let you know when you may take your two minutes ' speaking time .
We received a request from Mr Hughes , who suggested that we take the vote on the Damião report today .
Is there a Member who wishes to speak against Mr Hughes ' request to take the vote on the Damião report today ?
Since no one wishes to speak against this request and since this means a change to our agenda , I suggest that we first vote on this proposal for a change .
( Parliament agreed to the change to the agenda )
The vote will therefore take place after the vote on the Langenhagen report .
WRITTEN STATEMENT ( RULE 120 )
Thank you very much for this clarification .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
Mr President , I wonder if it is possible to get a set of headphones .
I do not appear to have a set at my desk and I must apologise to Mrs Thors , my Finnish is not that great .
Mr President , Amendment No 14 was tabled by the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party .
As rapporteur , I am not qualified - as I have not been mandated to this end by the Committee on Constitutional Affairs - to give an opinion in its favour , but I shall simply reiterate that this amendment is fully in line with the traditional positions of the European Parliament , and particularly with the report by Mr Dimitrakopoulos and Mr Leinen .
That is why , personally speaking , I approve this amendment .
I suggest that all the versions are reviewed in the light of your comment , Mr Corbett , so that we are all clear on this point .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
President .
Given the time , I suggest we suspend voting and resume immediately after the formal sitting for the presentation of the Sakharov Prize .
. ( DE ) Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , before we move to the final vote , I would just like to say a few words .
Never before , in eight years , have I taken the floor after a report , but I think it appropriate that I do so today .
There is no doubt that some of the amendments on which we voted today are perfectly in order .
Whilst I do not want to revisit the subject of Great Britain , which we talked about for long enough this morning , some of those that did not get through had to do with the removal of duplications , for example in connection with the OIE 's three-month probation period , which causes us concern .
We were also concerned to give the report a coherent form .
We did not succeed in that , but it does not matter .
What I would like to say is that I am very glad that the Greens ' Amendment No 25 was rejected .
I also want to tell you why .
The fact is that it would make the internal market fundamentally null and void , and , when your farmers vaccinate , you would have to explain to them that they were enabling British farmers to eat their own sheep and Dutch farmers to drink their own milk , since these products would no longer find their way onto the EU market or the markets of third countries outside the European Union .
You simply have to bear that in mind .
It may be all very fine as far as protecting animals is concerned , but there is no political mileage in it at all .
That is why I am very glad that the amendment was rejected .
Quite apart from that , I am very happy that we worked together extremely well in the committee , without regard to group allegiances , and that this report is supported by a large majority today .
May I remind you , Mr Kreissl-Dörfler , that it was by concession from the Chair that you were able to take the floor , as I do not want to launch another debate at this stage of the vote .
( Parliament adopted the resolution )
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
This European Parliament and Council directive , which aims to bring together in a single text all the regulations on the organisation of working time drawn up by the EU over a number of years , is an even clearer illustration of the desire to allow bosses to organise working time as they see fit .
That is why we are taking this opportunity to reiterate , in particular , our outright opposition to night working where this is not socially indispensable , as it is then merely another way to increase profits at the expense of workers ' health .
As for the length of working time , the considerable number of pages devoted to exemptions authorised for a transitional period of five years , beginning on 1 August 2004 , certainly illustrates the extent to which this is less of a question of organising employees ' working time than of allowing bosses a free reign so that they can exploit workers as they wish .
This is what one of these many scandalous exemptions stipulates : ' The Member States shall ensure that the number of weekly working hours does not , under any circumstances , exceed an average of 58 hours during the first three years of the transitional period , an average of 56 hours during the following two years , and an average of 52 hours for any additional period . '
We are obviously unable to endorse a directive of this nature .
We voted against this report , and against those on Bulgaria and Romania , as they incite , or even oblige , the governments of these countries to ' restructure ' their steel production .
On the pretext of ' streamlining ' , the text calls for a reduction of the productive capacities of these countries .
We condemn this absolutely stupid and inhumane ' streamlining ' , which will mean some of the existing businesses will close , that their workers will be made redundant and unemployment will get worse , and the only purpose of this streamlining is so that surviving factories make a profit for their owners .
Whilst we support the enlargement of the European Union to the countries of Eastern Europe , we are opposed to the fact that enlargement is being used as a pretext for making the living conditions of the working classes in these countries worse .
If the European Parliament wishes to punish war crimes , it should start by putting its own house in order .
France , Great Britain , Belgium , Portugal and Spain , virtually all the States in other words , whose representatives are sitting in this Chamber , have in the past waged shameful colonial wars leaving a trail of crimes against humanity .
It is out of the question to prosecute the generals or colonels who tortured Algerians , just as it is out of the question to try the political leaders who covered up for them and justified their actions .
How many other conflicts have occurred , even after decolonisation , in Rwanda , Sierra Leone or in Liberia for example , where European States have been responsible for or accomplices to crimes against humanity , should we not condemn these too ?
Who will judge the crimes being committed , even as we speak , against civilians in Côte d 'Ivoire , by rebel soldiers , yes , but also by soldiers of the regime , under the direct protection of the French army ?
It is not the population that the French army is protecting there , but French money .
Get the French army out of Côte d 'Ivoire !
As for the report , it reeks of hypocrisy , and that is why we voted against it .
- ( NL ) For centuries , no prosecutions were brought for crimes committed during wars .
Cruel intimidation and the murder of civilians were an accepted tool used for engaging in territorial expansion and securing economic spheres of interest .
The military was above the law .
Not until 1945 , after the defeat of Germany and Japan in the Second World War , were war criminals from those countries convicted by the victors .
Were they the only war criminals ?
Or is the designation of war criminal equally applicable to those responsible for the destruction of Dresden , Hiroshima and Nagasaki ?
Evidently one needs to be the loser in a war to be tried and sentenced after that war .
Partial losers , who have not lost control over their home base , get off scot-free , witness the colonial wars of the Netherlands in Indonesia , France in Algeria and Portugal in Angola and Mozambique .
Despite that selective approach , it is good that crimes should be punished , even if an attempt is made to justify them in terms of the exigencies of war .
In this way we can discourage repetition in future .
Unfortunately the Kirkhope report offers mainly a policy of harassing refugees accused by their political opponents of having dirty hands .
It will scarcely help us to prevent future crimes of rulers against their people .
I have voted for this report because I believe that it deals very well with a complex but urgent issue - that of bringing war criminals to justice within the European Union .
Mr Kirkhope as a former Home Office Minister in the UK has a good understanding of the complexity of the issue and has shown in his reports the benefits of action at a European level .
The Council text has been amended so that some articles which may have breached rules of subsidiarity ( those that are concerned with the regulation of investigations and prosecutions rather than with the exchange of information ) , in fact are now , in my view , in line with this principle .
. ( PT ) I believe that this Danish initiative , which seeks to promote closer cooperation in the investigation and prosecution of inter alia war crimes and crimes against humanity , makes an effective and practical contribution to the important objective being proposed for the EU , through the action plan adopted by the Council on 20 March 2000 , under the title ' The prevention and control of organised crime : a European Union strategy for the beginning of the new millennium ' .
I also considered some amendments tabled by the rapporteur and adopted by the specialist parliamentary committee to be appropriate and justified , concerning the protection of personal data , concerning this Council decision not interfering in the jurisdiction of the International Criminal Court and concerning the clarification that the authorities responsible for prosecuting these crimes are the national authorities responsible for ensuring that national legislation is complied with , not those responsible for immigration , particularly those established at European level .
I have therefore voted in favour of the report .
.
( PT ) I wish to congratulate Mr Sousa Pinto on the quality and the boldness of his report .
I agree with his criticism of the Danish proposal 's lack of ambition and scant substance .
No progress has been made on the mutual recognition of judgments and we are still a long way off from implementing the principle of the mutual recognition of sentencing .
The proposal that has been made only proposes the establishment of a system of exchanging information between Member States on disqualifications imposed in the courts , but does not provide for any type of mutual recognition of sentencing for the purposes of its implementation , which means that an individual who is sentenced to disqualification or to the loss of rights in one Member State can still exercise these rights freely in another State of the Union .
We must fulfil the desire expressed in Tampere and Laeken to make the principle of the mutual recognition of judgments in criminal matters effective .
The issue of the recognition of judgments in criminal matters is highly sensitive , and raises delicate issues .
There are differences in the various Member States and we must avoid the possibility of ' havens for criminals ' , and prevent freedom of movement from benefiting those acting outside the law .
We must provide a clear response to the citizens ' demands for the EU effectively to confront the problem of the increasing threats crime poses for their freedom and rights by means of a solid and common policy for preventing and combating crime .
Rejecting the Danish proposal would therefore send an important political signal to the Council and to the Member States : the European Parliament wants consistent and coherent progress under the third pillar and does not want unambitious initiatives that appear to focus all their energy on winning media approval .
British Conservative MEPs do not believe that mutual recognition is necessary in this field .
Disqualifications should remain a matter for intergovernmental cooperation .
As such the British Conservative Delegation supports the rejection of this Council proposal .
. ( PT ) The creation of a genuine European area of security and justice covering the entire territory of the Union can only be achieved through better coordination between the national authorities of the Member States , pursuing a dual approach : on the one hand , promoting a coherent and coordinated policy on combating organised crime - that has been very skilful in exploiting the completion and deepening of the internal market and , on the other , providing a clever answer to what is , as the rapporteur has stated , the third out of Europe 's citizens nine greatest concerns - combating organised crime , coming immediately after peace and security and unemployment .
Although this Danish initiative seeks to establish a system of information-sharing between the Member States on disqualifications issued against an individual in a criminal judgment , it does not , however , provide for any type of mutual recognition of sentencing for the purposes of its implementation .
I have therefore supported this report and agreed with rejecting the Danish initiative as the rapporteur proposed and as the specialist parliamentary committee accepted .
In fact , this initiative only concerns the creation of an information-sharing system between Member States , and this instrument lacks genuine operability in the fight against organised crime because the initiative does not seek to create , at the same time , any mutual recognition of sentencing with a view to its implementation , which is a prerequisite for the disqualifications it is seeking to achieve .
. ( PT ) The Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs has submitted a proposal to Parliament rejecting an initiative from the Kingdom of Denmark under the third pillar .
The Commission and your rapporteur believe that this position must be adopted to ensure that Parliament clearly states its deep dissatisfaction with the situation of paralysis afflicting the third pillar , for which the Member States are responsible .
Important Commission proposals both before and after 11 September 2001 , primarily the package of measures to combat terrorism , remain blocked in the Council or are still awaiting transposal or ratification by the Member States .
Unable to achieve the consensus necessary in the Council , or to honour their commitments in national legislation , the Member States are using and abusing their right of initiative .
We have received a plethora of outlandish proposals , by which I mean proposals that do not form part of any plan and did not feature in the Commission 's ' scoreboard ' .
These are arbitrary , insignificant , incoherent proposals , sometimes dictated by the national political agenda , and transform the third pillar into an ever-expanding universe , containing chaos in all directions ; a bureaucratic ball of thread without ends .
It is the European Parliament 's duty to condemn this smokescreen , which consists of apparent legislative hyperactivity , which contributes to disguising the Union 's lethargy in a crucial area , especially after 11 September 2001 - and the political inability of the Council and the Member States to bring a single significant measure coming from the Commission and laid out in the scoreboard into force .
The gulf between the words of political leaders , not least government representatives , and their translation into concrete actions is taking on scandalous proportions in the field of combating transnational crime .
We must put an end to this situation .
This is the message that the European Parliament wishes to send to the Council and to the Member States .
One of the problems that is fundamental but all too often neglected by scientific research in Europe is that of the flagrant under-representation of women .
This is not only a problem of equality and justice - it is also a problem relating to the effectiveness of European research , which therefore demonstrates that the EU is still far from able to harness its potential in human resources .
That is why , in the light of the objective that the Union set itself in Lisbon to become the most competitive and dynamic knowledge-based economy in the world , it is particularly important to vote in favour of this report , which gives the issue of women in research the attention that it deserves .
It is basically a question of supporting the efforts made within the framework of the European research policy , such as the prominence given to ' Women and Science ' as part of the specific programme entitled ' Structuring the European Research Area ' .
We also note that there is a great deal of work still to be done , such as integrating a gender perspective into all levels of future framework programmes and continuing to compile and disseminate statistics on the participation of men and women .
More generally speaking , the report also raises the issue of how to achieve better reconciliation between one 's career and family life , to the benefit of children as well as working men and women , through the establishment in each Member State of crèche and nursery facilities , for example .
. ( PT ) This report is based on the misguided principle that aid granted by the EDF falls within the sphere of Community competence .
It has been clearly proven that the nature of relations between the various Member States and the countries receiving development aid is quite different .
This is partly a result of historical factors and old ties which , in many cases , such as Portugal , lead to relationships involving very close cooperation .
These relationships are expressed in frameworks that can only be identified and given due consideration in the context of consultation with the Council itself .
I disagree with communitarisation and have therefore voted against the report .
Mr President , cooperation in the field of education in Europe has brought many students together from different parts of the European Union , as well as students from the accession countries .
The students taking part in these activities are not just increasing their own knowledge and abilities to deal with the ever-changing nature and shape of the world in which we live , they also represent the future building-blocks for a new society and a new understanding and tolerance of the cultural diversity within the European Union .
The number of people who have taken part in the Erasmus programme since its inception will exceed one million during the academic year 2002 to 2003 .
A total of 30 countries presently take part .
I welcome the fact that the European Union is now putting in place a charter for Erasmus students which will be available to all students in 2003 .
This charter spells out responsibilities and entitlements , such as full recognition by the home university of academic achievements , as well as credits to be obtained by students during their term on Erasmus .
It is the goal of the European Commission and Parliament to reach two million participating students by 2007 .
We must also ensure that , while they are abroad , students continue to receive education grants from their home Member States and that the Erasmus programme is not exclusive to those who can afford it .
The Youth for Europe programme has been very successful in encouraging more exchanges between students .
We should encourage further development of this area , in particular for those who are disadvantaged .
It should also be pointed out that the Socrates programme has already been extended to cover the period 2000 to 2006 and EUR 1 850 million has been allocated for this programme .
Finally , as a result of the Court of Auditors ' decisions , we must ensure that our accounting and delivery practices are better , to ensure that all students can benefit not only from a tremendous academic achievement but also from a cultural experience .
This motion concerns the Court of Auditors ' report on the application of the Socrates and Youth programmes ( 1995-1999 ) .
The Court of Auditors highlights design weaknesses ( Socrates is excessively complex , resulting in different interpretations and problems between the Technical Assistance Office and the national agencies ) and shortcomings in implementation ( delays , management shortcomings , suspicions of fraud , seven cases referred to OLAF ) and evaluation .
Evaluation reports were delayed and there were so many irregularities that the Court of Auditors found it hard to come to a judgment as to whether or not the programmes ' objectives had been realised , while the mid-term report on the Youth programme was produced by a company owned by a former director of the TAO .
The motion contains worthwhile comments and proposals .
It calls on the Commission to act on the Court of Auditors ' recommendations , including its recommendation to replace the TAOs by Community public-law agencies .
It also calls for any ' framework ' contracts with external bodies to be phased out and for monitoring and evaluation to be awarded to public bodies .
There also appears to be some doubt as to the efficacy of the programmes themselves .
These positive comments , however , are simply ways of improving programmes which , as we have stressed time and again , have been designed for purposes which bear no relation to their lofty titles .
These programmes aggressively impose the Euro-unifying education model in the field of education and youth and are designed to familiarise young people with so-called European ideals .
Having taken all these factors into account , the MEPs of the Communist Party of Greece abstained from voting .
. ( PT ) I have voted in favour of this report , because I believe that maintaining Community funds for promoting exchanges between European students , specifically under these two Community action programmes , Socrates and Youth for Europe , is extremely important .
Despite the shortcomings highlighted by the rapporteur and by the specialist parliamentary committee , not least the inadequacies of the programmes ' development and administration , for which some suggestions have in fact been made , it must be acknowledged that a take-up rate of around 90 % enables us to see the great importance and consequently , the considerable success that this type of programme has had , is having and will have in enriching and developing both future generations of Europeans and in contributing to lifelong learning , which is becoming increasingly necessary .
I therefore agree with maintaining these programmes and the budgetary approach that is proposed , because it is of crucial importance that we continue to promote the creation of a European educational area through informal educational experiences amongst young people , including physical mobility in particular , to promote lifelong learning , foreign language learning , greater use of new technologies in education and to promote cooperation at European level between the various Education providers concerned .
Mr President , in the context of the fight against terrorism , the Coelho report proposes , inter alia , the establishment by Council decision in each State of an office known as ' SIRENE ' .
In Italian , the word sirene [ mermaids ] is used to describe beautiful women with fishes ' tails , naked from the waist up , who live in the sea .
I therefore feel - and I had to vote for the report - that , with this system , the terrorists will be vanquished . How will the terrorists be able to resist the mermaids ?
If I may , I would therefore recommend that the mermaids should have the features of Claudia Schiffer , Kim Basinger , Sabrina Ferilli and - why not - more recent stars such as Britney Spears , Shakira , Christina Aguilera and various others , that each person can add as they wish .
.
( PT ) This initiative forms part of an approach of introducing proposals little by little in the aim of increasing discretionary powers , on the pretext of the fight against terrorism , in this case , through the completely unjustified creation of SIS-II .
This initiative must be rejected , because , in particular :
it allows bodies , particularly from third countries , to have easy access to information of a personal nature , without any sort of control ;
it provides no guarantees that every proposal for the SIS 's functioning will be approved by the Schengen Joint Supervisory Authority ;
the argument and the concern about terrorism cannot be used as a pretext for creating files on citizens , for purely political reasons , which could lead to the SIS becoming a political information service , serving a future European police policy , with unforeseeable consequences for safeguarding citizens ' freedoms and rights .
The Schengen Information System is an electronic system for recording , identifying and monitoring suspects and is used purely for policing and repressive purposes .
It is applied with a great deal of enthusiasm in order to suppress the burgeoning grass-roots movement opposed to European Union policy and to ensure that Fortress Europe keeps out immigrants .
Even though a great many complaints have been made , including by advocates of the SIS , about its lack of transparency and threat to human rights , the European Parliament assented last year to a new , second-generation system , on the pretext of fighting terrorism .
We would remind the House that the Schengen Information System started up in 1995 , well before 11 September 2001 .
The Spanish initiative , which the Coelho report endorses despite its rhetoric on protection of civil rights , proposes that all the repressive agencies of the ? U ( Europol , Eurojust etc . ) should have access to the system and that it should extend to new data categories .
The proposal to collect and exchange information on foreigners applying for residence permits , using the fight against terrorism as an excuse , is in keeping with the racist and xenophobic attitude of the rulers of the ? U.
This is an anti-democratic initiative and the grass-roots movement is fighting to reject both it and the Schengen Information System itself .
- ( NL ) The proposal before us implies a tacit shift in the function of the Schengen Information System from a monitoring tool in the context of the free movement of individuals to a detection tool in the context of the war against crime and terrorism .
Despite the fact that there is insufficient clarity about modalities , particularly supervision and data protection .
The rights of citizens are therefore insufficiently guaranteed in this proposal .
Mr President , if I may , I wanted to highlight the exceptional nature of Mr Bourlanges ' report , which comes at just the right time , given the development of the Convention .
The Convention has been bled almost dry by a virtual IGC with the arrival of numerous Foreign Affairs ministers .
Thanks to Mr Bourlanges ' report , it is the European Parliament that is restoring to the Convention its strength with the absolutely essential elements of clarity and a sense of perspective .
Clear legislation , because if we are all meant to be aware of the law , the legal categories must be perfectly clear , and a sense of perspective , because it is always important clearly to distinguish between constitutional data and actual policies .
Mr Bourlanges ' report will contribute significantly to this .
In fact , we get the feeling that this is less a report than the framework for a Bourlanges Constitution .
One of the Convention 's core tasks is to make proposals for simplifying and clarifying legal instruments and rules of procedure used by the EU , as well as to clarify which powers the Member States have delegated to the EU .
The Convention 's efforts to bring about a uniform decision-making structure based on codecision and the Community model within a combined ' constitutional treaty ' amount to important changes with a view to democratising the EU 's decision-making process and making it easier to grasp .
The report contains sound proposals for new terminology aimed at clarifying the ways in which the EU 's legal instruments work and at making the decision-making process more easily accessible .
The report makes it clear that the EU can only act in areas delegated by the Member States .
Those areas that the Member States choose to delegate are characterised by the clear added value entailed in cooperation as distinct from the Member States ' acting individually , especially with regard to the internal market and the joint combating of serious cross-border crime .
The report is unclear regarding whether treaty changes should only be based on the outcome of the Convention and whether future conventions need to approve possible changes by intergovernmental conferences to the conventions ' recommendations .
An obligation on the part of future intergovernmental conferences to comply with the Convention would fundamentally alter the relationship between the EU and the Member States .
The requirement of unanimity in the case of treaty changes must be maintained .
The ratification processes must be respected and continue to operate as they do at present .
What is also unclear is whether it will be possible for the proposed laws supplementary to the constitution , based on decision-making by qualified majority , to determine how the EU is funded in future .
The funding of the EU must be decided upon unanimously .
The Moderates are opposed to proposals that may lead to the EU 's being funded by EU taxes .
.
( FR ) In the minority opinion annexed to the Bourlanges report , I criticised , in particular , the proposal in paragraph 5 to allow the Treaties to be revised by majority vote , albeit an extremely qualified majority vote , instead of unanimously .
Taking Europe further along its current path , this method would distance the Member States from the European decision-making process .
One of our Luxemburgish fellow Members , Mr Poos , former Foreign Affairs Minister for his country , and former President-in-Office of the Council of the European Union , has written to Mr Bourlanges to tell him this .
Stating ' that no Member State will agree to a change to fundamental law being imposed on them against their will ' , he adds : ' the citizens of States thus made a minority will reject a Europe with vague authoritarian ideas .
As many successive constitutional changes are made , an increasing number of Member States could be reduced to the status of vassal states .
We can imagine the result in terms of adhesion to the Community project ' .
In the end , the adopted resolution contained a more vague passage on this point , but the intent remains .
In any case , the spirit of this proposal is more widely present in the idea of the report ( and the Convention ) to make codecision with a qualified majority in the Council the rule , without counterbalancing it with any national veto system .
We almost feel sorry for the rapporteur , who tries to introduce a little order into what he himself terms ' chaos ' , in other words the jumble of contradictory or inapplicable rules , regulations and directives resulting from the horse-trading that has taken place between Member States throughout what we incorrectly call European integration .
The chaos he criticises is not just in the texts , however , but also in reality .
There is total conflict between the process underway , which is developing according to the varying degrees of pressure from rival private interests defended by the Member States , and genuine unification creating a borderless Europe with a rationally-organised economy at European level .
In wanting to reconcile European unification with competing capitalist interests , the report is reduced to squaring the circle .
This report falls in line with the prospect of the federalist integration of the European Union , and points towards establishing a constitution , striving to increase the supranational powers of the European Parliament by extending codecision . It consequently advocates extending the use of qualified majority voting in the Council with the communitarisation of a greater number of policies .
The resolution also strives to change the method of amending the Treaties and advocates the institutionalisation of the ' convention ' method with increased powers , laying down different amending processes - making a distinction between what is known as the ' constitutional ' part and the ' policy ' part - and opening up the possibility of the national parliaments no longer being able to play their full role in ratifying the Treaties .
Although we welcome the withdrawal of this resolution , as proposed by my group , from the point where it recommends the end of decision-making by unanimity in the Council for any revision of the Treaties ( when what is at stake are issues as crucial as the decision to transfer national competences to the EU ) , the resolution envisages an EU legal system that takes precedence over those of the Member States , thereby increasing the powers of its supranational institutions . It even proposes creating a new institution , by institutionalising the ' convention ' , laying the foundations for creating a future ' European State ' and undermining national sovereignty and independence , not least of Portugal .
Hence our vote against the report .
- ( NL ) The rules presently applying in the EU form an incoherent patchwork .
They have emerged over the course of fifty years via treaties , ordinances and directives , with the Court of Justice having to act as arbiter .
It is unclear to the citizens of Europe who is responsible for those rules , how far-reaching they are and how they can be changed .
In the EU , ordinance is the name for direct legislation at the most centralised level , while the same term is used in the Netherlands for rules established by municipalities and provinces within the scope allowed by national legislation .
The word ' directive ' creates the impression that these are non-binding recommendations , hence well-meaning advice .
In reality national parliaments are forced to establish corresponding legislation within two years , so that the essence of the decision to be taken there has already been established before public discussion of its desirability can get under way .
Anyone wanting a European superstate with lots of centralised legislation will be given an excellent overview by the rapporteur , Mr Bourlanges of the relation between constitution , ordinary legislation , programme legislation , framework legislation , organic legislation and financial legislation .
I do not support his intentions , but I do support his clarity .
He quite rightly wants executive measures of the European Commission to be submitted for the approval of this Parliament if we register an objection within three months .
Given the talent that Mr Bourlanges normally demonstrates , we could have expected more from him than this report of no great value , which , in particular , is certainly not distinguished by originality .
The hierarchy of legislation he proposes ( constitutional bloc , organic laws , ordinary laws ) is nothing more than an exact copy of that laid down by the French Constitution of the Fifth Republic .
Furthermore , insofar as the hierarchy of legislation necessarily implies a hierarchy of functions and bodies , the rapporteur does nothing less than set out a new Community architecture that reproduces the Member State 's constitutional model at European level .
As with any exercise of this kind , institutional mimicry does , however , have its limits .
Is it really appropriate to attempt to transpose to Community level the constitutional model that is common to the Member States ?
The answer is clearly ' No ' .
What the rapporteur is forgetting when he substitutes European law for current legislation , obviously requiring the extension of the codecision procedure in doing so , or when he mentions a reform of the procedure for revising the Treaties , is that the Union , even equipped with an identical political system to that of the Member States , will always lack the essential factor : democratic legitimacy .
. ( PT ) I broadly share the legal assessment this report makes of the Community legal system .
One could hardly agree more with the rapporteur 's observation that we are facing real legislative , procedural and linguistic chaos ; and even more so when he says that the inconsistency between the various categories of legal acts of which this system comprises is making it unintelligible to members of the public , even the most well informed about legal issues .
The current framework ignores any principle for designating legal acts and is based on terms that are frequently obscure and sometimes misleading .
Nevertheless , I could not support the report when , in political terms , it seeks to take advantage of this need to establish a coherent typology of Community laws and a logical hierarchy of acts - a legislative necessity - in order to move forwards in the ' long march ' of the highly debatable federalist and constitutional doctrine , presuming that a ' de facto ' sovereign European State with constituent power already exists and goes so far as to omit any reference whatsoever to national parliaments or actually proposing to end the procedure based on the Treaties themselves .
The fact is that giving the Community legal system coherence and clarity by no means requires imposing a federal legislative framework and this is something we all know .
I have , therefore , voted against the report , whilst regretting that the rapporteur - who has produced a technically superb piece of work - should have blundered into what I consider to be federalist opportunism .
. ( PT ) The final report is to be welcomed because it upholds the current restrictive list of products .
It is also to be welcomed that it insists on the immediate removal of all products falsely labelled ' Not Irradiated ' when this claim has been disproved by the appropriate tests .
It should be remembered that the precautionary principle must always be observed .
The issue is that any technology needs to prove the benefits of its use and take account of the potential risks to health and to the environment , given that food-irradiation technology is highly problematic .
In fact , on the basis of a civilian use of nuclear energy , this appears to have no other use apart from replacing the normal hygiene and safety rules that processed foods should already follow .
There also appear to be no benefits to consumers because , apart from the risks of improper use , with the possibility of poisoning , irradiation makes it more difficult for the consumer to discern the true state of the product .
Consequently , the overriding aim of this technology appears to be something else - speeding up the liberalisation of international trade and increasing the centralisation / concentration of the mass production and distribution of foods throughout the world , with consequences for the delocalisation of agri-food production and for the decline of small-scale local farmers , thereby calling sustainable development into question .
Mr President , British Labour Members voted against the report because our amendments to remove errors of fact were not carried .
These errors remain in paragraphs 15 , 22 , 25 , 26 , 30 , 31 , 32 and 33 .
In addition , the following paragraphs contain statements which are not supported by the evidence and findings of the lessons to be learned and Royal Society reports : paragraphs 6 , 16 and 25 .
The following paragraphs contain statements not in line with the balance of evidence presented to the committee or contain errors of fact of lesser importance than those to which amendments were tabled : paragraphs 3 , 7 , 9 , 11 , 20 , 21 , 34 and 57 .
Mr President , I voted against this report , not because I do not support the recommendations on the way forward in the event of another unfortunate outbreak of foot and mouth disease , but because of the basic inaccuracies in the preamble .
I prefer to vote for fact and not fiction and , because certain people wish to obscure the truth with political fiction , I have voted against .
It has been claimed that over 10 million animals were slaughtered during the foot and mouth outbreak but owners have only claimed compensation for 6.5 million .
Farmers , I know , are not slow in coming forward .
There is no evidence of breaches in animal welfare legislation .
If there was , surely there would have been prosecutions , since animal rights groups within the UK are amongst the most active in the world .
Finally , the report hints at breaches in environmental legislation due to such events as the burning of dead carcasses .
The Environmental Agency within the UK carried out an investigation of the procedure used in the foot and mouth outbreak and concluded that there had been no breaches .
The report is , therefore , unfortunately basically flawed .
Mr President , on behalf of the European Parliamentary Labour Party , I would like to congratulate the rapporteur for the fair , open-minded and assiduous way in which he has carried out his task .
This report , when he looks ahead , is an excellent report and provides useful guidelines for future action .
Unfortunately , the committee and the plenary have chosen to amend the text in relation to what happened in the past , in such a way that my delegation found it impossible to support it and indeed voted against it .
We strongly reject the questions about the legality of the culls because the courts in the United Kingdom upheld their legality .
We strongly reject the idea of breaches of animal welfare legislation because there have been no prosecutions as a result of investigations of those claims .
We strongly reject the claims concerning breaches of environmental legislation because the Environmental Agency has conducted its assessment and come to the conclusion that there was no environmental harm .
We reject the claim of biosecurity lapses because there was no evidence of the spread of infection from carcasses being moved or by official personnel .
We reject the figure of 10 million animals slaughtered because farmers have only claimed for 6.5 million and this is a fantasy figure being used for political gain .
. I want to congratulate the rapporteur and the members of the Temporary Committee on Foot and Mouth Disease on the excellent work they have done together .
This is an important report because it endorses some firm points of reference in the problematic area of the prevention of this terrible disease .
First and foremost in that it calls for emergency vaccinations to be made a priority to control any future spread of the disease , in addition , of course , to calling for a ban on imports from third countries in which foot and mouth disease is endemic and for much more decisive measures to combat illegal meat imports , which we believe are the most likely cause of the entry of the disease into the European Union .
Secondly in that the report urges the European Union to change its current policy of vaccination being a last resort .
In the event of any future outbreak of the disease , vaccination with a view to keeping the animals alive must be considered right from the outset , along with the immediate need to slaughter the animals in the infected farms and avoid contacts which are widely known to be dangerous .
The Community should be able to play a fundamental role in defining the strategy for controlling foot and mouth disease .
Indeed , we support the call for a shift of emphasis in European Union policy away from purely commercial considerations .
( Text abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
The foot and mouth epidemic that affected Europe in 2001 was a great disaster , and not only for the United Kingdom , where mass slaughter of livestock was necessary .
Quite apart from the tragic consequences for farmers , the effects of this catastrophe and the urgent sanitary measures implemented have reached far beyond the agriculture sector .
The report highlights a number of factors that exacerbated the situation : livestock farming and the agri-food sector were subject to the demands of importers and exporters and the race for world market domination ; European sanitary directives were not transposed into national legislation ; veterinary border controls were sometimes insufficient , despite the tremendously high value of the interests at risk ; and there has been a continuous reduction in the number of veterinary surgeons .
However , although it highlights the aggravating factors and ' failures ' on the part of the authorities ( which some amendments attempt to conceal ) , this report fails to challenge the general financial principle of ' commercial breeding ' , the principle of the pursuit of capitalist profit .
This is precisely why , in order to avoid losing their position in the world marketplace , the authorities decided to prohibit prophylactic vaccination at European level , even if it meant resorting to mass slaughter in the event of an epidemic .
We therefore abstained from voting on this report , although we do support some of its recommendations .
Whilst the report of the committee set up by the European Parliament makes some important recommendations on how to improve the handling of any future outbreaks of foot and mouth disease , some MEPs are using the ' wisdom of hindsight ' to launch wholly unjustified attacks on the UK Government .
There is no doubt that the committee 's report underlines the scale of what was the world 's worst ever foot and mouth outbreak .
It has to be remembered that on the day the alarm was first raised the disease had already taken hold in over 50 farms in 16 different counties .
I understand the havoc it wreaked for so many individuals and communities in North Yorkshire and elsewhere .
I know they need help to recover and reassurance that , at both UK and European level , we will do everything we can to ensure that such a devastating outbreak never occurs again .
I hope that we will concentrate on the sensible and practical proposals put forward by the committee and other studies conducted into the outbreak - including the need to prevent infected meat and meat products entering the European Union .
. I have joined with my British Labour colleagues in the PSE Group in voting against this report .
As President of the European Parliament 's All Party Intergroup on the Welfare and Conservation of Animals , I naturally have a special interest in the Kreissl-Dörfler report .
I support measures to prevent a similar outbreak of foot and mouth disease , as proposed in the report .
I reject claims regarding the legality of the cull .
Whilst very regrettable , the cull was perceived at the time as the most effective measure to end the outbreak .
It is very easy to be wise in hindsight .
The approach of the UK Government with respect to the culls was approved by the European Commission .
Any report such as this requires accurate information .
As , for example , the statistics quoted appear to be contrary to official UK figures , it brings into question the wider points of the report .
For this reason , and with reservations as above , I have voted against the report .
Overall , I am happy with the text adopted .
It groups together all the players ( public authorities , agriculture sector , citizens ) and involves them early on in the debate , in particular with regard to the establishing of early warning systems .
These early warning systems , once set up by the Commission , should benefit visibly from monitoring and increased control of their operation .
Information on the risks and appropriate measures must be distributed and included .
All the Member States must also , as we are requesting , carry out regular farm inspections in order to ensure that the general rules on sanitary control and biosecurity are effectively understood and applied .
Failure to do so will incur penalties which are in proportion with the breaches observed .
Although farmers are given substantial responsibility in the measure , all too often increases in the amount of livestock for income are perceived as an essential factor in the risk of an epidemic .
International trade , however , is also a factor that should be taken into account .
I am also pleased that my fellow Members reacted favourably to my proposal seeking to prohibit the introduction of products destined for tax-free warehouses or the provisioning of ships from countries not authorised to export to the EU .
Today , this meat that could carry a risk of foot and mouth disease can be taken to these warehouses within the Union itself .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
Foot and mouth disease inflicted a heavy toll in my own East of England constituency , and I had hoped that this European Parliament report would do justice to the losses suffered by farmers , the tourist industry and our whole community .
Indeed the way the committee of inquiry conducted its work gave me such hope , that we could genuinely add to the lessons learnt , to combat and hopefully prevent any future outbreak .
However , as other Members have indicated , the final report has been subject to amendments put forward by political groups in the Parliament , which suggest breaches of law which did not take place , even deliberately misreporting the numbers of animals killed .
I had hoped this issue would be treated as more important than one subject to cheap political point-scoring .
Not so .
In these circumstances , I am recording my opposition to the final vote .
My support remains for the original recommendations which will guide our future legislation , and ensure Europe plays a constructive role in tackling foot and mouth disease for the future .
My constituents expect no less .
As a Member of the European Parliamentary Labour Party ( EPLP ) I will vote against this report .
Though the report contains some useful suggestions for the avoidance of future outbreaks of FMD , it is seriously flawed in a number of important respects .
It is factually incorrect in relation to its references to the legality of the culls , suggested breaches of animal welfare legislation , suggested breaches of environmental legislation and lapses in bio-security .
It also , for example , states that 10 million animals were killed when farmers claimed for only 6.5 million .
The report is so flawed that it cannot be supported .
I very much support those measures outlined in the report which would help prevent any further outbreak of FMD which devastated farming communities across the country and in my own region of Yorkshire and the Humber .
However , there are some aspects in the report which need clarifying .
Firstly , the culls were carried out in accordance with legal provisions and in full consultation with the European Commission .
Secondly , the number of animals slaughtered should reflect farmers ' claims for 6.5 million - not 10 million .
Thirdly , there have been no prosecutions for breaches of animal welfare legislation nor was any environmental harm identified by the Environmental Agency .
Fourthly , there was no evidence of a spread of infection from carcasses during transport or by personnel .
Given that these points were not sufficiently clarified in the vote , whilst welcoming those provisions seeking to combat any future outbreak of FMD , I decided to vote against the final vote on the report .
I very much support the measures outlined in this report to prevent a future outbreak of foot and mouth disease on the scale experienced in the United Kingdom , and the West Midlands region I represent .
Mr Kreissl-Dörfler 's report provides important guidelines should future legislation be required to tackle a new outbreak , were it to occur anywhere across the European Union .
I do , however , reject a number of the report 's observations and conclusions which are incorrect , in particular those relating to the legality of culls , suggested breaches of animal welfare legislation , suggested breaches of environmental legislation and suggested bio-security lapses .
Given that farmers have claimed for 6.5 million animals , I also reject the claim that 10 million were killed during the outbreak .
Despite the many positive aspects of the report , I will vote against in the light of the above comments .
The south east of England was one of the regions first hit by the foot and mouth outbreak in the UK .
As such , this report outlines many of the measures necessary to prevent such an outbreak occurring on the same scale in the future .
However , there were many discrepancies introduced by politically motivated amendments which distorted the report ;
In particular : suggestions of breaches of animal welfare legislation .
No prosecutions of any complaints occurred .
Lapses in bio-security .
Investigations proved no such lapses occurred .
The culls were pronounced illegal .
The courts found in favour of government action with regard to the contiguous cull .
It was deemed a measure that was necessary to stem the spread of the disease .
The European Commission was informed at all times .
Breaches of environmental legislation .
The Environment Agency looked into matter and found no environmental harm ,
In the south east of England , Labour MEPs felt that statistical error and political misinformation have combined to produce an inaccurate picture of the outbreak and the UK Government 's fight to deal with it .
. ( FR ) I am glad that the Kreissl-Dörfler report has been adopted by a large majority , including the important section devoted to the need to greatly increase controls on imported animals and animal products from vulnerable countries and their neighbours , which led to the disease that struck Europe in 2001 .
No control on imported products , however , could ever be as comprehensive , precise and rigorous as those applied by Member States and professional bodies themselves .
Controls on imports will never provide the same safety guarantees as regular controls and traceability applied to national production and localised production in Europe .
This should further encourage us to apply Community preference effectively and keep as much of our agricultural production as possible within the European Union .
Community preference , which is laid down at the heart of our Treaties , must , in future , be our favoured means of satisfying new consumer requirements in Europe in the area of food safety .
This is yet another reason to defend it vehemently to the WTO and ensure that our right to make imported products bear the cost of the controls we need to carry out on them is respected .
The Minutes of yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , item 11 of yesterday 's Minutes refers to a speech I made under Rule 121 ( a ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Apart from the fact that I would like to ask the Secretariat why there is no written summary of what I said , I would like to remind the House that I asked the Presidency to make firm representations to Belgian Railways on behalf of Parliament , calling upon them to reverse their worrying unilateral decision to withdraw night train No 299 , that legendary train that used to connect the European Parliament 's three places of work - Brussels , Luxembourg and Strasbourg - before , crossing Switzerland and arriving in Milan .
This train has been withdrawn by a unilateral decision .
Apart from the serious inconvenience this represents for the employees of the European Parliament , this makes things very difficult for the thousands of others travellers who often do that journey , particularly now with the approach of the end-of-year festivities .
Since the Presidency of Parliament , responding to a similar speech by Mrs Ghilardotti at the start of the sitting of 5 September , said that they would make representations to Belgian Railways , I would like to know what was done , following both my and my fellow Member 's requests , to obtain the response of Belgian Railways .
Is there a follow-up to this type of request ?
I would also like to know what happened to the speech I made yesterday , for I would like a written summary to be included in tomorrow 's publication .
Mr Santini , I would point out that your comments do not count as comments on the Minutes , because comments on the Minutes deal with what has been said during the sitting .
You are repeating a request , and there is another procedure in our Rules of Procedure for obtaining this information .
However , I myself can tell you - although I am stretching the Rules of Procedure - that Mrs Ghilardotti 's request was duly communicated to the Office of the President , who will communicate it to the competent Belgian authorities .
( The Minutes were approved )
Mr President , the annual budgetary procedure has passed off unusually smoothly .
It is the first time in many years that it has not , for example , been necessary for us to hold a meeting of the Committee on Budgets during this last part-session in Strasbourg in order to deal with a whole lot of sticking points .
The reason , of course , is that all the parties , no doubt partly because they all know how important it is for us to be able to demonstrate agreement prior to enlargement , have contributed to a businesslike and constructive process .
I want to extend my thanks for the fact that this has happened , especially to the Danish Presidency and the Finance Minister , Mr Pedersen , whom I hope we shall get to see in this House on Thursday .
He has helped guide the members of the Council to a very constructive settlement .
I also wish to extend my thanks to the Commission and Mrs Schreyer , to my co-rapporteurs , Mr Stenmarck and Mr Colom I Naval , and to the budget rapporteurs from the other committees who have contributed very constructively to this process .
Last but not least , I wish to thank my colleagues in the Committee on Budgets , the committee 's splendid secretariat and , especially , its splendid chairman , Mr Wynn , who has supported the work throughout .
When this process began just over a year ago , one of my objectives was to develop Parliament 's own procedures , and I think we have made some progress .
We have established a dialogue concerning objectives and guidelines at an early stage .
We have worked closely with the other specialised committees in order to get them actively involved in the budgetary process .
We have developed the new budgetary debate in September , something which it will certainly be possible to develop further next year .
These are things that have worked well .
Unfortunately , I also have to sound a critical note , not about our work on the budget but about the EU 's budgetary system .
In my opinion , the problem is the long-term budget plan and the interinstitutional agreement that set sector-by-sector budget ceilings for seven years in a row .
That is an entirely unreasonable model .
Such long-term and detailed planning is not possible in a modern budgetary system .
It is reminiscent , rather , of the Soviet Union .
Certainly , I accept budgetary discipline .
I am a keen adherent of budget ceilings , but that model is far too rigid .
As long as we are governed by it , we shall all constantly be looking for ways of escaping from the straitjacket of the financial perspective .
Since the advent of the budget plan in 1999 , we have used the flexibility mechanism each year to a greater or lesser extent .
We have also developed new , ever more creative methods of achieving flexibility .
We have an emergency reserve of which we make ever more extensive use .
We have added the new solidarity fund , which is also a flexibility instrument .
This year , we ourselves have introduced the systematic use of what is termed frontloading , whereby we try to find unutilised resources in the current year 's budget in order to bring forward expenditure for next year and in that way give ourselves room for manoeuvre .
This creativity has been of great help , but it is not especially open or transparent .
There is no sound long-term budgetary methodology .
I would therefore call upon our colleagues in the Convention really to give some thought as to how , in future treaties , we can increase Parliament 's influence over the budget as a whole and , at the same time , create in the long term a less rigid model for budget ceilings which is less hostile to development .
I am also critical of the way in which the budget has been implemented , even though we can see improvements here and there , for example when it comes to aid policy .
It is of course unreasonable that , in 2001 , we should have received back 15 % of the Member States ' contributions to the EU because we were unable to implement what we had decided in the budget .
If the pace of implementation continues to be slow , there will be a risk in future years of a situation arising in which regions that have received promises of aid and candidate countries that have been given generous promises of pre-accession aid will , quite justifiably , protest when the promises are not fulfilled .
If , however , the pace of implementation is improved and if , at a time when enlargement is making major new claims upon our resources , we are to honour the huge amount of payments that have been accumulating ahead of us , we shall instead be in danger , in future years , of encountering major problems in keeping to the budget .
In spite of these deficiencies , I think we have a lot to be satisfied with .
Allow me to mention just a few of the most important areas including , of course , enlargement .
By means of the developed frontloading model , we have been able to supply the Commission with those resources it needs , for example for the 500 new jobs required for enlargement .
I am certain that my fellow MEP , Mr Stenmarck , will talk more about this as it relates to the budgets for Parliament and the other institutions .
Enlargement has , however , also made its mark on other areas .
The major new resources in terms of information will have bearing upon enlargement .
A range of different bodies receiving aid from the EU are now investing those resources in integrating the new countries .
We are concerned here with the social dialogue , youth cooperation , the combined fight against crime etc .
We have also launched a new pilot project for cooperation between small companies and involving both the candidate countries and the countries along the EU 's new external border - Russia , the Balkan countries , North Africa etc .
I believe that , of all that we have achieved , this is the most important .
Allow me also to mention the EU 's efforts in the fight against poverty and disease in the developing countries .
Even if I personally am disappointed that we have not brought about clearer changes in agricultural policy , that being probably the most important thing we could have done in the fight against poverty , I am nonetheless pleased that we can make other sound contributions .
I know that there is some criticism of the fact that we have reduced the appropriations to food aid and humanitarian aid .
We have , however , done this partly in order to be able to bring forward aid to the famine-hit Horn of Africa , and partly in order to be able to free up resources for Afghanistan next year .
That has been done only on condition that we and the Council promise to supply the extra resources that may be required for these purposes next year .
We have also been criticised for the way in which we deal with the EU 's contribution to the Global Health Fund .
It is criticism that I consider to be unfair .
We have prevailed upon the Council to more than double the amount it proposed in its first reading , from EUR 20 million to EUR 42 million .
We have also got the Council to promise to try to produce a corresponding sum from the European Development Fund .
We have , finally , a joint promise in any case to contribute those resources that are required if the EU is to be able to retain its place in the management of the fund .
More than that I do not in actual fact think it is reasonable to demand .
Finally , we have also achieved a very constructive settlement concerning Parliament 's future role in foreign and security policy , and that is something I believe we are all satisfied with .
Ladies and gentlemen , this budget will not be an historic one because of any dramatic conflicts or major new revolutionary budget initiatives .
It will , however , be historic because it is the last budget with the old budgetary terminology .
Next year , we shall all be forced to teach ourselves activity-based budgeting .
It will also be historic because it is the last budget relating to an EU with 15 Member States .
I am , above all , very pleased that we have , with such broad political agreement , in actual fact come up with those solutions required in order to prepare for enlargement .
That , I believe , is the greatest success of this year .
Mr President , we are now at the end of a comprehensive process of producing a budget for future budgetary years , and I should like to thank everyone who has contributed to this work .
That applies , of course , to the Committee on Budgets and , especially , to its chairman , Mr Wynn , and to my Swedish co-rapporteur , Mr Färm , but it applies above all to the Committee on Budgets ' very competent secretariat .
I also wish to extend a big thank you to both the Commission and the Council for their constructive cooperation , with special thanks also going to the Danish Presidency for having actively helped the EU 's two budgetary authorities jointly to arrive at the framework for category 5 at a conciliation on 19 July of this year , something I believe to have been very important .
Throughout the current year , the EU 's administrative budget , otherwise known as category 5 , has been one of those areas that has posed genuine problems for the budget .
We began the year with significant anticipated deficits for the 2003 budget .
By various stages , these were subsequently reduced , giving us a manageable surplus and what I deem to be a wholly acceptable margin for the next budgetary year .
Within this budget , we have also managed to implement those priorities we set as early as when the guidelines were drawn up at the beginning of the year .
The obvious top priority of all at that time was enlargement .
Through the decisions subsequently made , we know that the Member States , notably through the positive decision taken at the Copenhagen Summit , are complying with their commitments regarding ten new Member States .
If the agreement is signed in March , we shall be able to have 147 observers from all these countries in place by no later than April .
The necessary decisions will have been taken and implemented by then .
What we have also been concerned with is giving each institution the opportunity to complete its preparations for enlargement .
This issue acquires further significance when we now consider the fortunate decision from Copenhagen .
Allow me to extend my thanks to all the institutions for having actively participated in this work and , especially , for the great loyalty they have all shown towards enlargement and the European project within the framework of the frontloading operation we have conducted together .
The second priority was to implement necessary reforms .
These were necessary with or without enlargement , especially for the European Parliament .
The main concern was with those key areas on which every parliament , be it national or European , must stand firm .
For the European Parliament , it was a question of strengthening the budgetary structure , meaning , in the main , not the Committee on Budgets but , rather , the other committees in the extraordinarily important budgetary work they do .
Parliament 's legislative function must also be strengthened .
In a very short time , Parliament has been given significant legislative power , meaning that the basic conditions under which Parliament operates within this area must also be strengthened .
These are key areas for the European Parliament , and it is precisely in these areas that we must stand especially firm .
The third priority is to tackle all this successfully .
It is a question of coping both with the preparations prior to enlargement and with the commitment to the necessary reforms and of doing these things within the stated budgetary framework .
We have succeeded in doing this .
It means that we are now entering a new budget year with a fairly broad margin which will hopefully amount to slightly more than EUR 20 million .
That applies on condition that Parliament approve the oral amendment which I know my fellow MEP , Mr Färm will table and to which I would in this way like to give my support .
Allow me to point out that I am conscious of the fact that the Council wishes to see a still greater margin .
I fully understand why that is so , and I promised at a conciliation to see what I could do to bring about a still greater margin .
I subsequently went through the whole budget again , and we have now got this far but , unfortunately , no farther .
Allow me to conclude by observing that this is the last budget the European Parliament will adopt before enlargement to include ten new Member States .
It has been important to implement all this in a way that means that the preparations for enlargement can be made in all the institutions .
In my judgment , this is possible .
It has also been important to make a number of decisions during the year to cope with long-term problems in category 5 .
It is my judgment that we have done this , moreover , but it is important for this work to be followed up .
Further decisions along these lines will be necessary during the forthcoming budget year .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the EU 's budget for 2003 is indeed a presentable one .
It is a shining example of how a budget can be successfully drawn up in such a way as to make the greatest possible savings whilst at the same time allocating sufficient funds to priority areas and to new tasks .
This frugal and forward-looking budget has resulted from good cooperation such as one can only dream of - with Parliament , and with the rapporteurs .
I can do no other than express my utmost appreciation to Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck .

My warm thanks , on behalf of the Commission , for this terrific cooperation go also to Mr Colom i Naval and of course to Mr Wynn , the committee 's chairman , as well as to the Committee on Budgets as a whole .
I am , naturally , also grateful to the Council .
In saying this , I want to highlight the purposeful way in which negotiations were handled , preventing us from being bogged down in any single area , or even in what might have been matters of merely secondary importance , so that , on the contrary , we always proceeded with negotiations with their ultimate purpose in mind .
The appropriations for commitments in the 2003 Budget amount to EUR 99.69 billion , which can be used in entering into new commitments on the EU 's behalf .
That adds up to an increase of only 0.26 % over against this year .
I would like to see anyone else do the same !
EUR 97.5 billion have been allocated to payments for the coming year , representing an increase of 1.9 % over the current year , and thus below the rate of inflation .
Expressed as a percentage of the EU 's gross domestic product , only 1.02 % is being spent on the EU Budget for 2003 - the lowest it has been for ten years .
The financial planning voted in 1999 provided EUR 103 billion for 2003 , that being EUR 5 billion more than the 2003 Budget has now actually required .
It is now a matter of certainty , ladies and gentlemen , that the 2003 Budget will be the last EU Budget for an EU of 15 Member States .
I would like to congratulate the Danish Presidency of the Council on the result achieved at Copenhagen , but I must also take this opportunity to thank Mr Böge , Parliament 's rapporteur on the financing of enlargement , for his support over the past year and a half .
The financial package did indeed take a long time to prepare , and , as Commissioner for the Budget , I am proud and , of course , glad that what was concluded at Copenhagen is so close to what the Commission proposed in January .
Copenhagen really has now sent out the message that it is time for all the EU 's institutions to roll their sleeves up .
Now is the time to reach all the interinstitutional agreements , so that our institutions can make these changes effectively .
Of the new posts , 236 will be allocated to the Council for the purpose of this preparation , whilst 500 will be allocated to the Commission .
On the Commission 's behalf , I want to thank the budgetary authority for this decision .
As regards where the Commission will be allocating these posts , 59 of them will be in the area of competition , 53 in agriculture , 56 in the Structural Funds , 10 in OLAF , 69 in the languages service and 60 in the Publications Office .
All of these are areas in which it is clear that the acquis must be applied from day one , and preparations must be made for this .
It has also finally been decided how much by way of funds will be allocated to the new States in the years from 2004 to 2006 ; these will amount to EUR 10 billion for agricultural policy and EUR 21 billion for structural aid .
These are large sums of money , and their implementation must of course be well prepared .
Parliament and the Council have welcomed the further policy priorities for the 2003 Budget , which are ' stability and security ' and ' sustainable and inclusive economic development ' .
These priorities are reflected in the 2003 Budget , in that the budget for DG Environment increases by 14 % , and resources are allocated specifically to enhancing the competitiveness of small and medium-sized enterprises in border regions .
The budget for DG Research and the Joint Research Centre totals EUR 3 billion for 2003 , which underlines the importance of sustainable and inclusive economic development .
The ' stability and security ' priority has to do with measures in the area of justice and home affairs - my fellow-Commissioner Mr Vitorino 's budget is increasing by 11 % - and in the area of foreign policy .
The EU Budget will , in the coming year , bear the joint costs of the Police Mission in Bosnia .
This is an important step towards a common foreign and security policy .
We are continuing to stand by our promises and by the policy commitments we have made in the Balkan region .
I believe it has to be emphasised that a large budget has been proposed , standing at over EUR 680 million in 2003 , and this is for the fourth time running .
Afghanistan can count on a high level of support from the EU , and the Global Health Fund will again receive substantial resources for its fight against Aids , tuberculosis and malaria .
In these areas , Europe is indeed the largest donor .
This year , ladies and gentlemen , we have set up the new Solidarity Fund for aid in cases of major natural catastrophes in the Member States and in the candidate countries .
In future , it will be funded to the tune of EUR 1 billion every year , and that includes 2003 .
As a whole , the balance sheet for work on budget policy in 2002 is an extremely favourable one .
A completely new Financial Regulation covers the EU 's Budget , as also the European Development Fund and the other facilities .
Today , the Commission adopted in its entirety the rules for implementing this Financial Regulation .
This means that the reform of financial management exists not only on paper ; it governs the activities of all those who work with European resources , so that the 2003 Budget will be the first to be implemented according to the new rules of the new Financial Regulation .
As I have already emphasised , the 2003 Budget is the last for an EU of 15 Member States .
We now have to adapt the Financial Perspective to the Copenhagen conclusions , in order to draw up the 2004 Budget for an EU of 25 Member States .
As early as February , we will be holding a trialogue to discuss the ongoing adaptations , and by then , it is to be hoped that there will be greater clarity about the future of Northern Cyprus .
Pre-accession aid for Bulgaria and Romania is then to be replenished , and the budget for pre-accession aid is then to include Turkey .
That is what the Copenhagen Council decided .
So it is that the budget reflects the dynamics of European development .
I look forward to cooperating on these issues for the future , being sure that we will find good solutions to them , as we found the right solutions for the budget for 2003 .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , compared with those we had to handle in previous years , the budget procedure for 2003 was indeed a very pleasant one , for which I would like to express warm thanks to both the rapporteurs , Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck .
It has thus become established practice for us to favour Scandinavian earnestness in the budget procedure , and the fact that we additionally had the Danes presiding over the Council , meant that we could find our way around many cliffs at an early stage and make the procedure very harmonious , especially at second reading stage .
I believe that to be deserving of particular mention .
In the PPE-DE Group , we are very proud of the way we were able to join with our colleagues from the other groups in putting across a multitude of our concerns , and it goes without saying that we are asking you , Commissioner , to support us accordingly .
I will say , very clearly , here and now , that there is little point in this Parliament , with the Council , laboriously drawing up a budget , only for many things of particular importance to both parts of the budgetary authority not to be reflected in daily life when the budget ends up being passed into law .
If you are talking about the budget figures for 2003 , with the minimal increase that we all greatly welcome and support , then honesty requires of us that we add that it took a large number of measures on our part in order for these slight growth rates to be made possible , as the 2002 Budget was not passed in the form in which it was drawn up .
Here I am thinking of what our technical jargon so splendidly terms frontloading measures , that is , the use of funds from 2002 to discharge commitments which will be incumbent on us only in the coming year , hence the transfer of resources allocated by way of the Solidarity Fund , from the 2002 Budget to 2003 .
Add all that together , plus the expected supplementary budget , and it all amounts to a tidy few billions .
Honesty demands that we say that .
What helps to finance next year 's low level of increase is the fact that we are transferring funds from the 2002 Budget that were used either wrongly or irregularly .
We in the PPE-DE Group would like to expressly call upon the Commission not to let up in the area of its own reform .
We look forward with eager anticipation to the reports we have been promised by Commissioner Neil Kinnock , who is responsible for these matters , which we will examine in very great depth in order , of course , to consider what further measures we can derive from them .
One thing I consider to have been a great success - something that the PPE-DE played a part in initiating , and which , thankfully , was taken up by other Members of this House - is the marked improvement on the question of cooperation between the Council and Parliament in defining foreign policy measures .
I think that the procedure we came up with here is suited to overcoming the democratic deficit that we find in the Council 's intergovernmental relations due to the national parliaments no longer being responsible and the European Parliament not yet being involved .
The dialogue procedure that we have agreed on with the Council builds a bridge leading to greater democracy in the definition of Europe 's foreign policy objectives .
I consider it a great success on our part to have succeeded in securing the promises of aid for Afghanistan for 2003 as well , but I do think - and this has been discussed here on many occasions - that it is not acceptable for Europe 's foreign ministers to keep on coming up with new things to focus on , so that the old priorities suddenly become redundant , and we have the laborious task of setting it all out in figures .
We have had a quite respectable success in combining new challenges and old commitments in a good compromise for 2003 , for which a heartfelt thank-you to all who helped to make that possible !
I do think that this is , as a whole , a respectable Budget , and I again ask the Commission to see to it that what was decided by the Council and Parliament is also implemented in 2003 .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , it is these speeches that remind us how close together we have been this year when dealing with specialised issues , as I believe that we are almost always discussing the same topics in this House , the very same ones that we are outlining now .
I cannot , of course , stay out of this either , but I want to say something now , something to which the European public might perhaps be more determined to pay attention than it has been on repeated occasions over the past few years .
Commissioner Schreyer referred to the rate of increase in the budget 's commitments , which stands at 0.26 % .
Our budget does not show the rates of increase - let alone the rates of inflation - that were provided for in Berlin .
We are well below them .
In Berlin , the precaution was taken of creating a margin in order to make enlargement possible and easier .
With a 0.26 % increase , our present budgetary conduct brings us another step closer to that .
Take a look at payments , and the figure of 1.9 % does not , at first sight , appear to be very much .
It is substantially less than what would be needed to reduce the debts that are still outstanding .
Despite that , 1.9 % is more than what is currently available to many national Finance Ministers to draw up their own budgets .
Nonetheless , we stick with this 1.9 % , because it is important .
We have to consider this budget , and what it covers , as a whole .
We have a budget of less than EUR 100 billion !
That is 25 % less than what the fifteen States of the European Union spend on defence .
What we get for 25 % less - in other words , for EUR 100 billion - is cooperation across Europe on environmental matters , in the field of research and development , and on cohesion , so that we do not leave the more vulnerable in the lurch .
Agriculture is wholly europeanised , and preparations are being made for youth exchange activities .
We are preparing for enlargement , we have a common foreign and security policy , and we collaborate on justice and home affairs .
I believe that it has to be said loud and clear that we spend substantially less on all of these things , so as to give Europe a viable and peaceful future , than is spent at national level in the area of defence policy alone .
Even though we have this tight budget and even though we have to take on new things with every passing year - as has already been said , there are new tasks in category IV almost every year - we nevertheless manage to set priorities that advance the economic development of the continent of Europe .
Not only do we maintain and sustain a continent full of large corporations , but also the small and medium-sized enterprises on this European continent can make use of the opportunities offered by a shared internal market .
They do not have their own departments to deal with tax or legal matters ; what they need , in order to make the best use of this European internal market , with all its advantages , is help , and that is what we give .
We respond to the ageing of society in the European Union .
Our own financial planning still needs to take this more into account .
I have already made repeated reference to pensions , but we want in future to respond to the ageing of European society as a whole .
One very major priority has been and still is category IV .
I read a newspaper report today , which stated that the European Parliament did not regard the fight against Aids as important .
Let me point out now that Parliament has quadrupled the sum of money originally proposed to be allocated for this purpose .
Anyone who claims that we do not attach enough importance to this has no idea what he is talking about .
I would like again to emphatically underline the great progress that this year 's budget procedure has enabled us to make .
I can follow on seamlessly from where Mr Ferber left off .
There are parliamentary gaps that we need to close in this area , gaps that have to do with the monitoring of policies that are being moved from the national to the European level , and we are finding out where they are .
We have managed to achieve a joint declaration with the Council , which makes considerable progress precisely in the area of security and defence policy , making it clear to the public that the European Parliament has no room for manoeuvre on European policies at European level .
These are matters that will have to be resolved in the Convention , that really need to be organised elsewhere .
Even so , we have already tackled them .
Mrs Schreyer , you have already acted as if all of this were already in the bag .
We will of course scrutinise the Copenhagen conclusions , but what is in any case clear is that this is not just an issue to be resolved in Copenhagen by the Council , but one that we should be discussing among ourselves in this House .
Although our attitude is very positive , your dogmatic ' and so it was decided ' is something I cannot leave unchallenged .
That can only be said when discussions have gone well and been concluded .
I wish to thank all of my fellow Members of this House , especially the two rapporteurs and the President , who has been patient enough to allow me an extra thirty seconds .
Mr President , Commissioner , firstly , I should like to congratulate the rapporteurs for the budget , Göran Färm and Per Stenmarck , for their excellent work , as well as Terence Wynn , Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , for his leadership on that committee .
I also want to thank Denmark 's chairmen in the Council for their cooperation , which was excellent , and Commissioner Michaele Schreyer for her excellent input .
Next year 's European Union budget is a disciplined budget .
The increase in expenditure is below inflation , at just 1.9 % .
This represents an outstanding gesture of support by the European Parliament to help Member States balance their national budgets .
It also demonstrates responsibility on the part of the EU , while Member States try to meet the requirements of its Stability and Growth Pact .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party supports this aim , although it partly undermines the EU 's long-term attempt to balance its economy , as the EU 's biggest budget worry this time is outstanding commitments .
At present these stand at EUR 103 billion , which is to say , more than the entire budget for one year .
There has been an increase in arrears of EUR 17 billion since the start of the year , with no limit to this in sight .
The situation is at its most wretched in the area of structural operations , where outstanding commitments have grown over the year by EUR 13 billion .
The most difficult situation , relatively speaking , however , is in the area of pre-accession aid , where EUR 8.5 billion in outstanding commitments has accrued in three years , with just under EUR 2 billion being paid out in actual aid .
What is most vexing is that there would have been funds available for payment in respect of these commitments , but they were not used .
Consequently , the situation betrays administrative inefficiency , with the Commission and the Member States as the guilty parties .
That is why Commission reform is extremely important .
At the moment the Commission is very conservative and shirks its responsibilities .
We should also simplify legal instruments and procedures , as was agreed in conciliation with the Council in the summer .
Enlargement is the hallmark of next year 's budget .
This budget is the last to be drafted for an EU consisting of 15 Member States .
Parliament safeguarded the posts needed in the Commission for enlargement by amassing resources partly out of this year 's budget .
In this way we were able to meet next year 's expenditure in advance and fit administrative expenditure into the tight framework in place for heading 5 .
My group supports this .
Otherwise , we could say of the budget 's content that the EU 's functions are adequately financed .
Agricultural expenditure is under control , so there is no need for significant reforms for budgetary reasons .
External actions were able to be partly financed in advance out of this year 's budget , and there was no need to look again at Parliament 's priorities .
In addition to other actions , we were able to improve the financing of the Northern Dimension a little , which has to be considered a good thing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start , if I may , by congratulating this year 's two rapporteurs , Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck , on their excellent work .
The 2003 budget has not been a simple budget , nor has it been easy in political terms .
Indeed , it is a budget in which there is tension between demands which absolutely have to be met now , such as the financing of the administrative expenditure to prepare for enlargement , and political priorities such as support for Afghanistan .
There is tension between commitments which must be made good , such as the funding of the restructuring of the Portuguese and Spanish fleets - on which , at last , we appear to have reached agreement - and new urgent measures , such as the need to fund the European Union 's participation in the Global Health Fund .
It is a budget which , in my view , suffers throughout from the failure to revise the Financial Perspective established in 1999 at Berlin : a Financial Perspective which I believe is now inadequate and can only become politically more unacceptable in the coming years .
Nor can the - albeit significant - results achieved in conciliation in November lead to any lasting change in the situation .
For example , the joint declaration whereby the Council undertakes to consult Parliament before taking any decision which might involve financial commitments in the field of common foreign and security policy is , over and above any possible objections , an important milestone , a further step towards the full involvement of the European Parliament in a strategic sector , towards the development of a more powerful , more secure Union .
That , however , does not change the fact that the Heading 4 ceiling is still too low , not to say stiflingly low .
What will we do when the Council asks us to authorise it to make a financial commitment because of new international political developments ?
Will we refuse to give it the authorisation on the grounds that there are not enough funds or will we accept the challenge and undertake to find the money , somehow , somewhere ?
Now , for example , we have to find funds for the problems in Galicia .
What would we have done , for example , in the case of Afghanistan ?
What would we have done in the case of the Balkans ?
Not to mention Heading 3 . Indeed , the European Union 's commitments increase every year in the field of internal policy too .
With every passing year , there are new , costly multiannual programmes of huge political import which , as such , must be processed and adhered to .
What , however , will we do when there is no longer a margin for any political initiative that Parliament might want to set in motion ?
What will we do when the distinction between compulsory expenditure and non-compulsory expenditure is reduced to a distinction between expenditure on which Parliament does not have the ultimate say and expenditure which Parliament cannot alter for fear that the European institutions will lose face ?
And that is just to mention two headings .
I therefore call upon all the Members to make representations to their delegations and to their governments to ensure that the situation is avoided where , subsequently , when all is said and done , everything we have planned for in this budget , in this conciliation , is frustrated because of lack of resources , and to ensure that it becomes the joint objective of each one of us , irrespective of our political affiliation .
Mr President , I too , like Mr van Dam , would like to focus on a specific budget line , not least because , as a member of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , I have been able to follow the matter closely .
The line in question is line B7-6310 : ' North-South cooperation schemes in the campaign against drug abuse ' .
First the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , then the Committee on Budgets and , finally , the plenary , by a unanimous vote , decided to block the new appropriations and place the payment appropriations in the reserve because , in Parliament 's opinion , this budget line did not have a legal basis .
It did not have a legal basis because the Commission should have presented to Parliament an evaluation of the measures financed by the Community under this line as far back as October 2000 and proposed a new regulation .
Instead , for at least two financial years , this line has been financed with no legal basis .
Immediately after the vote in plenary , the Commission told the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets that , in effect , this line did not have a legal basis , which was the opposite of what the Commissioner had repeatedly stated in response to Parliamentary questions , to the effect that it was a line financed according to a quite precise legal basis and that the fact that the evaluation had not taken place did not mean that it could not continue to be financed .
We were then told that there had actually been an evaluation .
This evaluation , which ought to have concerned the Regulation of 21 October 1997 and would have been submitted to Parliament in July 2002 , certainly never reached the Secretariat of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights .
I succeeded , with some difficulty , in unearthing it .
It is a final report of 9 May 2002 , which , if we had had the time , the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights could indeed have assessed , possibly avoiding this situation , avoiding what is happening now with the new budget , which has led the Commission , Parliament and the Council jointly to release the appropriations in reserve now that there does appear to be an evaluation .
Apart from the cover and the title , this is an evaluation which focuses principally on the 1990s and concerns North-South cooperation in the fight against drugs and drug abuse , which is only partly related to the Regulation published on 21 October 1997 .
What is more , the evaluation concentrates on all the measures undertaken in the previous years while still failing to state clearly what happened with this Regulation during those three years .
The evaluation clearly reveals that , in the past three years , the majority of the measures have been undertaken together with and through the United Nations agency , under the direction of Mr Arlacchi .
We have been calling for years for this Commission to investigate the actions which the United Nations itself had recognised as not transparent and , furthermore , as running counter to the financial regulation .
President Prodi himself had taken upon himself the responsibility of ascertaining what the United Nations recognised .
None of this happened , and now we are blithely refinancing this budget line when we have financed it every year for years , without a legal basis , for dubious operations of which , even now , the Commission is unable or unwilling to provide a proper evaluation .
Mr President , like other speakers this afternoon , I welcome the successful conclusion of this budget process .
It is certainly one of the most peaceful that I have known and my congratulations on the excellent work done by our two rapporteurs .
There are in any budget process successes and failures .
We in our political group , as Mr Ferber has indicated , feel we have had more successes than failures in this budget process .
Three issues stand out , and I would like to mention them .
The first refers to the improvement of the quality of budget execution .
We insisted from the beginning that we should pick up on the Commission , Council and Parliament declaration of December 2000 , specifically looking to reduce outstanding commitments to a normal level by December 2003 .
To that effect , we suggested the appropriations for staff should be put in the reserve .
As a result , we are now promised a document for the PDB 2004 setting out how we are going to eliminate abnormal outstanding commitments by the end of 2003 .
I think that we have some way to go , but this is a step in the right direction .
Secondly , so far as appropriate involvement of Parliament in CFSP measures is concerned , what concerned us most was to how to get Parliament fully involved in consultation and information on how the monies will be spent by the Council .
For that purpose , we withheld money in the reserve at first reading , so that we could have a proper negotiation with the Council on second reading .
And now we have a joint declaration in accordance with the Interinstitutional Agreement , setting up for the first time a way in which Parliament will be fully involved in consultation and information , including in political dialogue on the CFSP .
We also have put funds into the budget so that the Commission can come forward with a study establishing CFSP priorities over the next five years .
I very much hope that this study will be completed .
Last and not least is the question of successful implementation of the Commission reforms .
For my group , this is an essential point .
We therefore suggested that we should have some overall view of this and , for that purpose , on first reading , we put 500 staff into the reserve - the additional posts requested .
Lo and behold , as a result of this , we now have a comprehensive report which I was just discussing with my colleagues - including Commissioner Kinnock this morning - observing that progress has indeed been made .
But we would like it more widely known that progress has been made , but there are other methods under discussion in the Council at the moment and decisions to be taken before we face the electorate again in June 2004 .
Therefore , I think that on these three items , the 2003 budget has been a success .
We had a strategy and we had some muscle enabling us to achieve that , by withholding monies or posts so that action could be taken .
We must be vigilant over the next few months and ensure that progress continues to be made on these three items because none of them has been fully resolved in this 2003 budget .
But it is thanks to Parliament 's powers and the determination of our political group to use them that we have made progress on those three items so far .
I end with a word of warning : current proposals in the European Convention seem to be aiming to restrict Parliament 's power in the budgetary procedure - we should make sure that this does not happen .
Mr President , since we are congratulating ourselves - everyone has made very complimentary speeches about the role of the Committee on Budgets - I am reminded of a story once told to me by Vice-President Schmid .
A former chairman of the Committee on Budgets and a former general rapporteur went on a skiing holiday .
Whilst they were out skiing they had an accident : they fell down a deep ravine .
They were stuck and could not get out .
Twenty-four hours later , people realised they were missing and they sent out a search party .
When the search party reached the ravine , it looked down and saw these two figures .
They shouted down : ' Are you from the Budgets Committee ? '
They replied : ' Yes , we are ! '
They shouted back : ' We are from the Red Cross . '
The reply came : ' We have no money ' .
That is the image that most people have of the Committee on Budgets .
However , with this budget we have been extremely kind to virtually everybody who has come along .
Anyone who has been involved in this procedure knows about the faxes , e-mails , telephone calls and the knocks on the door as attempts are made to lobby for anything that can be gained from this budget .
However , on this occasion the rapporteurs have worked extremely well to ensure that the priorities of the committees , the different political groups and those with outside interests who have lobbied effectively are taken on board .
We have a budget which reflects considerable good will on the part of this Parliament .
In fact , there is so much good will that , as I said in committee , we have too much money in the budget , especially in some areas in category 4 where the money will not be spent .
However , it is there , and it has been achieved through the good work of the rapporteurs and the committee and through our joint efforts with the Council and the Commission .
It must be said that there have been a good deal of firsts in this budgetary process , not least because of the attitude of the Danish Presidency .
We have all congratulated them , and they have worked exceptionally hard to ensure that we finally have a budget of which we can all be proud .
There is normally considerable lobbying at this final stage , but not on this occasion .
The very few instances of lobbying we have encountered concern one or two lines relating to category 4 .
Our negotiations in the conciliation with the Council and the Commission have actually proved fruitful .
In category 4 , every single amendment requested by the committees has been delivered , except on those lines concerned with ECHO - we are convinced that the money can be found - and the Global Health Fund .
We do not have the EUR 80 million that was requested , but we have EUR 42 million from the general budget and a guarantee that the European Union will have a seat on the board of the Global Health Fund .
From that point of view , it is quite good .
However , the one message that needs to be conveyed , amidst all these congratulations , is how the money will be utilised throughout next year , because our weakness in this Parliament is that we do not monitor how the money is being spent .
Mr Ferber urged the Commission and the Council to ensure that the money is well spent .
It is our job as well , and the committees in this Parliament have to ensure that they are monitoring month in and month out .
The last thing we want is a 15 % return to the Member States at the end of the day , which is what happened this year when we gave back EUR 15 billion .
The Member States are happy about that , but it is not good budgetary practice .
( Applause )
Mr President , I too want to join in the delight that has been expressed today in many quarters concerning the constructive way in which the budgetary negotiations have proceeded .
To outsiders , the effusive way in which we are praising each other may appear odd , but the mutual trust , openness and integrity that has characterised the budgetary negotiations this year inspires confidence that shortening and simplifying the budgetary process along the lines being worked on in the Convention is something that can be done easily and that we can continue the work on ensuring that the budget appears as a political document with clear political priorities .
This process will in any case be clearer by next year when we change over to activity-based budgeting and so hopefully remove something of the mystique surrounding the language used in the budget .
It will be easier for all of us to see the economic and political priorities in the budget .
Good results were achieved in this year 's budget , and I want firstly to point out that , for 2003 , we found the money to prepare for enlargement to include ten countries in 2004 .
Without exceeding the agreed financial framework , EU legislation must be translated into the languages of the new Member States , and staff from the new countries must be appointed .
I think that Parliament has made its contribution to that process .
Secondly , we found the money for rebuilding Afghanistan and , thirdly , we were given clear pledges by the Council of better cooperation and scrutiny when it came to the funding of the common foreign and security policy .
It is important , indeed it is in everyone 's interest , that there should be no recesses of the budget outside parliamentary control .
Mr President , as I have already had occasion to point out , the exercises in financial engineering that the current budgetary process has required have once again demonstrated the precariousness of the Community financial framework and , consequently , the need for it to be revised and adapted .
It is well known that the financial framework decided on in Berlin is clearly inadequate for dealing with the costs of enlargement , the increased requirements of economic and social cohesion and , at the same time , for responding to the new priorities arising in the meantime , particularly for internal and external policies .
Revising the financial perspectives would therefore be the most appropriate course of action .
Or , in the absence of such a revision , the legitimate and full use of all the budgetary prerogatives granted to the European Parliament under the Treaties could have constituted a lesser evil , thereby avoiding the games involving redistribution and cuts to which we have become accustomed , often at the expense of previously set priorities and objectives .
I am thinking , in particular , about one area that has suffered more than most : cooperation and development policy .
In fact , under the current framework and in light of the new priorities that have arisen in the meantime - Kosovo , Afghanistan , as well as Palestine and the pre-accession funds for Turkey or even the Global Health Fund - compressing appropriations intended for the poorest countries has become an inevitability .
This compression of funds is now being extended to food aid , to cooperation with Latin America , the Balkans and to the MEDA Programme .
Nevertheless , as a result of all the advances , transfers , reserves and non-execution , not even the budgetary decisions adopted have been implemented . This is the case now of the EUR 55 million intended specifically for Afghanistan .
We are also seeing an attempt to include the funding of the Global Health Fund within the European Development Fund without even consulting the target countries of the EDF and to their detriment .
All of this is happening because the principle of sufficiency of means , according to which new priorities should be given new financial means , is not being observed .
A revision of the upper ceiling for the financial perspectives was clearly needed under category 4 , which concerns external policies .
The issue becomes even more clear and urgent , however , if we consider the fact that the volume of payment expenditure being proposed for adoption represents an increase in 2003 of only 1.9 % , in other words , lower than the expected level of inflation , which will lead to a real reduction in the payments budget .
As a matter of fact , this budget for 2003 will become , in relative terms , and in terms of the criteria of the Stability Pact , the lowest in the last decade , representing only 1.02 % or less of Community GDP .
It makes no sense to seek to achieve more and more Europe and at the same time , wish to adopt an increasingly low budget .
Having said this , I should like to add a positive note , with regard to East Timor .
I welcome the results that have been achieved , both by maintaining a specific budget line , something for which I have always fought , and by increasing this line by EUR 6 million more than the Council proposal .
This sends a positive political sign to a country and a population that gained independence only recently and which are still experiencing considerable difficulties and this brings together , as a matter of fact , the various decisions that we have adopted on this matter .
I wish lastly , to say a couple of words about Palestine : given the tragic situation currently facing that country , we must respond to the situation next year by establishing a line and sufficient appropriations , specifically to recuperate the investments that the European Union has made there .
Mr President , Commissioner , we are not satisfied with the budget as it concerns agriculture .
Our proposals were not taken on board , although the Council made us a few small concessions , but our essential demand for a new institutional agreement in order to be able to transfer surplus funds from the first pillar to the second , has not been met , the belief being that things simply cannot be done that way .
We now note with astonishment that the exact opposite happened in Copenhagen , in that funds were , with a stroke of the pen , transferred from rural development in the second pillar in order to make room for funds to be disbursed as direct payments .
I have to say that I find this scandalous .
We in Parliament drafted a resolution expressing our opposition to direct payments and to their being transferred to the new Member States of the EU , and also stating that we take it as read that payments as a whole will not be affected , but that this is being done by way of support for rural development , that is , in the second pillar .
That has not been complied with .
The Brussels conclusions imposed a financial cap that does not exhaust the possibilities offered by Berlin .
No cap was imposed on the financing of the second development , and we had hoped that this would mean that reform could include Parliament within the second pillar , enabling it to participate in these areas and enabling progress to be made with the second pillar .
But if a Council decision takes the funds , agreement to which had been reached in this House by a great deal of effort , and transfers them back to a development that we do not want , that , Commissioner , is not in accordance with Parliament 's intentions .
I therefore take the view that this cannot be approved in this way , that we will have to deal with it in the negotiations on the next Budget , and that we very definitely expect the European Convention to make codecision applicable in matters of agricultural policy both as regards its substance and also what are termed the mandatory funds .
Rather than , in the long term , putting up with the Council shifting things hither and thither as it pleases , we want to be able to vote on the budget and decide these matters for ourselves .
Mr President , I would like to congratulate the rapporteurs for their work on the EU budget for 2003 which now stands at almost EUR 100 billion .
Nearly EUR 44.8 billion is due to be allocated to the common agricultural policy next year and I very much welcome the support that the European Union is giving to agriculture in general .
It is recognition by all the key EU institutions of the political importance of assisting farmers , their families and the rural communities in which they live .
We must continue to invest in ensuring that we have an economically viable European agricultural system .
That is why I am particularly satisfied that in the context of broader EU budgetary policies , the EU leaders are making provision to safeguard the viability of the common agricultural policy now and into the future .
I am also encouraged by the spin on regional funds in Europe which will amount to EUR 33.98 billion and I am particularly pleased that this is going to be spent in areas like my own region , Connacht / Ulster in Ireland .
These funds will alleviate the obvious infrastructural deficit that occurs in regions like mine and indeed in other regions that are lagging behind in Europe .
Mr President , representatives of the Council , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Wynn 's joke would have been much better if instead of members of the Committee on Budgets we had been Finance Ministers .
Apart from that , you have made us all laugh just the same .
We are pleased today because the Färm and Stenmarck reports have brought consensus to this House .
They have also brought consensus to our relations with the Council and have responded as far as possible to the Commission 's fair demands .
In summary , we believe that the Nordic dimension has been very beneficial to the interests of the European Union and therefore today we are debating the draft budget for 2003 in a situation which those of us with long budgetary experience could describe as exceptionally calm .
The almost EUR 100 000 million we are going to approve is of little quantitative significance in terms of the Union 's economy , but its relative importance is very great because , let us not forget , what both politicians and citizens understand by Europe is there , in those scant EUR 100 000 million .
The final consensus , however , for which we have so much to thank the Danish Presidency , which was so willing to hold discussions , does not hide the fact that there are still thorns in the sides of Parliament .
I will comment on a couple of them : firstly - and other speakers have said this - the real budgetary power of this House is diminishing all the time .
When we are not talking about obligatory expenditure , we are talking about multi-annual programmes or privileged expenditure or amending budgets .
The percentage of the Community budget not subject to the direct control and decisions of this Parliament increases every year .
Within the proposals my group is making to the Convention , those dealing with changing this situation stand out .
A representative Parliament must decide on all expenditure .
Codecision must be generalised , without thereby jeopardising agricultural and structural spending which must be guaranteed .
Above all , I believe it is a political mistake to translate the way in which budgetary austerity is carried out in the Member States to the Union 's budget , and there are two reasons for this : firstly , because budgetary restrictions are being applied to a Community budget which by its very nature does not have the capacity for indebtedness .
It is understandable that a national government which wants to , or which must , comply with the Stability Pact has to act on its public deficit and , if possible , achieve zero deficit , but to apply these annual rates of budgetary growth of less than 2 % per annum to the Union 's budget leads to an increasing insufficiency in Community resources .
It is expected that the Union will do increasing numbers of things with fewer resources .
And not only is this miracle not eternal , but furthermore it is not sustainable .
Secondly , how would the Council explain these increasing budget balances being returned to the Member States with a rate of use of own resources now practically of 1 % rather than the theoretical 1.27 % ?
The answer remains in the air .
There are Member States which use , as a variable for their national budgetary adjustments , structural funds which they do not commit and do not implement .
I ask myself whether this is the right way to administrate the European Union , whether this Parliament should agree with this way of acting .
Let us hope that the Convention helps us to resolve this problem which we are all facing .
Mr President , I too would like to congratulate both rapporteurs , who have attained good results .
I would particularly like to thank Mr Stenmarck for his cooperation in working with me on the other institutions ' budgets and , crucially , the implementation of the front-loading exercise .
This means that those budgets which at the outset were EUR 66 million over the ceiling , are now within an acceptable margin .
This should help us in the 2004 budget as well .
The start of 2003 was a difficult budgetary year .
Not only did we have major preparations in the institutions for the forthcoming enlargement , but the strains of working within a rigid framework agreed in Berlin were all too apparent , especially in category 4 .
I agree with what Mr Färm said earlier about the straightjacket system within which we have to work .
It has been a real juggling act for both rapporteurs , especially on our main budget .
I have observed over the last three years a year-on-year crisis situation .
Whilst the EU 's obligations and global needs are growing , the finances are not .
One of the fundamental problems for Parliament is the lack of influence on the whole of the EU 's budget , particularly category 1 .
While we , as parliamentarians , are committed to budgetary rigour , our inability to influence 50 % of the EU budget is frustrating because we cannot fully translate political priorities into budgetary ones .

Therefore , I would like to congratulate both Mr Stenmarck and Mr Färm , particularly Mr Färm , for achieving what he has done in delivering on most of Parliament 's priorities .
The reality of enlargement is upon us .
However , until we have the outcome of the Convention and the full extent of the new role of the institution is established , it will be difficult to put direct plans into place .
Although we have begun preparations in this budget and some minor adaptations have already taken place in this House , the reality of enlargement has not fully sunk in within the institutions .
We have not properly begun to address the full implications of enlargement .
Let us just look at the three places of work .
Concerning Strasbourg , there are likely to be something like 100 new MEPs plus their assistants as well as their Council counterparts and additional Commission staff from the new members of the European Union .
In practical terms , that means that there are likely to be 2 000 to 3 000 more people around once a month in this city .
Even now the hotels are struggling to cope .
I know we are known as a travelling circus but , come May 2004 , we may literally have to camp out in our tents because there will not be enough hotel rooms as a result of the enlarged Parliament .
Combined with this the transport links - especially the air links - are far from satisfactory for current Members .
Therefore it is absolutely essential that the Convention grasps the nettle and looks seriously at the three places of work .
How can these be reduced ?
It is important that the Council and the Convention recognise that they have to take this political decision .
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , it gives me great pleasure to say that the budget for 2003 has gone wonderfully well .
It was a privilege to be in on the mid-term and end-of-year conciliation meetings where there was constructive and sensible debate and deals were done .
I would like to praise Commissioner Kinnock for his reforms at the Commission , although there has been one blind spot .
I am delighted to see Mrs Schreyer here today , who hopefully is going to talk about accounting control .
During the passage of this budget we in the Conservatives and the European People 's Party tried to indicate that we needed better and tighter accounting control .
If we did not get that , we would not release certain amounts of money and allow certain staffing levels .
This is absolutely vital .
It is a great pity that the Committee on Budgets takes one forward look at the budget , but then encounters budgetary control implications , and there is a bit of a gap between the two .
There needs to be a seamless thread , and I am delighted that Mrs Schreyer is here to address that issue today .
Looking ahead , it is vital that we have the common agricultural policy reform carried out to programme and not delayed , because this is so vital to enlargement and the sensible payment of reasonable subsidies - I say reasonable and stress that word - to the accession countries .
I praise the fact that we get good value from the European Union budget .
We have brought down the percentage of gross domestic product spent on the budget successfully , so that it is now just over 1 % at 1.02 % .
I praise everyone involved , particularly the rapporteurs , on a very successful budget outcome .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I too would like to thank the general rapporteurs , Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck , for their astute handling of the matter and achievement of a compromise which has allowed us to reach our goal with a result which Parliament finds satisfactory , on the whole .
As many of you are aware , I have expressed some concern at a number of decisions , particularly the cut in payment appropriations for category 2 of the Structural Funds .
However , although I do not view the compromise reached with enthusiasm , I do understand how it has come about , given the enormous pressure from the Member States to reduce the amount of payments which , I regret to say , are increasing at a slower rate than inflation .
I do not want to focus on the content of the budget but to talk about something else .
This is a transitional budget : as Mr Walter said , it shows us the tough reality of figures which are , once again , a reflection of the miserly rigidity of the States .
One would have to be blind not to see that we have entered a new phase in European history . Copenhagen is a historic milestone .
Those who have believed in enlargement have had to have genuine visionary powers , the visionary powers of Spinelli , Monnet and Schumann before us .
Is it really impossible to be visionaries once again when it comes to the budget too ?
We cannot build a European power with miserly States .
Will there come a day when the Financial Perspective will be established on the basis of a burst of generosity , from the Netherlands for example , with the Solidarity Fund entirely financed by Luxembourg for instance , with the Committee on Budgetary Control urging us to spend more rather than less , with the Member States calculating not what comes in and what goes out of their pockets but what Europe genuinely needs to meet the needs of its citizens ?
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , alongside enlargement and foreign policy , agriculture and structural policy are the essential priorities for the budget .
That is only right and proper , as the European Budget was originally agricultural in character .
That has to be borne in mind when considering large areas of the Council 's policy .
There is something dubious about constantly burdening the European Budget with new Community tasks without stating where the money for these tasks is to come from .
As I understand these things , it certainly is not going to be from the agriculture budget !
I do not see that it has to be our function to keep national budgets sound by dividing up the work in this way .
To that extent , it follows that the amendments taken up by the Council from Parliament 's first reading are double-edged .
On the one hand , I am glad that the Council has withdrawn 25 % of the across-the-board cuts in the lines under heading 1A .
On the other , this means , when compared with the draft budget , that we are giving out EUR 200 million , even though the estimated upper limit has a margin of EUR 2.6 billion .
This money is not being used where it is needed - as aid that actually generates income .
Money has been taken away even from the strengthening of the second pillar that has been called for on all sides .
I am on record as favouring the support and development of rural areas , if it gives the people there a long-term home and the money is not wasted on local status symbols or allowed to drain away into national projects with ideological trimmings .
As regards the Commission 's letter of amendment , I welcome the fact that the Commission has adopted some of Parliament 's proposals from the first reading and , in particular that it is not making further cuts to export refunds .
It is important for me to again emphasise , in conclusion , that the agriculture budget faces attack on two fronts .
On one , the Council is attempting to use the agriculture sector to finance ever more new expenditure , and on the other , redeployment of funds to a second pillar yet to be defined means that farmers are losing out on payments from the first pillar that generate income .
Both of these things I regard as unfair and would like to take this opportunity to make this abundantly clear .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , even though the foreign policy of nation states is , by tradition , a matter for the executive , money for certain foreign-policy activities has to be authorised by their parliaments .
The right of control over the budget is the traditional means whereby a national parliament exercises parliamentary control over foreign policy , and so we are very glad that this budget enables us to take a further step on the road towards parliamentary control of the common foreign and security policy .
An agreement is in place with the Council , which has given an assurance that , prior to future decisions - in particular on joint actions - Parliament , the Committee on Foreign Affairs and the Committee on Budgets will be notified at a point in time at which they can still exert some influence on the measure as a whole .
We now appeal to the Convention to enshrine this accordingly in the nascent European constitution and to beef it up .
Nobody wants to put a question mark against the Member States ' right to reach autonomous decisions on foreign policy matters , but if Parliament is expected to make funds available , then it has to be given advance notice .
We have seen many examples over the past few years of foreign policy undertakings being given and our budget procedure having to be used to find the money for them by cuts being made somewhere in the budget .
As our colleague Mr Bourlanges once put it : ' The reconstruction of the former Yugoslavia , and of the Balkans , was paid for by Africa , as that is where we had to make cuts to make it possible . '
This agreement with the Council is an important step towards this no longer being the case in future , and towards foreign policy competence bearing some relation to the budget procedure , and we encourage the Convention to take this into account in the work it is doing .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as rapporteur for the Committee on Industry , External Trade , Research and Energy , I see a need for discussion of four areas that are of great importance to us .
The first is external trade .
The next round of WTO talks is imminent .
I believe that the trend towards moving from the promotion of products to the promotion of quality is one that is especially important and will be of very great significance for Europe .
Secondly , the WTO is in urgent need of a parliamentary assembly to accompany it .
We can observe how pressure on the part of NGOs is constantly increasing , and how a political debate on globalisation issues is becoming ever more important .
Thirdly , we in this House must ourselves step up our efforts in order to meet the challenges involved in preparing the WTO to face the future .
At the end of the day , this issue will decisively affect some 20 % of jobs in the European Union .
On the subject of industry , I want to record the fact that support for border regions has been very successful , especially that given to small and medium-sized enterprises .
The B5-510 budget line would also be very well suited to increasing the budget for the ' Arge 28 ' working community of chambers of commerce .
I think it very sensible that discussions have touched on this .
A further factor is that consideration is given , in the fourth multiannual programme , to the various modes of financing Basle II .
I believe these programmes to be of great importance for the future .
In particular , we want to start up a preparatory operation for next year , in order to give particular help in this area to small and medium-sized enterprises in meeting the requirements of Basle II .
Turning to research and development , the earmarking for SMEs is especially laudable , and I believe that the EUR 3 billion to be spent in the coming year can also give an impetus to improved economic development .
My fourth and final point has to do with intelligent energy .
Here too , I believe , we have taken a step in the right direction as regards the supply , safety and efficiency of energy , with especial consideration for small and medium-sized enterprises .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I want just to deal briefly with a number of the questions that have been raised , starting , of course , with the management of the budget .
I would like to mention here that we have again come to a very good arrangement in this budget procedure on the very issue of pilot projects and preparatory measures , namely that a vote can be held beforehand on approaches to implementation , so that what the budgetary authority has decided in the budget procedure is also speedily implemented by the Commission .
Mrs Buitenweg asked about the complement of posts for the environmental area , with reference to , among other things , the tasks that enlargement makes necessary , as environmental legislation must - quite rightly - also be implemented from day one , unless transitional arrangements are in place , but transitional arrangements , too , have to be observed .
After you have finished voting on the 2003 Budget on Thursday , the enlargement DG will be given an additional 18 posts for preparation for enlargement , and more when the budget is implemented , with the result that , in the course of 2003 , the environment DG will have 33 additional posts at its disposal .
I would like to pick up on what Mr Walter said in his intervention with reference to the adjustment of the Financial Perspective in the course of enlargement .
I really can unreservedly assure you , Mr Walter , that the Commission has been quite specific in emphasising that the adjustment of the Financial Perspective is not something that has been , so to speak , decided in advance ; rather , it is to be decided jointly by Parliament and the Council on the basis of the Commission 's proposal .
I take the same view as you here : the maximum amounts were decided on in Copenhagen , but decisions on what we might call precise adjustments will have to be a joint effort .
I would be very glad if we could succeed in laying down the timetable in the way the Greek Presidency is contemplating , so that we can indeed have the essential discussions on these matters as part of the first trialogue .
Mr Graefe zu Baringdorf , who is no longer in the Chamber , raised the subject of Parliament 's decisions on expenditure in the area of agricultural policy .
The Commission entirely shares the view that , in future , this distinction between compulsory and non-compulsory expenditure should be removed and the consequent differences in Parliament 's rights eliminated , so that the European Parliament becomes fully competent in budget matters .
It is my belief that this particular budget procedure has again shown that the European Budget cannot but stand to gain by this .
The debate is closed .
The vote will be taken on Thursday , at 11.30 a.m.
( The sitting was suspended at 4.55 p.m. and resumed at 5 p.m. )

The next item is the Commission communications on the future of pension systems and the modernisation of accounting .
Mr President , today , the Commission has adopted a comprehensive analysis of the Member States ' strategies for ensuring adequate and sustainable pensions .
This report is the fruit of a new form of cooperation between the Member States , given the consensus that pension systems should remain a responsibility of the Member States , and so the role of the European Union will be limited to supporting the Member States in their reform efforts .
This is , of course , without prejudice to the Community policies in a number of areas which have an impact on national policy-makers , including internal market policy and the sustainability of public finances , which is examined in the framework of the broad economic policy guidelines .
Moreover , the financial sustainability of pensions depends very much on the success of the European employment strategy .
I am very pleased that the European Parliament supports this approach , even though we have yet to find a satisfactory way of involving Parliament more in the open method of coordination .
The agreement on applying the open method of coordination to the issue of pensions was reached at the Laeken European Council one year ago .
On that occasion , 11 common objectives were set covering the adequacy of pensions , their financial sustainability and the modernisation of pension systems to adapt them to changes on the labour market and in society , notably to ensure that they cater well for the needs of women .
An important concept of the whole report is that there are three different dimensions : sustainability , modernisation and adequacy of pensions .
It is not just the one dimension that we had until now in our European policies , which was within the framework of public finances .
It was also agreed that the Member States would submit national strategy reports in which they explain how they achieve those common objectives .
The national reports were submitted in September , and the document that has been adopted by the Commission today is an analysis of the national strategies , objective by objective .
The Commission 's aim was not to establish a ranking of Member States or to lecture them .
The open method of coordination on pensions is not a beauty contest .
Member States have to decide for themselves what type of pension systems they want .
But our report tried to highlight certain and concrete strengths and weaknesses of national systems and policies .
The common objectives can be achieved through a wide range of pension systems .
Member States have either flat-rate public pension schemes covering all residents , or earnings-related schemes where benefits are based on employment .
They rely to varying degrees on private-funded provision to complement these public schemes .
The social partners play a more or less important role in national pension systems .
The fact that , in spite of this diversity of systems , we could agree on a set of common objectives proves that it makes sense to speak of a European social model .
The diversity of pension systems does not prevent us from having shared goals in this important policy area .
In general , the national strategy reports described the current state of play rather than presenting new policy initiatives .
The Member States involved not just different government departments in their preparation , but also social partners and other interested parties and , in some cases , there has been approval by the national parliaments .
One important conclusion that we can draw from this exercise is that Member States can cope with ageing societies and avoid a financial or social disaster in their pension systems .
The report tries to be neither unduly alarmist , nor too complacent about the situation of pension systems .
Indeed , there are a lot of positive developments highlighted in the report , but there are also considerable weaknesses .
In many countries , the sound financing of future pension benefits has not been secured .
One very effective way of achieving this would be to raise the effective retirement age .
In fact , achieving the Barcelona target of raising the labour market withdrawal age by five years would almost solve our financing problems as identified in the public pension expenditure projections by the Economic Policy Committee .
However , we will only get there if Member States make much more determined efforts not only to encourage older people to stay longer in the labour market but also to enable them to do so .
The European Parliament rightly insisted on the importance of health and safety in this regard and on the need to adapt the working environment to the special needs of older workers .
Many Member States also have to do more to improve access to occupational pension schemes , particularly for atypical workers , among whom women tend to be over-represented .
The portability of occupational pension rights also requires further improvements , and we will be discussing with the social partners at European level how this could be promoted .
The European Parliament insisted particularly on the situation of older women .
Women tend to live longer than men ; so a majority of pensioners are women : some 60 % of people over 65 and nearly two thirds of people over 75 .
The gender dimension therefore receives much attention in this report .
We can expect individual pension rights for women to increase , thanks to increased labour force participation and smaller pay gaps between men and women .
However , career breaks still tend to be taken more often by women than by men .
So it will remain important to award pension rights for child-care periods and to maintain derived rights , without which many older women would be exposed to the risk of poverty .
However , our priority should be to increase individual pension rights by offering better employment opportunities to women .
What is going to happen next with this report ?
The European Council requested a joint report by the Commission and the Council .
So the next step will be to examine the Commission 's text in the Council so as to finalise a report in time for the European Council meeting in March .
There is no commitment to a second round of national strategy reports and their assessment at European level .
However , we are committed to reviewing the common objectives and working methods before 2005 as a basis for deciding on the future of this cooperation .
We intend to cooperate with the applicant countries and to carry out the same exercise for their systems .
We are also working on common indicators which would allow us to measure the achievements of Member States .
However , agreement on common indicators is quite a difficult issue and could not be arrived at in time for this report .
Mr President , Commissioner , I greatly welcome this report from one point of view , because it highlights the fact that the problem of pensions systems is twofold : financial sustainability and adequacy .
We - and I am thinking of countries such as Germany or , in particular , Italy - are laying the foundations for there to be generations of poor pensioners .
We will ask for increasingly large contributions to balance our accounts but the size of the pensions they will lead to will steadily decrease . In addition , w e will ask for a superhuman effort to contribute to supplementary pension schemes .
I believe that this report suffers from excessive optimism .
I do not feel that we are being alarmist here . We need to see and state the facts as they are , and the fact is that , in Europe - and I am thinking , as I said before , of countries such as Italy and Germany in particular - we are laying the foundations for our pensioners to be poor , we are digging further holes in our budget .
I fear that you have placed too much trust in Member States ' forecasts .
Mr President , the report is neither optimistic nor pessimistic .
There are two objective factors here .
The first is the problem of the ageing population and the second is the rise in the entitlement age .
Bearing both these in mind , the Member States have introduced specific policies in which raising the age limit on the labour market appears to be the basic option - in fact most countries now consider it prerequisite - alongside policies to help older people stay in the labour market .
I think that we can avoid smaller pensions if we keep to the philosophy I referred to earlier .
I very much welcome your remarks , Commissioner .
I would like to pick up on just one point , when you said ' Member States must make much more effort to enable employees to stay longer in employment ' .
I agree with that .
My question really is : what is the Commission , rather than Member States , doing , and in particular what are the EU institutions doing , not just to allow people to stay longer but also to employ older people in the first place ?
My specific question is : is it true that there are still some EU institutions that have age barriers so that if you are over a certain age , you cannot be employed by them ?
Have those barriers come down yet ?
If not , when will they come down ?
Mr President , I would like to ask the Commissioner two questions , but first I would like to congratulate her because the debate is continuing and I like the music , although we will have to wait to see the lyrics .
Firstly , Commissioner , we Members have not seen the communication , and I would like to know when we will see it and how Parliament will be involved before the spring Council , so that its opinion may be heard .
Secondly , Commissioner , you have said that this is a process of support for the reforms of the Member States .
My question is whether only those reforms which are in line with the Commission 's communications and with the common doctrine we have supported in the European Parliament will be supported .
Because not just any reform will be sufficient .
If the reform is of a purely financial nature and does not take account of the social needs raised by the ageing of the population , I very much fear , Commissioner , that a large majority of this House will not be able to support it .
Mr President , earlier retirement ages , growing life expectancy and the increasing call for early retirement pensions mean of course that many pensions systems have problems remaining financially viable , yet you say , Commissioner , that no special model is being singled out . Is not , however , attention being drawn to the Swedish model , also endorsed by Poland and Latvia , as a way of ensuring future sustainability ?
Since they will greatly affect pensions sums , does the report go into the significance of the falls in share values that have taken place this summer and that have become still more marked this autumn ?
This is not a factor we have seen taken into account , yet it means that great caution will need to be exercised where future investments are concerned , given how important falls in share values are to the sustainability of pensions .
Have you taken this factor into account during your deliberations ?
Mr President , in reply to the first question , it is true that certain countries had age limits in the past .
May I remind you that we adopted an anti-discrimination directive two years ago , which all the Member States must adopt by July 2003 , banning discrimination on the basis of age .
So this will be the European framework from July 2003 onwards .
As for the second question concerning the European Parliament , as I said in my speech , we need to find a clearer role for the European Parliament within the open coordination method and we have again discussed how we might strengthen Parliament 's role in the open coordination method within the framework of the Convention with the relevant committee .
As far as the report 's orientation is concerned , I made it quite clear that pension reform policies are national policies .
Of course there are European dimensions to these national policies and a country cannot exercise a pension reform policy without taking account of the stability pact , the laws of the internal market or the employment strategy .
So this is national policy .
Commissioner , I would like to ask you to make clear within the Commission that when we speak of pensions here we really mean provision for old age and not savings schemes as the directive now has it .
Secondly , would you please give some thought to whether the term ' raising the retirement age ' is really appropriate ?
We ought rather to be creating programmes for people who have reached the age of 55 , 65 or older that allow older workers to carry on working and retrain so that older unemployed people can be reintegrated into working life .
Mr President , I congratulate Mrs Diamantopoulou and I fully support her last statement to the effect that the purpose of the report is not just to balance accounts but to ensure that the elderly are able to lead dignified lives , which is the most important thing .
In this general climate of satisfaction , I would like to ask the Commissioner whether she feels that it would not be appropriate , as regards the funds which each Member State has freely decided to use to pay pensions , to go and assess the fairness with which the different individual situations are handled .
We could give more to those who need to improve their standard of living and less to those who have too much , while still spending the same amount .
In Italy , for example , there are widows with four children ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
Mr President , does the consultation process which was used by Member States reflect the public 's confidence that they will have a decent pension at the end of their working lives , given the current state of the finances and markets of the Member States ?
Have any of the Member States examined , in particular , the issue of how pension funds themselves operate , given that they are , as Ms Jensen said , big financial players on the market ?
How much are they investing in the issue of corporate social responsibility themselves ?
How much are they looking at ethical investment which might then deal with issues such as quality of work , keeping older people in the workforce , training and a whole raft of measures at the same time as dealing with the pensions question itself ?
Mr President , in reply to the first question , I agree .
As I pointed out in my introduction , the problem is not just one of raising the retirement age ; we also need flanking policies to help older people stay in or , in many cases , enter the labour market , which is why I referred to both the stability pact and the employment strategies .
May I remind you that one of the basic objectives of the employment strategy is to integrate older people .
We can achieve this through specific training proposals and measures and special incentives . May I also remind you that Commissioner Monti and I recently decided that support for older people during the first stage of their integration into the labour market does not qualify as state aid .
This therefore is our approach .
We cannot raise the age limit unless we introduce policies at the same time to support the integration of older people .
In reply to Mr Fatuzzo 's question about the internal redistribution of pensions , we must remember that this is a purely national model and that it is in fact up to each government to decide what type of pension it is going to grant and where , depending on the model and principles it has decided on .
However , to come back to one of the basic lines of approach of the strategy , the adequacy of pensions , again specific action is being taken to define present policies and future indicators for sections of the population which are at risk of exclusion or have particular problems , such as single-parent families , which I mentioned , or the question of women .
The Member States must therefore say what they have done under each of these lines of approach in the reports they submit .
So if there are specific sectors which guarantee adequacy , each Member State must highlight and state what measures it has taken in its reforms .
In reply to Mr Pronk 's question on the age of 60 or 65 , there is no directive which sets the retirement age in the Member States .
Each Member State sets it on the basis of its economic analysis and capabilities .
At present , all the Member States have a lower limit of 65 .
France is an exception , but sets other requirements , and the Scandinavian countries are trying out a new approach and tending to abolish the age limit , which might go up to 67 or down to 60 , with pensions being adjusted in line with the retirement age .
Finally , as far as the question of the management of financial organisations and funds is concerned , I am not sure if I fully understood the question , but what I would say is that public pension funds are obviously subject to the general financial stability framework of each country , as far as private pension funds are concerned .
I would remind you that a recent Commission directive introduced important safety valves for the safe management of these funds .
We now move on to the Commission communication on the modernisation of accounting from Mrs Schreyer .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , today the Commission has adopted a financial reform package that marks a crucial stage in this Commission 's reform efforts .
Firstly , the legislative framework for the new Financial Regulation is completed ; the Commission has adopted the Financial Regulation 's implementing regulation , along with procedural rules for the collection of receivables .
It has taken a great effort by all concerned , the European Parliament in particular , to reach the goal of the European Union having a new , modern budgetary law by 1 January 2003 .
This new budgetary law will provide better protection for the Community 's financial interests - I might mention , for example , the securities to be lodged by the recipients of advance payments , the obligation on contractors to provide auditor 's certificates or the Commission 's ability to bar contractors from tendering procedures if irregularities have been found in the past .
This new budgetary law will also make budget execution more transparent and more coherent .
Secondly , the Commission has made an overall assessment of the preparedness of its services for the implementation of this new budgetary law .
This shows that considerable progress has been made in bringing the old ex ante controls into the services ' internal control procedures .
Any remaining problems will receive continued attention and the concerted efforts of all concerned .
Horizontal services will provide targeted support .
This creates the conditions for ending central financial control at the end of this financial year and also for winding up the remaining parts of the Directorate-General for Financial Control by early 2003 .
Most of the staff released in that way will be made available to the services to complete the human resources for financial reform that they have built up in the last three years .
The sections of the Commission managing funds will then be fully responsible for budget implementation including the necessary control measures .
Finally , the Commission has today also adopted the communication on the modernisation of the Communities ' accounting system .
This communication is divided into three parts .
First , reform of the bookkeeping rules ; second , adaptation of the supporting information and technology system ; and third , the architecture of project management .
The Commission had promised the European Parliament and the Court of Auditors to present these measures and the timetable by the end of this year .
In so doing , the Commission is taking another important step in the long-term strategy for the modernisation of its accounting system that was begun in the year 2000 .
In 2000 , the Commission presented a study that led to the Commission proposing that the Financial Regulation should incorporate new bookkeeping rules using accrual accounting .
This communication now sets out step by step the action that must be taken to make the modern system available by 2005 .
In future , bookkeeping will be done by the double entry system .
The budget account will use traditional cash accounting for budget revenue and expenditure , which is what the budgetary authority requires for checking the execution and implementation of the Budget ; this means that the actual expenditures and actual receipts will be compared with the estimated amounts decided in the budget .
The accrual accounting , however , will also have to incorporate the capital account for the European Budget 's cash flow statement , and new standards will be introduced for this part of the budget account corresponding to the international standards that were recently adopted ; I shall come back to that in a moment .
For the purpose of introducing the new standards required by the Financial Regulation from 2005 the Commission 's chief accountant will be working out the specific details of how these international standards are to be implemented for the various measures financed out of the European Union 's budget .
A new Accounting Standards Committee will be created for the purpose .
Various experts from the services as well as from outside will be represented on this committee .
Another important point is that the new system will apply not only to the Commission 's bookkeeping and accounting , but also to all European institutions , that means also to Parliament and to the budgets of the Council , the Court of Auditors and the agencies .
The standards in question are in fact very new .
This international body adopted its first standard for the public sector in 2000 , the last standard in October 2002 .
They are therefore quite new rules and we will be using them as a benchmark for our accounting system .
When this project is introduced , the European budget will be in the vanguard of accountancy rules .
For the new standards to be introduced , the technical support provided by the underlying computer system , that is the information technology , will also have to be modernised .
The system currently used for accounting is Sincom 2 .
It was introduced in 1997 and extended to all fund-managing departments in 1999 .
The SAP system - which all the experts call A3 for short - is crucial for the Commission 's bookkeeping , and the closure of the books and presentation of the annual statement depend entirely on this system .
At the same time , the SI II system was developed for departments managing resources and data on all relevant measures , that is , all data relevant for accounting have to be input into it .
Experience shows , however , that the future system must be a fully integrated system for bookkeeping purposes .
So far as complete integration allows , however , account should also be taken of the services ' different requirements and respective management tasks , which are also subject to different requirements for the various sections of the European budget .
There are three options for modernising the IT system in question , namely continuing with the present system as before , introducing a completely new system or developing an integrated system from what is already in place .
As you will have inferred from what I have said , the Commission rejects the first option .
A feasibility study will be made of the second and third options , which will be ready in the first half of 2003 .
A decision will then be taken on the steps that can be taken to develop an integrated system .
How will this project be organised , given that it is a large-scale project covering the Commission and all the European Institutions ?
The project organisation puts the chief accountant at the centre of the project .
The Commission has today decided to appoint Mr Brian Gray , the new deputy director-general of the Directorate-General for the Budget , as chief accountant to see through this ambitious reform .
This means the Commission has decided to give this project the highest grade , A1 , in order to make clear that the necessary authority is also necessary in the grade if we are to take all the institutions and all the services here with us .
There will be a Project Oversight Board with representatives of the most important services and also of the European Court of Auditors to assist with the implementation of this ambitious and expensive project .

With Mr Gray as chief accountant and Mr Oostens as director of the accountancy division , we shall have two qualified and experienced accountants and qualified managers at the head of this ambitious project which , if it is successful - and I am confident that it will be - will put the EU administration at the forefront of modern public administration in accountancy as it is in other areas .
All in all , today 's package of decisions that the Commission has now adopted underlines that the Commission and the administrative reform package have long since passed the planning stage and have entered implementation , and I am pleased to have been able today to present these steps forward in financial management to the European Parliament , which is supporting us with its constructive criticism .
Mr President , I have a couple of questions for the Commissioner .
I am obviously pleased that a report is now being produced , but I have to observe that there is a large discrepancy between the Commission 's report and what the Court of Auditors says .
It might be stimulating to hear a couple of remarks concerning this discrepancy .
The report also observes that there are serious problems with the system , as we also know of course from the Court of Auditors and from a canny Mrs Andreasen .
The fact that the system cannot talk to itself is also a very great weakness .
I am pleased to see the idea rejected that fraud and irregularities can occur , but the Commission maintains that there are too few authorised users with access to the system , and that is something about which the Court of Auditors disagrees .
I should like to hear why there is such considerable disagreement between the Commission and the Court of Auditors .
These really are issues we should very much like to hear something about in the Committee on Budgetary Control .
Mr President , I welcome the Commission statement and I am pleased to see we are becoming more avant garde , emerging from the dark age of accounting that the Commission presently inhabits .
It is interesting to hear that you are going to check the receipts of Commission monies - who gets contracts , where tenders go .
You are going to change your bookkeeping rules , your IT systems and your project management .
But what do you preside over now ?
What has the Commission been doing for the last few years ?
Why has it taken so long for this reform to be introduced ?
More importantly , having now confirmed that every allegation levelled by Mrs Marta Andreasen was correct , where was the part - maybe I missed it in your statement - where you apologised for the personal slurs on Mrs Andreasen 's background and character , made on and off the record by your press service ?
Could you now say that the disciplinary process against your former chief accountant will stop and she will be brought in to drive through these reforms that she told you you needed this time last year ?
Finally , who ever signed off the Commission 's accounts in 2001 ?
Mr President , I will now answer Mr Blak 's question .
Every year since 1994 and again , too , for the 2001 Budget , the European Court of Auditors has found that the books and financial statement are a true record of the European Union 's revenue and expenditure and also accurately show the financial position at the end of the year .
At the same time , the European Court of Auditors has repeatedly urged us , as regards the capital account , to go over to a new system that does not wait until a payment or receipt has been made before recording financial transactions , but records them when a claim is raised or a commitment entered into .
That is an important step , which is now enacted in the Financial Regulation .
In the past few years - and this brings me to Mr Heaton-Harris 's question - we have already taken steps towards this capital account .
Then , of course , a lot of information about our claims and commitments came from outside the bookkeeping system .
For example , we asked ourselves what the Commission 's future obligations were with regard to pensions for its officials .
That was information that was obtained and processed by the Directorate-General for Administration and then fed into the accounting system .
This information was not derived from the annual budget .
Take another example , which also applies to the Parliament 's budget .
Take the fixed assets , this building for example .
The budget account contained only the expenditure made in a given year .
If you like , the assets were then no longer contained in the accounts , or they had to be brought into them again at an appropriate valuation .
For the future we plan - and this is how it is being introduced - that the information will go from the annual budget directly into the capital budget .
Then we will know what the European Union 's assets are and we will not have to introduce them separately .
I must point out that unfortunately we cannot simply draw on best practices in the Member States .
Some Member States - and we discussed this repeatedly in the Committee on Budgetary Control - have taken steps in this direction , but at the same time the Member States also have different problems .
Municipalities , for example , own infrastructure , and you might therefore say that they have different assets than we do and have to value them differently .
If - and this is new - for example securities that contractors have to lodge when they take part in a tendering procedure or the tender has been accepted now have to be shown in books , then we have to take new decisions .
The international standards are , if you like , principles , but they must , as it were , be tailored to the specific budget , to the specific tasks that we have in the budget , if they are to be made to work .
That will also be decided by this Standards Committee .
If that produces good results , I think that might in future be something that the Member States or third countries will be able to take over from us .
Commissioner , you call your communication ' Modernisation of Accounting ' .
To put it politely , I call that a misrepresentation of the facts , as what has been revealed to us in the last few weeks has been total chaos .
Your administration is about to blow up in spectacular fashion and if you had the courage of your convictions you would admit it .
I only wonder why it is only now that you are admitting to this scandalous situation - I only mention the fact that nothing was obviously done to prevent multiple entries - even though the Court of Auditors has drawn attention to it repeatedly since 1994 , why you apparently need a few more years , until 2005 , to put a stop to them , why you dismissed a chief accountant who was the first to draw attention to these errors early this year and why you subjected her to disciplinary proceedings .
I seriously wonder how you think you can sell us your new Financial Regulation as a great success when it is not based on an operational bookkeeping system .
Mr President , Commissioner , please excuse me if I have to leave before you reply , but I have a group of visitors and it is my custom to be punctual .
That is not usual everywhere in Europe , but I do it .
I have a very precise question .
You said you wanted to carry out a feasibility study about the IT system .
Now we agree that we are under pressure of time so far as the modernisation of the accounting system is concerned .
When I think about it , on the grounds of plausibility it seems to me that a feasibility study can only refer to option 2 , namely modernising the existing system in such a way that it also satisfies future requirements .
My question is , given that we are all under pressure of time and that the system must be modernised , would it not be more sensible to save time by not asking this question and going straight for a complete integrated replacement of this system ?
Mr President , Mrs Schreyer , I congratulate you on this ambitious project and have the following questions .
The new system must be operational from 2005 .
What do you propose doing in the meantime , since the Court of Auditors has been voicing strong criticism of the existing bookkeeping and accounting system since 1994 ?
You know that Parliament will very likely be dealing with these problems once they have been put before the Committee on Budgetary Control .
How much longer will it take after 2005 before everything is really operational if the new chief accountant - probably supported by the committee you referred to - will then actually have to guarantee that it will work ?

Mr President , to come back to Mr Heaton-Harris 's question about responsibility for the 2001 accounts , it was of course the chief accountant at the time who was responsible for the accounts for the whole year , including the annual statement for 2001 .
Regarding Mr van Dam 's question , I must again point out that it is not correct to say that the European Union 's and the European Commission 's accounts did not meet international standards .
There are , however , different international standards , there are standards that are based solely on the cash accounting principle and there is a further development with a view to more managerial categories .
In the past , the Financial Regulation , that is the law that applies to us and also to the other institutions , had only prescribed the cash accounting principle .
This met the standard and it was followed .
I have pointed out that the further development is a relatively recent development , even for the public sector .
I repeat , the corresponding IPSA standards of the International Federation of Accountants are the first standards for the public sector and were adopted in the year 2000 , the most recent one not until October 2002 , that is , two months ago .
These standards do not yet cover every issue ; in other words , it is in fact an ongoing development , and in that respect we can truly say that we are in the vanguard if we decide to go in that direction - and that is what we have done with the Financial Regulation .
Regarding Mrs Stauner 's question , you have again assumed , Mrs Stauner , that the Court of Auditors would not give a statement of assurance for the accounts .
That is not correct .
I would stress once again that this year the Court of Auditors again found , for the year 2001 , that the financial statement , the budget account gives a true picture of the revenue and expenditure .
You were the rapporteur , the general rapporteur , Mrs Stauner , and you also confirmed this in your statement .
I will explain once again that the financial statement is of course submitted not only to the European Court of Auditors but also to the Council and Parliament , in other words the books are open on the table .

Regarding Mr Kuhne 's question about the development of the necessary computer system , here too , I will say again that when I look at the situation in some Member States , where many different financial statements are produced because they do not yet have a uniform system , I can only say that the previous Commission took an important step here in 1999 when it required all entries in the books to be made using the same system .
That was a tremendous step for the European Commission , too , since there were previously five or seven different financial statements - I do not remember the exact number - that then had to be integrated or could not be completely integrated .
That was therefore essential , and we all know that software and computer systems , too , continue to develop .
Regarding the SAP system , for example , on which our bookkeeping is based or which does our bookkeeping , SAP is running the software in question only until 2004 ; a new system is now being introduced all over the world and we are faced with the task of having to adopt it and introduce it over that period of time .
I turn now to Mrs Theato 's question .
What will happen in the meantime ?
Work is of course being done all the time .
For example , work is now being done to create a central register of accounts and a central register for contracts , which will then be available to all services .
We now have the SI-II System for sections managing funds .
The data it produces are input into the SAP accounting system , after having been checked by financial control .
The managers of resources cannot consult the accounting system direct .
They have no access , that is correct , but they cannot consult it either .
The aim is that the chief accountant will make the data available to everyone so that there will be no more inconsistencies but at the same time , of course , that safeguards are maintained , so that the person managing the funds cannot , as it were , get past the front-line security and through to the transaction .

Mr President , on a point of order , I listened with great interest to the questions by Mrs Stauner and Mr Heaton-Harris who both asked the Commissioner to comment on the allegations made by Mrs Andreasen and on whether , in fact , she was not completely justified .
I notice the Commissioner did not reply to those questions .
Mr President , please invite the Commissioner to do so because , as two Members have asked the same question , they are entitled to a full response .
Mr President , I will gladly answer the question .
As I have explained , in the year 2000 , the Commission commissioned a study that examined the accounting system .
We then decided - it was in a Prodi Commission proposal for the Financial Regulation - to propose new bookkeeping rules .
Then in June 2001 the services of the Commission prepared a first package of measures , a first action plan , of what must be done .
That was the basis on which the chief accountant was appointed in January 2002 and that was the basis of the work that should have been done .
I believe that Parliament itself would say that anyone working in the Commission is responsible for implementation .
It is not sufficient to repeat certain criticisms , but it is then that person 's duty to work on implementing the reform .
This is the last point of order I shall allow , because if this requires further debate there will be another opportunity , but today we cannot stretch our time any further .
The final point of order .
Mr President , on a point of order , I appreciate your comments but this is one of the fundamental problems we have with the Commission at present .
Mrs Sandbæk has written to you , Commissioner , asking to see a copy of the signature of your former , former chief accountant on the 2001 accounts .
I asked who that person was .
I was told in the past that they were signed whilst that person was in post .
That person left the Commission 's employment on 31 December 2001 .
They were either the quickest prepared set of accounts in history or something magical happened .
I am not convinced by what you have said today and I very much doubt whether the people in the public gallery are convinced .
I would just appreciate some frank exchanges and honesty between you and those of us who are interested , because Mrs Andreasen told you what was happening .
She wrote to you and met you , and you chose to ignore here .
What happened is a disgrace to you and your institution .
Realistically , you have to bite the bullet and get on with reforming the accounting system properly , and you could do with Mrs Andreasen 's help .
Mr President , Mr Heaton-Harris , once again , the chief accountant who was responsible for the budget and capital accounts in 2001 was also responsible for the 2001 financial statement .
It was sent to the Court of Auditors on time .
The Commission presents the budget and capital account to the European Court of Auditors , which also checks the books on an ongoing basis .
The European Court of Auditors again came to the conclusion for the 2001 books that the financial statement provides a correct and true picture of the revenue and expenditure and the financial situation at the end of the year .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have no option but to move on to the next item on the agenda .
If you need to continue this debate , it must be at another time .
The next item is Questions to the Commission ( B5-0510 / 2002 ) .
In accordance with paragraph 2 of Annex II of the Rules of Procedure , Questions Nos 40 , 42 , 43 and 44 will not be replied to , since they relate to an issue which already appears on the agenda for the present part-session : the Council and Commission statements on the Prestige , tomorrow Wednesday .
The authors of the questions have naturally been informed .
Part I
Question No 37 by Manuel Medina Ortega ( H-0727 / 02 ) :
Subject : Border controls in north Africa
Can the Commission explain the scope of the agreements reached with Morocco and other north African countries with a view to helping these countries curb the illegal transit of emigrants to the European Union across their borders ?
Can the Commission provide information on other projects in this field ?
Mr President , the figure the Commissioner has given is EUR 40 million , apparently for the period 2002-2004 .
I would be grateful if you could clarify whether this is only for 2002 and whether it is an experimental programme because , given that , when we talk about the borders of Morocco , we are talking about thousands of kilometres of borders , I have the impression that this sum is entirely insufficient to help the Moroccan Government to carry out the control of those borders .
I would like to know whether there is any possibility of this figure of EUR 40 million , if it is considered simply to be an initial figure , being increased so that we may have a sensible programme of cooperation with Morocco which would allow that country to control its borders .
Question No 38 by Mary Elizabeth Banotti ( H-0825 / 02 ) :
Subject : Abuse of EU research legislation covering orphan drugs
In 1999 EU legislation was adopted with a view to encouraging research into the development of ' orphan ' drugs for the treatment of rare diseases .
It would now seem that unscrupulous drug companies are using the legislation to obtain exclusive rights to common medicines which are currently used in the treatment of rare disorders , therefore pushing up the cost of such drugs .
Will the Commission undertake to inquire into the level of such abuse , and what measures will the Commission take to end such abuse and to ensure that the legislation is used for the purpose that it was intended , namely research for effective treatment of rare disorders ?
Mr President , orphan medicinal products are so called because they are used in the treatment or diagnosis of conditions that occur so rarely .
The cost of developing and marketing orphan medicinal products would not be recovered by their expected sales .
For this reason , the pharmaceutical industry has been unwilling to develop such products under normal market conditions .
The regulation on orphan medicinal products which entered into force in January 2000 provides a system of incentives for sponsors to develop and market designated orphan medicinal products .
One of these incentives is market exclusivity for a period of 10 years .
This is granted if a designated orphan medicinal product obtains a marketing authorisation in all Member States .
To obtain this , the sponsor must conduct a series of tests and studies to demonstrate that the product meets the rigorous standards of quality , safety and efficacy required of all medicinal products marketed in the EU .
Since 2000 , 123 products have been designated as orphan medicinal products and placed on the Community register .
In a very small number of cases this involves a commonly available chemical that has been supplied by the manufacturer to hospitals which have prepared the chemical for administration to patients .
The great majority of these orphan medicinal products contain new innovative ingredients .
In a few cases it has been common practice for some time to supply the raw ingredients to treat the patient .
However , this chemical has not been tested for its purity and safety and the product is not authorised .
Indeed the chemical is not of pharmaceutical quality and may contain unspecified and unquantified impurities .
In this situation , it is not surprising that an authorised medicinal product developed to meet rigorous standards of quality , safety and efficacy costs more than the base chemical .
The Commission has no powers with respect to either the price or reimbursement of medicines .
However , the orphan regulation contains a provision to reduce the period of market exclusivity to six years , if after five years it can be shown that the product is sufficiently profitable not to justify the maintenance of market exclusivity .
Question No 39 by Bernd Posselt ( H-0773 / 02 ) :
Subject : Chechnya - Commissioner Nielson 's visit
Has the Commission already decided when Commissioner Nielson will be travelling to Chechnya in order to form an impression , in person , of the humanitarian situation there and set about improving the distribution of EU aid ?
Mr President , just two specific queries .
Firstly , can you give some kind of guarantee - one can of course never give an absolute one - that the humanitarian aid is actually reaching the Chechen refugees , or are you relying completely on the Russian authorities for that ?
My second question is this : as camps have now been set up in Ingushetia and masses of people deported , do you know where those people have gone ?
One of the most important activities and one activity that we are very pleased to continue funding is the logistical work provided by the Danish Refugee Council - the only non-Russian operation that delivers food and all other items inside Chechnya .
They use local drivers , but the whole organisation is provided by that NGO .
This is also recognised by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees and by the UN system in general .
It is a very important achievement because it provides access for the humanitarian community .
So the answer to the question of whether we are able to monitor the whole flow is that we are doing it as well as possible .
On a number of occasions over the years I have informed Parliament that we are working on the basis of a so-called ' remote-control ' concept , which means that we have to use local implementing partners .
However , so far we have not run into problems relating to accountability .
We are trying to track every activity as carefully as possible .
I would say that , as long as we are able to keep the operation carried out by the Danish Refugee Council up and running , we have some security in terms of knowing what is going on .
The input from the UN organisations is also crucial in this respect and our cooperation with them is quite well developed .
The problem of the people who are more or less willing to go back - and we fear they are fewer in number - is that they go back into all kinds of different situations .
This is why we are criticising the pressure that they are under .
We are clearly worried .
We will proceed to the second part of this Question Time , and we will begin with questions to Vice-President de Palacio .
Part II
Questions to Commissioner de Palacio
Questions to 41 by José Manuel García-Margallo y Marfil ( H-0800 / 02 ) :
Subject : Taxation of fuel supplied in Gibraltar
On 20 November , the newspaper ' El Pais ' reported that most vessels passing through the Straits of Gibraltar take on fuel from tanker ships anchored in Gibraltarian waters , instead of doing so in the port of Algeciras , where there are better installations .
The reasons are , inter alia , that fuel is cheaper in Gibraltar than in Spain , and that the Spanish authorities are stricter in their application of EU regulations on maritime safety and pollution prevention than the Gibraltar authorities .
It is no secret that this particular form of taking on fuel presents considerable environmental risks in terms of spillage , which has indeed occurred fairly frequently .
Furthermore , the fact that the amount of tax paid on fuel differs between Spain and Gibraltar constitutes fullblown fiscal discrimination , seriously distorting competition , as happens with all products subject to Community customs duties .
What does the Commission intend to do , therefore , to put an end to these practices , which are both dangerous to the environment and harmful to the proper operation of the internal market ?
Mr President , Gibraltar is , in fact , one of the main points for the supply of marine fuel in the Mediterranean and much of this activity is carried out by oil tankers .
Although many ports have equipment for refuelling on the quayside , this type of refuelling is still the most common in ports , not only in small ports , but also in others such as Rotterdam , Barcelona or Hamburg .
The Commission believes that this practice should be carefully supervised in order to prevent dumping and marine pollution .
Therefore , many ports have adopted specific regulations and procedures which regulate such activities and the Commission , for its part , in accordance with the Treaty , monitors compliance with the Community legislation on environmental protection and therefore , on 24 January 2001 , brought a case before the Court of Justice in relation to the non-application by the United Kingdom of a whole series of environmental rules in Gibraltar , including Directive 93 / 12 / EEC on the sulphur content of certain liquid fuels .
With regard to taxation , in accordance with Community tax rules , the hydrocarbons used as fuels for shipping and fishing in Community waters , with the exception of private recreational vessels , are exempt from the payment of special taxes , both at Community level and at national level .
Commissioner , behind the tide of black oil being suffered today by Galicia and which on other occasions has been suffered by other European coasts , there is always a tide of black money which should be investigated .
These black oil slicks and this black money always involve groups with structures much more like mafias than like businesses , made up of companies with ridiculous assets in order to evade responsibilities and covered by insurance which is also ridiculous .
These groups are always protected by legislation which is lax from environmental , commercial and fiscal points of view , and Gibraltar is no exception .
The port of Gibraltar supplies much more fuel than the port of Algeciras , amongst other things because less harbour duties are paid there and because - as the Commissioner has acknowledged - maritime safety and environmental rules are applied much less rigorously and , thirdly , because less tax is paid .
I am not of course referring to special taxes , because any first-year law student knows that the fuel used in maritime transport is exempt from the value added tax on hydrocarbons .
The problem is that direct taxes are not paid either , taxes on companies , which also have an impact on prices : 35 % in Algeciras and nothing in Gibraltar , as Commissioner Monti knows very well .
I would like to ask whether or not there are tax differences in Gibraltar when compared to Algeciras .
Bearing in mind that there cannot be differences in relation to special taxes , there can be differences in relation to taxation as a whole , which has an impact on costs , as you will be aware , every time you go out to lunch or dinner and pay the bill .
Mr President , my colleague , Mario Monti , has already initiated procedures on two occasions against the United Kingdom , precisely in order to ensure the correct operation of the internal market and the appropriate application of the competition rules in an equivalent manner throughout the Union .
In any event , I am sure that Mr García Margallo , who has plenty of experience , is perfectly aware of these issues , and I am sure that my colleague , Mario Monti , will continue to work to ensure that there are no havens in any part of the European Union in relation to any issue , when it comes to the application of Community legislation .
Question No 45 by Nuala Ahern ( H-0721 / 02 ) :
Subject : EU-wide nuclear regulation
On 12 September the Energy Commissioner briefed selected press on new plans for EU-wide nuclear regulation , revealing plans that include :
a ' framework directive ' which will establish nuclear safety standards in the EU ; a directive on the management and disposal of radioactive waste ; a directive governing the financial mechanisms for securing long term disposal of radioactive waste and the decommissioning of nuclear facilities ; a negotiation mandate to raise the levels of imported nuclear fuel into the EU .
Can the Commission state what parts of the current Euratom Treaty powers on nuclear safety regulation are inadequate and require such changes ; what consultation the Commission has had with Member States in respect of plans to increase the import of nuclear fuels into the EU ; and whether the Commission envisages that these increased nuclear imports are intended for reprocessing at Sellafield and The Hague ?
Mr President , in the 45 years of application of the Euratom Treaty , its capacity for adaptation and flexibility in order to respond to the needs and concerns of any particular moment has been demonstrated .
In this regard , it has promoted and facilitated the development of Community research and legislation on control in the fields of both radiation protection and on the control of the use of nuclear materials .
The measures proposed are concrete evidence of the appropriate nature of the Treaty , whose provisions provide them with a solid and sufficient legal basis .
These Commission proposals strengthen , above all , the existing mechanism for guaranteeing the health protection of the population and of workers , as defined in Chapter 3 of Title II of the Euratom Treaty .
In this way , health protection within the framework of radiation protection rules will be supplemented with nuclear safety provisions able to guarantee compliance with the radiation protection rules .
With regard to the trade in nuclear materials with Russia , the Commission proposes to present a proposal for a negotiation mandate for the approval of the Council , in accordance with its right to initiative .
Commissioner , we were very surprised to discover that you , a Commissioner with special responsibility for relations with Parliament , briefed the press in September before Parliament had even heard of these proposals .
This was appalling of you .
I cannot stress too firmly that you should have come to discuss them with Parliament before briefing the press .
I am very surprised to hear that you have a sufficient legal base .
I understand that the Council is discussing this at the moment and that your nuclear proposals are based on the wrong legal framework .
You have actually got it wrong , Commissioner .
Contrary to what the Commission has suggested , Articles 30 , 31 and 32 of the Euratom Treaty are not applicable , as the Commission would be interfering with the safety of nuclear installations in respect of their technical operation .
This is excluded under the Euratom Treaty .
I should also like to inform you that in the Member States , particularly in the UK , questions are being raised concerning your support for reprocessing in some of your statements .
I would like you to clarify that you are not supporting plutonium reprocessing of in these proposals .
Mr President , Mr Ahern , forgive me , but I announced the intention to present this nuclear safety package to this Parliament before anybody else and I have repeated it on various occasions , and it was therefore nothing new .
And I did not present the initiatives to the press before this Parliament .
On the contrary , I came here to inform Parliament of the initiatives I had proposed in Brussels .
With regard to the legal basis , I would refer to the press release issued by the Luxembourg Court on 10 December .
The Court believes that Euratom has competences in the following areas : the establishment of a legislative and regulatory framework for organising the safety of nuclear installations ; measures relating to the assessment and verification of safety ; organisation in the event of emergencies ; the choice of location of nuclear installations and , finally , the design , construction and operation of nuclear installations .
I therefore believe that nobody is going to argue about the legal basis in the Euratom Treaty for all the proposals I have made to the Council and Parliament , because the Court has said it loud and clear .
Finally , I do not support reprocessing in any way whatsoever .
I do not know where the honourable Member has got these ideas from , I do not get into these types of issues .
All I propose is that we must provide a framework for greatest possible degree of safety in all the countries of the Union .
In all of them , in the ones that are going to join now and in the current ones , and there must be the highest possible level of safety in all of them , making obligatory , amongst other things , what are merely recommendations from the Safety Agency in Vienna .
Question No 46 by Laura González Álvarez ( H-0737 / 02 ) :
Subject : Independence exercised by the Commission
In June 2002 a delegation of the European Parliament 's Committee on Petitions travelled to Asturias at the invitation of the parliament of Asturias .
One of the petitions handed to the committee chairman , Mr Gemelli , at a meeting with various groups of petitioners criticised the social and environmental impact of routing the ' autovía del Cantábrico ' motorway through the west of the region .
That petition was declared admissible by the Committee on Petitions .
Surprisingly , however , before the petition could be discussed under the usual procedure , an MEP , accompanied by the secretary of his party in the region and three mayors , met with Commissioner Loyola de Palacio and two Commission officials .
On their return to Asturias the mayors told the media that the petition had been filed .
How can a case be closed before the committee responsible has either seen or discussed it ?
How can Mrs Loyola de Palacio decide to file a petition which - as indicated in a reply sent by Mrs Wallström - does not fall within her department 's remit ?
Does the Commission not believe that its independence and the duty of confidentiality of the officials concerned have been affected ?
In its view , does action of this kind not undermine the role of the Committee on Petitions and of Parliament itself and , worse still , show a lack of respect for the petitioners ?
Mr President , I would like to say briefly to the honourable Member that I did in fact receive a visit - and I receive many visits - from a series of representatives who not only visited me but also the Directorate-General for the Environment , which is responsible for dealing with the issue which the honourable Member refers to .
This type of visit to the Commission is normal .
Furthermore , on certain occasions I have also met with the honourable Member and other people and these meetings furthermore seem to me to be extremely important in terms of becoming aware of what social groups and people are thinking .
What we have to avoid when we are in the Commission , in Brussels , is losing contact with reality .
Having said this , I cannot get into what the people who visit me say or the content of what they freely express .
I cannot get into it , but I would like to say firstly that I am not responsible with regard to the initiation of any possible procedures or investigations relating to these issues , which fall within the competence of my colleague , Mrs Wallström ; secondly , with regard to the Committee on Petitions , I do not have any responsibility here either , because it falls to this Parliament to deal with these issues .
Mr President , rather than supplementing the question , because I consider the Commissioner 's reply to be correct , what I will do is inform her that in that case they used her name and those of two officials from the Directorate-General for the Environment wrongly .
As I said in the question , a number of petitioners spoke with Mr Gemelli , in Asturias - my region - and then there were a series of visits to the Commissioner .
Now , what appears in the regional press is that the Commissioner and the officials say that this case is closed .
It seems to me unfortunate to use the names of two officials from the Directorate-General for the Environment .
The Asturian petitioners quite rightly asked me how it could be that a case was closed when it had not even been discussed in the Committee on Petitions .
I therefore say to you that the appearance in the press of the names of these two officials and of the Commissioner greatly damages the credibility of the European institutions and of the Committee on Petitions .
It grieves me that your name and those of these two officials should be linked to a political issue which should not have appeared in the press in this way .
Mr President , I am surprised that such experienced Members of Parliament should confuse a complaint to the Commission with a petition to the European Parliament .
Such an important public communications infrastructure project as the ' autovía de Occidente ' motorway deserves all the support of all the Asturian political representatives .
Therefore , certain Asturian Mayors , very concerned about some complaints made to the Commission by certain Asturian local organisations , came here to find out how the executive Commission was dealing with those complaints .
They were received by Commissioner de Palacio and by certain officials , who informed them that that complaint presented to the European Commission had just that week been filed away and that the case had been completely closed .
Of course , it is not the duty of the Commission to resolve the final outcome of the petitions to the European Parliament , but of the MEPs .
But let us not confuse complaints with petitions .
Commissioner de Palacio , I would like to ask you whether you have any news on whether in the corresponding services of the Commission there is any other complaint presented on the issue of the ' autovía de Occidente ' .
Mr President , there has perhaps been a degree of confusion , as the honourable Member has said .
All I can do is repeat that I cannot comment on the content of statements by people who visit me .
Secondly , one thing is a complaint and quite another is the Committee on Petitions which , I insist , the Commission plays no part in , since it falls within the competence of this Parliament .
With regard to the issue of complaints , this falls to Mrs Wallström .
I have no knowledge but , in any event , I will be very happy to look into it and I will inform the honourable Member .
The Members are aware that this is a time for questions and supplementary questions to the Commission , not for explanations and descriptions by the honourable Members .
I very much respect your enthusiasm for debating and explaining the facts , but this is a Question Time .
As the author is not present , Question No 47 , by Herman Vermeer , lapses .
Question No 48 by Carlos Bautista Ojeda ( H-0781 / 02 ) :
Subject : Starting date for Third Road Safety Action Plan
In reply to question E-1265 / 02 of 26 April 2002 by the author of the present question , the Commission stated that it would issue a communication on the Third Road Safety Action Plan during the third quarter of 2002 .
However , from the remarks made by Commissioner de Palacio on Thursday , 12 September 2002 on the occasion of the first anniversary of the Red Cross road safety campaign it appears that the Third Plan will not be presented until 2003 .
Meanwhile , it has been stated in the European research programme FANTASIE that a situation of ' sustainable growth ' or ' sustainable balance ' in the European transport sector would entail a considerable increase in the use of two-wheeled vehicles .
Can the Commission confirm the publication date of its communication on the Third Road Safety Action Plan ?
Can it provide advance information on the specific road safety measures which this plan will contain for two-wheeled vehicles ?
Mr President , the White Paper on European transport policy presents a range of measures which must be taken in order to improve road safety , as well as an action plan on road safety aimed at determining measures which will allow us to achieve by 2010 the global objective of reducing by half the number of fatalities resulting from road accidents in the European Union .
This programme is being drawn up and it is scheduled to be adopted during the first quarter of 2003 .
Certain measures will refer specifically to two-wheeled vehicles and , in this regard , I would like once again to highlight the excellent work done by Mr Bautista Ojeda in this area .
The general measures will also have significant positive consequences for the safety of drivers and passengers of two-wheeled vehicles .
Mr President , thanks to the improvement in communication networks , particularly within cities , in population centres , pedestrianisation and the increase in the volume of four-wheeled traffic , the number of users of two-wheeled vehicles is increasing every day , as you have said .
I would like to ask you , Commissioner , whether you are intending to implement any type of specific initiative to promote the use of two-wheeled vehicles , bearing in mind , furthermore , the current situation with regard to the cost of insurance , which is leading to a significant reduction in the numbers of these vehicles sold .
Mr President , I can tell you that there will be specific initiatives .
For example , in the programme on safety for cars , in the agreements with the car manufacturing industry , there is consideration of designs for cars which are less harmful in collisions with unprotected persons , that is , both pedestrians and users of two-wheeled vehicles ( motorcycles , bicycles etc . ) .
Furthermore , it is necessary as always within the European Union to monitor true compliance with the existing traffic rules and codes , such as wearing helmets when riding a motorcycle , because we have detected that , on many occasions , what happens is that the legislation approved is unfortunately not applied or enforced strictly enough .
Mr President , Commissioner , a lot of accidents involving two-wheeled vehicles occur mainly as a result of road works , barriers , divided carriageways , sections of road where the way is unclear .
Is it also planned to develop a kind of best practice or a benchmark system for defusing accident black spots , which after all are known from past experience , so that in future road works will serve to make traffic safer and fewer accidents happen ?
Lack of visibility affects two-wheeled vehicles and all vehicles in general .
With regard to the design of barriers , I would like to say that Mr Bautista Ojeda has produced initiatives on several occasions .
We in the Commission are studying whether it is true that , in the construction of barriers , there are shapes and designs which are less harmful and safer .
We do not have any definitive conclusions about this yet but it is one of the issues we are analysing in order to increase security and prevent the terrible accidents which sometimes occur .
Commissioner , my friend and colleague Carlos Bautista Ojeda has made a brief reference to this , but I would like to expand on one of the issues which he has raised : as you know , in the Spanish State users of two-wheeled vehicles have real difficulties finding companies who want to insure mopeds , motorcycles etc .
Their only answer - in some cases - is to turn to the insurance compensation consortium .
I do not know whether anything can be done in this regard , on the initiative of the Commission , because this is a great demand from the motorcycling sector : that there may really be insurance cover which is accessible and proportionate to the use , enjoyment and cost of motorcycles and two-wheeled vehicles in general .

Mr President , all the issues relating to the internal market are more directly the responsibility of Commissioner Bolkestein , but in any event I take good note of what both you and Mr Bautista Ojeda have said to me and we will try to analyse it .
This undoubtedly also relates to the problem of levels of danger and its physical and health consequences .
Therefore , it is a question of taking action to improve safety in the moped , motorcycle and bicycle sectors , in other words , two-wheeled vehicles , but of course I will also study the issue of the problem of insurance .
Question No 49 by Proinsias De Rossa ( H-0786 / 02 ) :
Subject : Protection of Ireland 's rail freight infrastructure
Is the Commission aware of recent proposals from Ireland 's government-owned rail freight operator , Iarnrod Eireann , to withdraw from certain rail freight operations ?
This proposal would lead to an estimated additional 400 extra trucks involved in transporting freight by road each day .
Ireland already has a serious traffic congestion problem due to inadequate road infrastructure , and any further shift from rail to road would greatly exacerbate this problem .
Such a development would also run counter to the Commission 's rail freight strategy .
Will the Commission urgently raise this issue with the Irish Government and ensure its current strategic rail review leads to an internal freight policy consistent with the Transport White Paper ? Will it seek a clear statement of the sums allocated to rail freight under the current and previous rounds of structural funds and of how it proposes to handle the evolution of a transport pricing policy , and a commitment that its future stewardship of the railway system will be consistent with the principles set out in the Transport White Paper ?
Mr President , the transport White Paper clearly speaks of revitalising the railways throughout the European Union .
In order to achieve this objective , the Community has taken various initiatives and has recently made proposals .
The new European regulatory framework providing for the integration and interoperability of the market will allow rail companies to increase their competitiveness and orientate their business activities towards the growth of market sectors such as European goods services .
The Union 's financial aid for the construction or modernisation of rail infrastructures , as well as the elimination of bottle necks , creates the physical conditions necessary for the rail system to absorb a greater percentage of the expected future growth in transport volume .
The Community has co-financed various projects for development of the trans-European rail network in Ireland .
For example , in 2000 , the projects received co-funding of approximately EUR 3 million from the trans-European networks budget and around EUR 16 million from the Cohesion Fund .
Nevertheless , for reasons of subsidiarity , the Commission is prevented from going further than its own competences when it comes to designating or selecting the priority objectives for action of a particular government , at any particular moment , in a specific State of the Union .
The Commissioner is probably aware that the Irish rail system is run by a state company in which the government is a shareholder .
This state company has recently announced its intention to review its entire network , particularly the freight network , with the possibility that it may be closed entirely .
Given that it is the objective of the Commission , and indeed of the European Union , that increases in traffic should be absorbed by the rail system , does the Commissioner not think that there is a conflict here between what we are seeking to achieve , in relation to the moving of goods in particular , and that he should at least talk to the Irish Government about establishing some coordination between the White Paper , the proposed national transport policy which the government claims it is working on , and the proposal to close the rail network in Ireland ?
Mr President , Irish Rail has recently taken the decision to suspend any restructuring measures until a strategic study of the railways is published , and we expect this to be at the beginning of 2003 .
The Commission hopes that this study of the Irish rail system will take account , naturally , not only of general transport policy , but also of the investments made during recent years with Community funds in the Irish railway .
Question 50 by Paul A.A.J.G. Lannoye ( H-0793 / 02 ) :
Subject : Air transport and noise
Following the adoption of Directive 2002 / 30 / EC
Directive 2002 / 30 / EC lays down objectives and methods for resolving the problems of noise pollution in areas close to Community airports .
To this end , the directive describes measures which the States can apply in order to reduce noise and lays down a series of principles and rules on the methods for the evaluation of noise with a view to a reduction in levels of noise emissions .
At the moment , the Commission considers it a priority to ensure the correct incorporation of this directive into national legislations of the States of the Union , which should take place by 28 September 2003 at the latest .
This directive is one more measure in a series of measures intended to control exposure to noise around airports .
With regard to the proposal for a directive on the establishment of a Community framework for the classification of noise emissions from subsonic civilian aircraft and for the calculation of noise charges , following the first reading by the European Parliament in September , it now falls to the Council to begin examining the proposed text .
The Commission does not plan to create a single charter of rights for people living near airports .

In accordance with the Rules of Procedure , Question No 51 , by Mr Hatzidakis , will be replied to in writing .
Questions to Mr Kinnock

Question No 52 by Gerard Collins , which has been taken over by Mr Hyland ( H-0801 / 02 ) :
Subject : New Berlaymont building
The main features of the contract on the purchase of the Commission 's Berlaymont building were revealed on 23 October last .
The Commission 's total payment will be ? 553 million and its share of the renovation cost is set at ? 503 million which includes ? 35.6 million for enlargement purposes .
What provisions have been made for public access to the new Berlaymont building ?
What savings does the Commission expect to make once the need for its present ' improvised arrangements ' have gone and it has returned to its original headquarters and what innovative features have been introduced to ensure that the running costs of the Berlaymont are kept to the minimum and the building will act as a symbol for a dynamic European Union ?
Question No 53 by Kathleen Van Brempt ( H-0818 / 02 ) :
Subject : Commission officials moving to private companies
The Commission encourages officials to move from the private to the public sector and vice versa .
It even has arrangements allowing officials to work for a private company for a temporary period . That is a good thing in itself .
However , the move by the head of the information policy division to Microsoft raises questions , as the official concerned was involved in the antitrust investigation into the company .
The Commission 's spokesman has stated that the official was consulted by the Competition Directorate-General in connection with the investigation . He said that this did not pose a problem , as the person concerned had given assurances in a letter that he would not deal , at Microsoft , with matters being investigated by the Commission .
What guarantees does the Commission have that EU officials who go to work in the private sector will not pass on crucial information to their new employers ?
Do written promises by those concerned provide sufficient guarantees ?
Does the Commission agree that new rules on the secondment of EU officials are urgently needed ?
If so , what precise steps does it intend to take ?
As I also say in my question , I do not wish to dispute in any way that civil servants should be allowed to move on to new employment , including the private sector .
But your reply does not entirely satisfy me , Commissioner .
I want to believe in the good faith - I certainly do believe in your own good faith , let that be clear - of this civil servant .
But an impression has been created .
He was working on the anti-trust investigation into Microsoft and he leaves to join that company .
I think it should be made explicit what case is involved here .
I should certainly like to ask in future for a far clearer and more enforceable framework of agreements .
Yes , a change of jobs must be possible , but not to companies or sectors on which you yourself have worked for the Commission because this will create the appearance of partiality that damages your Commission and by extension all European institutions .
I should like once again to press the Commissioner on his future intentions .
Is it feasible to create such a framework of agreements ?
Mr President , yes it is possible to have such a framework which is why I referred to the proposals now before the Council made by the Commission .
It is also why I referred to the further work that is being undertaken to clarify beyond any doubt for both potential employers and for Commission officials and former officials what the limits of activity are .
Meanwhile , the official whose case is relevant to the specific question that the honourable Member asked was granted leave and permission to work for a company after he had signed a declaration that he was aware of his obligations under the Staff Regulations and would not disclose any confidential information to his employer .
As she will understand and she was good enough to recognise both in her question and her supplementary question , in a free society , if we are trying to maintain the advantage of an interchange between the institutions and outside bodies , we must ultimately rely on the honour of civil servants as well as on the fact that they are advised and know that if they stray from the undertakings they have been required to give , they make themselves virtually automatically liable to disciplinary proceedings .
It may be of interest to the honourable Member and the House to know that , at the moment , 566 officials of the Commission are on personal leave .
Four hundred cases have so far been examined , all will be examined .
About 10 % - around about 40 people - are actually engaged in professional activities .
The other 90 % are on personal leave because of family or educational obligations or they are undertaking external courses .
When we have the final figures in the first week or so of next year I will certainly ensure that the honourable Member receives those in detail .
Thank you very much , Mr Kinnock .
Questions to Mr Monti
Question No 55 by Astrid Thors ( H-0828 / 02 ) :
Subject : Investigation of possible infringements of EU competition law by Microsoft
Will the Commission confirm that any Commission decision resulting from its present investigation of possible infringements of EU competition law by Microsoft will be taken in view of the circumstances particular to European markets and to the interests of European consumers and will include remedies sufficient to end and prevent the recurrence of any business practices of Microsoft found to have been or continuing to be in breach of EU anti-trust rules ?
Is the Commission aware that , in the United States , leading consumer voices do not in fact agree that the settlement recently agreed between Microsoft and the US Department of Justice is in the best interest of consumers , despite such assertions by the parties to that settlement ?
On the question of at what point the Commission establishes that there is a dominant position , there is case-law made up of Commission decisions and judgments of the courts , on the basis of which further decisions are made .
As to your question concerning the timing , our analysis of what is a very extensive file is well advanced .
Once all the relevant information has been examined and assessed , we will be in a position to decide how best to proceed with the case .
It would be realistic to expect a final conclusion in the first part of next year .
Thank you very much , Mr Monti , for your reply .
This brings an end to this Question Time .
As the time allotted to questions to the Commission has elapsed , Questions Nos 56 to 102 will be replied to in writing .
Mr Oswaldo Payá , allow me to express the emotion with which we welcome you today to award you the Sakharov Prize for freedom of thought .
It has been difficult to obtain your leave and re-entry visa for coming to Strasbourg .
I would like to thank all those who have worked to make it possible , including Members of the European Parliament who raised the matter with the Cuban authorities last week while there .
I asked the President of the Government of Cuba , Mr Fidel Castro , to let you come to this ceremony as a signal from the Cuban authorities of their recognition of the human rights agenda .
I am happy that this signal has been given to the European Parliament .
My dear Mr Payá , you represent for many Cubans today what Andrei Sakharov represented in the 1980s for many Soviet citizens : you represent hope .
Harassed , pursued , persecuted , prosecuted , condemned and imprisoned from your youth for your opinions , which were openly critical of the government 's official policies , you nevertheless continue to work on constructing your movement , the Christian Liberation Movement for Peace .
You advocate national dialogue to enable democratic change in Cuba .
You are working tirelessly to create an alternative , non-violent democratic movement , based on a wide coalition .
Using the existing legal and political framework , you want to introduce reforms in order to initiate a process of transition to pluralist democracy , respect for human rights and fundamental freedoms .
Under your direction , the civil initiative ' the Varela project ' was born .
This initiative calls for a referendum on open elections , freedom of speech , freedom for political prisoners and free enterprise .
To date , the project has attracted support from more than 100 organisations in Cuba and tens of thousands of individual signatures .
Together with other opposition leaders , you drafted the manifesto ' Todos Unidos ' and for the first time , thanks to your action , the opposition has united together on a single initiative : the Varela project .
We recognise your endurance in the face of a barrage of obstacles .
We recognise your personal courage .
Your plan is not a theoretical construction ; it does not promise heaven on earth but reminds people of basic principles for which so many have fought for so long : respect for human rights and fundamental democratic principles .
Throughout the years , the European Parliament has taken the lead in keeping human rights high on the policy agenda .
This is not , on our part , an abstract commitment ; it was forged in the tragic experiences of Europe 's barbaric twentieth century .
It has been used over the last 50 years to construct a vision of Europe that has learned from , but not forgotten , its past .
We are committed to the principles of democracy and respect for the universality and indivisibility of human rights , fundamental freedoms and the rule of law .
The Sakharov Prize celebrates that commitment annually .
The Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought for 2002 is awarded to Oswaldo Payá , as a tribute to his commitment to freedom of thought , democracy and reconciliation of the Cuban people .
We salute Oswaldo Payá 's decision to use the pen and not the sword , to use signatures and not bullets , to use peace and not terror , as the pathway to democracy in Cuba .
Mr Payá , to you , and through you to those who support the Varela project , we say today : ' We walk with you on your journey .
You do not walk alone .
You do not work in isolation . '
On your first ever visit anywhere outside Cuba , through you , Oswaldo Payá , the European Parliament honours all those who defend human rights , and their hard work and your hard work in building democracy from the grassroots level , step by step , person by person , day by day .
I would like to thank the President , Pat Cox , and this Parliament , which represents many of the peoples of Europe .
You have awarded the Sakharov Prize to the people of Cuba ; I say this because the Cuban people richly deserve such recognition .
I say this without excluding any of my compatriots , whatever their political position , because rights do not have any particular political , racial or cultural allegiance .
Nor do dictatorships have any particular political allegiance , they are neither of the right nor of the left , they are simply dictatorships .
In my country there are thousands of men and women fighting for the rights of all Cubans in the midst of persecution .
Hundreds of them are imprisoned simply for proclaiming and defending these rights , and I am therefore accepting this award on behalf of them .
I say that this prize is for all Cubans because I believe that , by means of this prize , Europe wishes to say to them : ' You also have the right to rights ' .
We were all convinced of this , but there were times when it seemed that that truth was not so evident to many people in the world .
I have not come here to ask for support for the opposition to the Cuban Government , nor to condemn those who persecute us .
It is of no help to Cuba for some people in the world to take sides with the Cuban Government or with their opponents , on the basis of ideology .
We want people to take sides with the Cuban people , with all Cubans .
And this means supporting respect for all their rights , supporting openness , supporting the demand that our people be consulted through the ballot box on the changes we are demanding .
We ask for solidarity so that our people may be given a voice through the ballot box , as the Varela Project proposes .
Many people have related this prize to the Varela Project , and they are right , because the thousands of Cubans who , in the midst of repression , have signed this referendum petition , are making a decisive contribution to the changes Cuba needs .
These changes would mean participation in economic and cultural life , they would mean political and civil rights and national reconciliation .
This would represent the true exercise of self-determination for our people .
We must put an end to the myth that we Cubans must live without rights in order to sustain the independence and sovereignty of our country .
Father Félix Varela taught us that independence and national sovereignty are inseparable from the exercise of fundamental rights .
The Cubans living in Cuba and those abroad , as one people , have the will and the ability to build a democratic , fair and free society , without hate or revenge , as José Martí dreamt : ' With everybody and for the good of everybody ' .
We have not chosen the peaceful route as a tactic , but because it is inseparable from the goal of our people .
Experience shows us that violence creates more violence and that when political changes are carried out in this way , it leads to new forms of oppression and injustice .
Our wish is that violence and force are never again used to overcome crises or unjust governments .
This time we will carry out the changes by means of this civic movement which is already opening up a new stage in the history of Cuba , in which dialogue , democratic participation and solidarity will prevail .
In that way we will build a true peace .
The heroic Cuban civic fighters , the citizens who sign the Varela Project , are not carrying arms .
We do not have a single weapon .
We are holding out both arms , offering our hands to all Cubans , as brothers , and to all the peoples of the world .
The first victory we can claim is that we do not have hate in our hearts .
We therefore say to those who persecute and try to dominate us : you are my brother , I do not hate you , but you are no longer going to dominate me through fear , I do not want to impose my truth , and I do not want you to impose yours , let us seek the truth together .
That is the liberation we are proclaiming .
There are still some people who maintain the myth of the disjunction between civil and political rights , on the one hand , and the capacity of society to build social justice and achieve development , on the other .
They are not exclusive .
The lack of political and civil rights in Cuba has had serious consequences such as inequality , poverty for the majority , privileges for a minority , the deterioration of certain services , even when they are intended to be human and positive services .
Therefore , although many Cubans have worked for years with love and good faith , today there is a serious situation in terms of civil and political rights , as well as increasing inequality and a deterioration of quality of life for the majority .
Furthermore , the hands of the citizens are tied , neutralising the Cubans ' enormous potential for creativity and hard work .
That is the main cause of our poverty .
This reality cannot be justified by claiming that the Cuban people freely chose this system .
The honourable Members know that none of the peoples represented in this Parliament , nor any people in the world , would ever surrender the exercise of their fundamental rights .
It is made ever clearer that social and economic well-being and progress are the fruit of the exercise of rights .
In the same way , a democracy is not a true or complete one unless it is able to begin and sustain a process of increasing the quality of life of everyone . Because no peoples exercise their right to vote freely in order to chose poverty and inequality , which reduce the masses to a situation of disadvantage and marginalisation .
Our Latin American peoples are calling for a real democracy , which is one within which justice can be built .
It is scandalous that , in the name of efficiency , methods are applied which are intended to overcome crisis and end poverty , but which in practice threaten to annihilate the poor .
It is not my intention to proclaim new positions or models , but our people have experienced and suffered various political and economic systems .
We know today that any method or model which , in a supposed quest for justice , development or efficiency , places itself above human beings and cancels out any of their fundamental rights leads to some form of oppression , of exclusion and brings disaster to the people .
We wish to express here our solidarity with all people suffering any kind of oppression or injustice , or who are silenced or marginalized throughout the world .
The cause of human rights is a single one , just as we have one single humanity .
While we talk today about globalisation , we declare that if we do not globalise solidarity we do not only endanger human rights , but also the right to continue as a human race .
Without human solidarity neither will we conserve a clean world in which it remains possible for human beings to live .
It is therefore my humble opinion that , rather than new models , either for societies or for relations between countries , what we need is a new spirit .
This new spirit must be expressed through solidarity , cooperation and justice in relations between countries and will not hinder development . Because if policies and models are conditional upon the fulfilment of people , the construction of justice and democracy , if policies are humanised , then we will overcome the abyss which separates people and we will be a genuine human family .
May our message from Cuba of Peace and Solidarity reach all peoples .
All Cubans are accepting this prize with dignity and stating our hope that we can rebuild our society with the love of everybody , as brothers , as children of God .
We Cubans are simple folk and we simply wish to live in peace and to move forward with our work , but we are not able and we do not wish to live without freedom .
We place our hopes in the Lord , who was laid in a humble manger , and this is our homage to Him .
Thank you and happy Christmas .
( Standing ovation )
Madam President , I thank the Commissioner .
His contribution was short and sweet but at this stage most of the talking has been done .
I would like to thank my colleague in absentia , Mr Nisticò , for the enormous amount of work he has done on this particular directive .
It has come back to us from conciliation quite satisfactorily .
The final issue on which the debate rested was whether a doctor would be responsible for the assessment of the eligibility of donors , whereas the Council wanted a health professional and deemed that to be sufficient .
The compromise is that both Parliament and the Council have agreed on a qualified health professional .
In the spirit of conciliation that is quite satisfactory .
Others might give it another name , but it gets us to where we want to be at this point .
I thank all those who spent a lot of time and effort in getting to this position .
The directive before us deals with the collection , testing , processing , storage and distribution of human blood .
It is quite a contentious issue in many of our Member States , not least in our own .
We have had a tribunal , known as the Lindsey tribunal , which was wound up recently , having sat for some time trying to resolve the very tragic cases of patients , many of whom have since died , who received infected blood .
Other countries have had similar experiences .
One of the most important aspects of this directive is that it will restore confidence in blood transfusion services generally and in the movement of blood and blood products throughout the European Union so we can all have confidence in other Member State systems in relation to it .
This new directive , together with the existing Directive 89 / 381 / EEC , will ensure that binding Community legislation will apply now to blood and blood products whatever the intended purpose .
Apart from blood and blood products , it will also cover the whole area of patients donating their own blood prior to surgery in hospitals and cover regulation in that area specifically as well .
There was quite a lot of contention at earlier readings on this directive as to whether all donations had to be voluntary or unremunerated .
That should be the culture ; that must be the ethos we foster .
While we should never risk rare blood groups or rare blood products being unavailable to patients through our unwillingness to pay , that must be the exception .
Payment can take many forms in terms of expenses or just compensating for lost hours at work , as distinct from profit in terms of payment .
The views of the patient groups , which were very strong at first and second reading , were that we must not rule out remuneration , but it must not be the rule .
We must continue with the voluntary ethos .
I welcome the return of this report from conciliation and I hope it will not be too long before all our Member States transpose it and it becomes law .
I should like to thank Mr Nisticò and Commissioner Byrne for the sterling work they have done on this matter .
The outcome of the conciliation will mean our now having obtained high minimum levels of safety and quality where blood and blood components used for transfusion are concerned .
Requirements are being set in terms of staff qualifications , the operation of blood banks , the testing of donated blood and also efficient supervision and monitoring .
The most controversial issue has of course been that of whether blood should be given without the donors ' actually being remunerated .
I believe it is well documented that voluntary and unremunerated donation provides the best blood quality , especially if there is a permanent body of donors .
The different rules in the Member States have meant , however , that we have not been able to decide that unremunerated donation should apply in all the Member States from day one .
I am nonetheless very pleased that the directive now refers to the European Council 's proper definition of unremunerated blood donation .
I am also very pleased that the Member States are now to make arrangements for encouraging voluntary , unremunerated blood donation and that , every three years , they are to submit reports to the Commission concerning the arrangements they have made .
Finally , I think it is important that the individual Member State be entitled to maintain or introduce the requirement for voluntary and unremunerated blood donation , a requirement that also includes a ban on the import of blood and blood components not donated in accordance with these principles of non-remuneration .
I definitely think that the directive we have now arrived at will make an important contribution to the safety and the quality of blood donation in Europe .
Madam President , Commissioner Byrne , on behalf of the Liberal Group , I in turn would like to thank our rapporteur , Mr Nisticò , for the quality and rigour of his work .
It is a great pity he is not here this evening to reap the rewards , as it were .
That said , I am glad that this joint text was adopted in the Conciliation Committee .
It was vital to ensure the same high level of safety of blood donations and transfusions throughout the Union , just as all the improvements made to the legislative text throughout the procedure were vital .
These improvements included , first of all , a great victory for blood donors and patients : the insertion of a specific chapter on blood monitoring which covers traceability and notification of incidents and serious unwanted reactions .
The Liberal Group believed this to be particularly important , quite simply , I would say , because the need for this type of monitoring requires no further proof in Europe .
Blood monitoring networks are a vital tool for making the transfusion chain as safe as possible .
On the thorny issue of benevolent donations , my interpretation differs from that of Mr Lund .
I am pleased to see that common sense has won the day , as of the second reading .
I welcome the fact that the joint text , while strongly encouraging voluntary , benevolent donations - which is the aim of Article 20 - allows the Member States room for manoeuvre to use remunerated donors in a strictly-regulated environment .
I need not remind you that the Union imports no less than 50 % of plasma-derived therapeutic products , and that haemophiliacs , patients suffering from serious burns and other patients desperately need these products .
In this regard , determined implementation of a policy to provide patients with recombinant factors is more necessary than ever in Europe .
The Liberal Group also wanted the text to contain a reference to scientific and technical progress .
This concern was addressed in Article 29 , which , in particular , lays down clear guidelines for establishments performing blood transfusions .
Lastly , the conciliation procedure has put the finishing touches to the excellent work carried out by the three institutions on this matter .
The only point of contention , which I shall mention briefly , is the matter of medical examination prior to donation , which has already been raised .
I am pleased , once again , that the Conciliation Committee considers it sufficient to require this examination to be carried out by a qualified health professional .
I believe it is silly , as I have said since first reading , to go against certain national practices that give excellent results .
I am thinking in particular , although not exclusively , of the awareness campaigns and donations in mobile units that could come to an end if we were to require the presence of a doctor .
The European Union is not immune to accidents , of course , or even the appearance of a new virus .
North America is currently experiencing a blood product safety alert caused by a virus from a western island .
We must therefore increase monitoring , apply the early detection principle for any use of blood , and ensure traceability from donor to recipient .
That is the price of establishing a blood chain that will renew the confidence of European citizens .
Madam President , I am pleased to be able to speak this evening about this particularly important , even vital , matter , in the true meaning of the term . I am pleased on behalf of my group , the GUE / NGL Group , but also personally , as someone who has long been a staunch advocate of blood donation and a blood donor .
Blood donations , as many will know , have an incomparable human dimension , which concerns us all .
First of all , I shall state some telling figures .
They only concern France , I am afraid , but I would imagine they could generally be applied to most of the Member States of the Union .
In France , 8 000 donations are required every day to save 60 000 lives each year and carry out 800 000 transfusions .
The victim of a road accident might need the participation of ten to thirty people to ensure their survival , and yet only 5 % of people give blood .
We are therefore entitled to ask why there are so few blood donors .
I know the European Commission understood - and I thank it for that - a fundamental part of the problem when defining the objective of its proposal for December 2000 .
Its aim is to increase public confidence in the safety of blood and blood products and thus achieve self-sufficiency within the European Union .
I shall not speak tonight about the contaminated blood scandals , which understandably shook this confidence and which , furthermore , brought down some political leaders who sinned through lack of vigilance , not to say incompetence .
Without forgiving or forgetting anything , I would prefer to concentrate on three questions .
What must we do now to restore this confidence ?
How can we encourage people to give blood more frequently and persuade more people to give ?
Thirdly , does the solution not lie in the remuneration of donors , as certain European States already practise this system ?
In response to this last question , I would say straight away that the answer , for me , is ' no ' .
Definitely not .
Blood and blood products are not goods .
Incidentally , I would note that some people , here and there , and even in this Parliament , who vehemently defend ethical principles on matters relating to human genetics , have no problem defending the option of payment being given for blood , and therefore payment being given for the human body .
I shall say no more for now , as I do not want to get angry .
I must also , however , refer to the sickening trafficking that takes place in countries where people have no other means of survival but to sell blood or other organs .
That is why we must stand firm on this matter , in order to avoid any deviation , scandal or attack on human dignity and the ethical principles we share and hold dear .
Blood donations must therefore remain based on the principles of free consent , anonymity and benevolence .
I feel this is something that should not even be up for discussion .
Of course , we must distinguish between remuneration for blood as such and reimbursement of costs incurred in order to give blood : refreshments and snacks , reimbursement of transport costs , and time taken from work to give blood .
The proposal put forward in this area is along the right lines .
It has been strengthened and clarified to very positive effect by the European Parliament .
I shall take this opportunity to congratulate Professor Nisticò warmly on the quality of his work .
Lastly , it is important to emphasise certain essential points : blood quality and safety standards , more stringent specifications on the acceptability of blood and plasma donors , and testing of blood donations in the European Community .
In conclusion , I would say that , in terms of the points that were the subject of contention , I can accept the results obtained through the conciliation procedure with regard to the guarantee of traceability and the quality of the staff directly involved in collection , testing , processing and storage .
For all these reasons , Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , I can vote in favour of this report and would call on you to do the same .
It is our responsibility to help increase public awareness of this gesture , which saves the lives of tens of thousands of people each year , a gesture that could be more common in future , so that our needs can be met in a human and ethical manner .
Madam President , I would like to congratulate my colleague , Mr Nisticó , for the outcome of conciliation , which must be considered a good achievement from Parliament 's viewpoint .
Many of our aims were realised , and the directive must surely serve to contribute to general confidence both in the quality of donated blood and in the health protection of donors in an integrating Europe .
For Finns the end result will not , however , be spot on , as it were .
Parliament accepted my amendment regarding the non-remuneration of blood donation in the first reading in September 2001 , but we had to yield in the end .
We would have been very glad to see an unconditional principle of non-remuneration applied throughout Europe ; now it is mentioned merely as a hoped-for goal , and not , unfortunately , as an obligation .
In the actual Article that concerns non-remuneration the hope is expressed that blood and blood components should be derived as far as possible from this type of donation .
The non-remuneration principle was resisted with the argument that it was hard to obtain rare blood products .
I myself would have resolved the matter in individual cases without opening the floodgates to remuneration for all blood products .
Many patient groups and authorities at one time appealed to Parliament not to allow the commercialisation of blood donation .
First of all , there is a safety risk involved .
There is also an ethical risk .
We have a responsibility for the extent to which the rest of the world copies what we do .
If we allow trade in human body parts and blood we have to consider that the less developed countries will follow Europe 's example .
This could lead not only to exploitation but increased risk .
Furthermore , several Member States are signatories to a bioethical agreement which categorically forbids the economic exploitation of the human body and its parts , including blood .
Finland does not , however , need to renounce its principle of non-remuneration , as the recitals refer to the rights of Member States to maintain stricter protective measures by virtue of the Treaty .
I hope that when in time this directive is reviewed , we will also consider the part the principle of non-remuneration has to play .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I agree with the other speakers who have said that this conciliation procedure went well from Parliament 's point of view , considering the original position we were in .
It is essential that matters like these that are so important for human life , such as the quality of blood and its safety , are guaranteed everywhere in Europe .
For this reason , I think progress was being made in this matter when the objective was voluntary donation and non-remuneration .
It must certainly be considered regrettable that this objective has not been fully realised , although I believe we shall move in this direction in future discussions on the subject .
The wording of the conciliation decision also refers to this .
As has been said here , blood or its components cannot be commercial goods .
This is more about a gift from one person to another and that is the way it should be seen .
When in conciliation the greatest worry in the final stages was what level of health professional should carry out a health examination of donors , in my opinion the final outcome was very good indeed .
It is important that it should be a health professional : we also have to have confidence in others than those practising the profession of doctor .
The next item is the Commission statement on the presence of nitrofurans and other prohibited substances in poultry and shrimps .
Commissioner , you have the floor .
Madam President , Commissioner , I think this is a very wide ranging and difficult subject .
I have listened very carefully to what you have said and I come now to a topic that I would have liked to have put before you earlier in writing .
But I believe that a joint effort may perhaps still elicit an answer from you .
Nitrofurans is a generic term .
One very important product it covers is Nifursol .
Nifursol is the last histomonostat still to be permitted in the EU for use as an additive in poultry feed to prevent blackhead disease .
I admit I am not a scientist .
According to my information , however , experts say that this product was banned for good in Regulation 2377 / 90 .
The Scientific Committee for Animal Nutrition ( SCAN ) was asked by the Commission to make a risk assessment of Nifursol .
Investigations that will give a definite answer have yet to be carried out .
Because I also have the feed additives report , I have now heard the alarm bells ringing , because many who are concerned with this matter fear there will be a treatment crisis in a few months ' time .
As a logical consequence of the ban on nitrofurans in Regulation 2377 / 90 , Regulation 1756 / 2002 was issued on 23 September 2002 , banning Nifursol from 31 March 2003 .
When this ban comes into force on 31 March , there will , for example , be a crisis in the treatments used to combat blackhead disease in turkeys .
No alternative remedy is available legally in the EU , either as a feed additive or as a veterinary medicine .
The consequences of the ban will hit both fatteners and consumers .
The consequences are a treatment emergency , a painful end for large stocks of birds , jeopardy for turkey farms , the development of an uncontrollable black market , and an increase in imports of poultry from third countries , where many substances that are banned in the EU are used with few or any controls .
Only last week antibiotics of the nitrofuran group that are banned in the EU were found again in cheap imports of meat from third countries .
Logically , mixed feed manufacturers will now have to stop using Nifursol by January 2003 at the latest if there is to be no more such feed in the silos by the beginning of March .
My question to you this evening , although I do not know whether you can answer it , is : what solutions do we now have available ?
Personally I find it hard to understand how the Commission can on the one hand , in the report in my possession , on the Commission 's draft of which we worked very hard - approve the use of histomonostats , -- while on the other hand , in another regulation , banning the only product in existence on this market .
I therefore have a few questions .
What are we to say to the fatteners ?
What are they to do ?
What forms of treatment are available to them ?
And secondly , is the Commission aware that European production is continuing to decline , is disappearing from the market in the European Union and that we are being increasingly exposed to third country imports of turkey meat , although we still do not know what quality standards those imports come up to ?
I think I can be brief but would very much like to respond to the Commissioner 's reply .
I believe that it is particularly important to acknowledge the problem in the first instance .
However , I had the feeling that the Commissioner did not wish to acknowledge at all that there is a problem at this moment in the Union as regards the presence of a number of forbidden antibiotics in , for example , chickens and prawns .
We all know , Commissioner , that you are especially concerned and are making great efforts to ensure food safety and this House , across all party boundaries , supports you in that .
But it is very important - and we still have doubts about this - that the same statutory framework should be applied to products produced in the EU and for products marketed in the EU .
I believe this is precisely where the sticking point is .
I come from Belgium where we had the dioxin crisis , which is certainly not unknown to you .
On that occasion , the Commission acted in a draconian manner against Belgium .
You were right , quite right to take strict measures and one of your main accusations related to the fact that the Member State failed to give sufficient information .
I believe that we are now in a similar situation .
We have no alternative but to acknowledge the problem and therefore we regret the fact that the inspection mission did not go ahead , since we are convinced that you did not have sufficient reason .
I believe that it is absolutely unacceptable that trade relations should be revoked to ensure that certain inspections do not take place or that lower or different standards should be applied .
I should have therefore preferred a number of more concrete answers to the questions , since I do not have the impression that you dealt with them properly .
I also think that you can provide a better answer in order to reassure the consumer that what eventually finds its way onto his plate is safe .
Madam President , Commissioner , there are two areas that give us cause for concern .
The health of consumers is , of course , one of them , but there is also the position of producers here if we are not able to ensure that what may not be used here , may not be used outside the EU either .
The question is , who produces these substances and how can they get into the European Union ?
You have now said there are intensive controls , but - if I understood that correctly - foreign missions are unnecessary because we find bad conditions there anyway .
So we do not need to go there .
I have heard that today 's meeting of the Standing Committee was to have discussed removing Thailand again from the list of countries that must be subject to special inspections .
On what basis was that decision to be taken ?
I have also heard that you have announced inspection missions to those countries for next year .
What reason do you now have to assume that those missions will be worthwhile ?
I think that , if these countries do not meet our requirements , they should be put on the list , and then they cannot supply us until they can guarantee that the products they supply to the European Union meet our standards .
There is another problem that needs to be clarified .
What happens to the shrimps , poultry meat and turkey that is imported into the Union and does not meet our requirements ?
Is it sent back ?
What is done with it ?
As we have been saying about food waste for a long time , a ban is not enough .
We saw that with the shrimps from China , which somewhere found their way into animal feed and by that route got into the food chain again .
What I would therefore like is for you to put forward a clear plan that we , who have to justify ourselves as parliamentarians - including to the Commission - can stand by and say that the Commission , the European Union , is being strict enough here .
We cannot have it perceived to be true that you say the Commission enters into trade relations with some countries and is less strict with them , even though doubts have arisen about that recently .
I hope you will be able to clear this up in your reply .
Madam President , it seems like only yesterday that the Commissioner and I were talking about other issues regarding the safety of some of these foodstuffs .
Does the Commissioner still believe that his statement of 28 June was a necessary and sufficient answer to the concerns that have been raised ?
He has just told us that the FVO missions to Brazil and Thailand , and probably elsewhere , were cancelled because 100 % testing is now in place within the Member States .
If the Commissioner did not say that , then I misheard him .
It is certainly true that in some of those Member States - notably Germany and the Netherlands - considerable concern has been expressed about the degree of nitrofuran residues in poultry and the extent to which even a very sophisticated Member State cannot guarantee by itself the degree of testing .
The issue is not only what happens within the Member State - as the Commissioner knows , there have been a whole series of rapid alerts during 2002 .
I would like to know how many rapid alerts throughout the European Union have been proclaimed in this calendar year as a result of this continuing anxiety about carcinogens like nitrofuran when residues are discovered in imports .
I would like to know whether or not he feels that poultry imports from countries like Brazil give cause for serious concern .
I would like the Commissioner to put on record the opinion of the Commission and its own residues experts on the number of tonnes of poultry from the states in question that have passed into the European Union without proper inspection .
My information is that something like 2000 tonnes of Brazilian poultry have entered the EU in this way .
How close does the Commissioner believe we are to achieving 100 % safety testing in the Member States ?
Why are these missions being postponed ?
Is the SANCO DG under pressure from other directorates ?
Are there questions here about endangering trade talks , meaning that one should not throw suspicion on any other states ?
If that is the case , it is not a sufficient answer to give to those whose primary concern is - as is the Commission 's - food safety .
Finally , how soon will these proposed missions take place ?
The Commissioner said earlier today in the debate on foot and mouth disease that he did not like disguised forms of protectionism - nor do I. However , I do not like disguised forms of concealment either , where there is a risk .
If the money is not available and that is why these FVO missions have been postponed - tell us so .
There are members of the Committee on Budgets here now .
Parliament is very keen to support you , but we need candour in order to do it .
Madam President , Commissioner , in the past we might have talked about pigs ' ears , today it looks more like fishy goings-on .
We read today in communication COM ( 2002 ) 422 , which was presented yesterday , that a firm has imported shrimps with very high nitrofuran levels - 20 mg - from Vietnam via Ostend into Germany and then on to Austria and Luxembourg as well as selling them in Germany .
How is that possible ?
This communication is dated 25 November , but only today , nearly four weeks later , is there an early alert .
Why were four weeks allowed to elapse ?
I would like you to give me , and Luxembourg 's consumers , a clear answer .
My second question is this . On 2 October you relaxed controls for Vietnam .
That is a Commission decision .
I will read you what it says :
Mr President , firstly I would like to say how grateful I am to Members of Parliament for raising these important issues .
Let me also say that I am sure all of you may well accept this as a valuable contribution to debates in Parliament but sometimes general questions are followed up by extremely detailed questions that can best be responded to in correspondence .
However , I will do my best to answer such questions as you have raised .
I have taken notes and if I am not able to deal with technical issues of a specific nature , I will respond to the questioner in writing .
The issues that have been raised centre around the question of why the inspections were suspended and when these inspections will be resumed .
As I indicated in my earlier contribution , these inspections were suspended either because there was a ban on the importation of products from that country or because in the two countries in question there was 100 % testing in respect of all products coming from those countries .
It is expected that the controls that are put in place in Member States effectively carry out the job that they are supposed to do because it is understood that these inspections have to be 100 % .
Therefore it is important that they reveal any residues in any of the foods that are designated for testing .
When the tests show positive , I want to confirm , as I indicated earlier , that these products are destroyed .
A number of you raised the question whether there were doubts about standards and whether there was any pressure being put on the Commission and on DG SANCO in particular by other DGs in relation to the carrying out of tests or the changing of procedures , either by suspending FVO inspections in third countries or by not doing so .
I confirm to the House considerations of that kind never impinge on a decision in relation to food safety .
I have made that point here in this Parliament on many occasions and I am happy to repeat it now .
Inevitably you meet representatives from the developing countries that we are talking about and often others , sometimes Members of Parliament , who make the suggestion that perhaps the European Union is putting in place precautionary barriers in place of tariff barriers .
This is an important issue and has to be taken into account , but I have always responded by saying that the protection of public health , the protection of consumers and the maintenance of the standards that consumers expect in relation to the importation of food must come first .
I have to assure Members of Parliament who raised this question that the decisions that are taken in relation to these kinds of issues - testing for residues - are strictly based on the scientific analysis and judgement of the technical and scientific staff in DG SANCO , who give their advice as to the appropriate way forward in respect of these issues .
No other political or trade consideration is ever taken into account .
That simply does not happen .
On the question of when the inspections will be resumed , that will happen in the spring , but there is not much point in sending inspectors to third countries - or the ones I have been describing - to carry out tests to determine what we know already , to confirm the continuation of either a ban or 100 % testing .
The only conclusion that is being suggested by those who raised this question is that , if these tests and inspections continue and if it is found that there are still residues or that 100 % testing is an inefficient and inadequate response , we should there and then decide to put in place a ban on the importation of foods from those developing countries .
That is a very serious decision to take .
We have to determine whether it is a proportionate response to a risk that may exist to the consumers of the European Union , bearing in mind not just trade considerations but the kinds of consideration I am sure questioners have in mind here today .
I know that you have concerns about the welfare of and benefits to developing countries also .
This is not an inconsiderable issue .
In deciding what is an appropriate response , we have to take into account all of these considerations and make sure that we come to proportionate responses .
One of the most difficult aspects of my job in dealing with food safety is to come up with solutions that are proportionate .
Very often , when you are too hard , people will point that out .
Sometimes when they believe that you are too weak , the other side will point that out .
It is not always possible to keep everybody happy on all occasions .
But I am satisfied , bearing in mind the rigour with which inspectors from the Food and Veterinary Office carry out their work and the reports they make , which are made available to the public on the Internet for all of us to read , as well as the work that is undertaken by the control authorities in the Member States to ensure that where 100 % testing is required , that is done .
That appears to me to be the proportionate response to the risk that may have been identified .
All the time we keep this under review .
In the event that a problem arises , to the extent that it arose in China , it was felt that the only appropriate response in those circumstances was a ban .
As a consequence , a ban was placed on the importation of chickens , crustaceans , honey and one or two other products .
That was the appropriate response in those circumstances .
If we come to the conclusion that is the appropriate response in respect of other countries which seek to trade with the European Union and send food here , as distinct from the continuation from a 100 % control programme , that will happen .
But we have not reached that view in respect of the two countries I have identified .
The more detailed and technical questions that have been raised by many of you I have taken note of . I will ensure that each of you receives a response in writing in due course .
Thank you , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .

Madam President , Mr Liikanen , ladies and gentlemen , I would like , first of all , to thank my 12 colleagues in the European Parliament delegation to the Conciliation Committee .
I can see Mr Bowe , Mrs Schörling , Mr Lund , and Mrs Van Brempt , all of whom have firmly and vigorously defended consumers ' right to safe , effective flame retardants .
This joint text could not have been prepared without the efficient work of the Danish Presidency - who will receive the message - and the Commission either , of course .
We have come so far since 16 January 2001 , when the Commission submitted this proposal for a directive which , I would remind you , was aimed at prohibiting the marketing and use of pentabromodiphenyl ether alone , a brominated flame retardant used , in particular , in the manufacture of polyurethane foam , a chemical substance that is harmful to our environment and our health .
It is found at high concentrations , in particular in breast milk , with a significant risk of contamination in infants .
Logically , therefore , at first reading Parliament pronounced itself in favour of prohibiting pentaBDE in all its forms , thus confirming the red card that the Commission had shown it .
There was therefore unanimity with regard to this first substance .
Having said this , Parliament , in its vote of September 2001 , also wanted this proposal to cover the two sister substances , octabromodiphenyl ether and decabromodiphenyl ether .
Given the strong indications of the hazardous nature of octabromodiphenyl ether , both for the environment and public health , the European Parliament , once again with a very large majority , pronounced itself in favour of immediate prohibition .
Parliament , however , chose to show decabromodiphenyl ether the yellow card , by proposing to defer its prohibition to 1 January 2006 at the latest and make it conditional upon the final results of a risk analysis .
This approach strictly applied the precautionary principle and was not , at this point , shared by either the Council in its common position or the Commission in its amended proposal .
In this kind of matter , where chemical substances are in the dock , debate is always tricky .
We needed to establish a fragile balance between obvious advantages in terms of fire safety and equally proven disadvantages in some cases in terms of health and the environment .
It is this balance in risk management , taking account of factors as varied as scientific risk assessment , proportionality and cost-benefit analysis , that was at the heart of the discussions within our Conciliation Committee .
Three trialogues were eventually necessary to bring together the various points of view and reach a compromise that was acceptable to all , mainly where decabromodiphenyl ether was concerned , since , I must emphasise , as regards octabromodiphenyl ether , the pressure exerted by Parliament paid off .
This pressure contributed to the swift , eventually negative conclusion of the risk assessment and convinced the Council to support us in prohibiting the use of this substance .
In the case of decabromodiphenyl ether , the insertion in the joint text of a recital inviting the Commission to immediately assess the results of the risk reduction strategy , expected by 30 June next year at the latest , seems to me to be objectively the first compromise we have been able to achieve at this stage because , in this case , contrary to the case of octabromodiphenyl ether , in the absence of a final risk reduction strategy and , in particular , in the absence of risks to human health - the conclusions of the French rapporteur are definite in this regard - this deferment accompanied by strict conditions is justified .
It should , however , be pointed out that decabromodiphenyl ether , which is mainly used in insulating products , in construction and textiles , is a particularly effective , fire-resistant flame retardant .
In the United Kingdom alone , in the year 2000 , 155 lives were saved and 4 537 injuries avoided by the presence of this kind of substance in furniture upholstery .
So much effort has been put into reaching this agreement in the Conciliation Committee .
I sometimes had the impression , as rapporteur , that I was acting as a member of the European office for chemical products rather than a representative elected directly by the citizens because of the cumbersome , slow risk assessment process with little transparency .
It has taken almost ten years for brominated fire retardants , which are included in the list of priority substances , to be assessed at last .
I sincerely hope that this textbook case will enable the Commission and , in particular , the Member States , to understand the need , when preparing future legislation on chemical products , to establish a new assessment method that is swifter , more effective and more transparent , a REACH system which , as proposed by the resolution adopted by Parliament in November 2001 , is based on a genuine risk management strategy at Community level .
In conclusion , and I shall go back to my footballing metaphor , whereas the Commission , in its initial proposal , only gave half a red card to pentabromodiphenyl ether , Parliament and the Council , as fair , impartial referees , give two red cards to pentabromodiphenyl ether and octabromodiphenyl ether and a yellow card to decabromodiphenyl ether , as the essential aim is to reconcile citizens ' immediate safety from fire hazards with the more long-term benefits in the field of public health and the environment .
The joint text to be submitted to Parliament tomorrow fulfils this dual objective .
For all these reasons , I would ask my fellow Members to support it .
Madam President , I wish to begin by thanking Members for their interest in this proposal and especially Mrs Ries , the rapporteur , for her constructive work , as well as the delegation of the European Parliament in the Conciliation Committee .
This is an important directive , as it would introduce a ban on substances that have been identified as dangerous brominated flame-retardants posing unacceptable risks to human health and the environment .
It is a far-reaching proposal as it bans the marketing and use of all articles containing these substances .
The proposed directive will therefore encourage the marketing and use of safer alternatives .
Furthermore , the proposed directive provides not only for the protection of human health and of the environment but it would also preserve the internal market , as it would introduce harmonised rules throughout the Community .
The conciliation procedure that is about to be concluded has benefited from the fact that the risk assessment and the risk reduction strategy for ocataBDE became available in July of this year .
We were therefore able to include ' octa ' in this directive .
The Commission believes that this is a positive outcome .
Considering the discussions about the extension of the ban to the third brominated flame retardant , decaBDE , this requires further examination and finalisation of the currently ongoing risk assessment .
Simultaneously , a risk reduction strategy will be developed .
This is an important step in the procedure .
It will allow the right balance to be found between the protection of health and the environment , on the one hand , and the need for effective fire protection on the other .
As the risk assessment procedure and the risk reduction strategy will be completed in the next few months , the Commission will soon be able to propose justified measures .
In conclusion , I am very glad about the successful cooperation between the European Parliament and the Council and hope that this important directive can now be finalised .
Madam President , like the previous two speakers I welcome this report and I praise the rapporteur for her work .
The initial proposal to ban the use of the flame retardant pentaBDE was not considered by Parliament to be adequate , as closely related substances - octaBDE and decaBDE - were not included .
Furthermore , Parliament was dissatisfied with the speed at which the risk assessment was being carried out , as this was delaying any real concrete decisions .
No one underestimates the value and importance of these substances : they are very effective flame retardants and they save lives .
However , they appear to have dangerous effects on the environment and public health and , therefore , we felt something had to be done .
I am sure that Parliament is pleased that the original proposal is now developed and that octaBDe has also been banned .
However , Parliament cannot be totally happy about the fate of decaBDE , which remains to be decided .
Parliament would like a clear date for action on this .
The fate of this remaining substance is still hanging in the balance .
We need clear reassurance from the Council and the Commission - by way of an insertion of a paragraph in the text during conciliation - that prompt , immediate action will be taken when the results of the risk assessment become available , as promised , in June 2003 .
I hope the Commissioner will confirm that tonight .
On this basis , the PSE Group can support this proposal , which will be put to the vote tomorrow morning .
Mr President , I should like very much to thank Mrs Ries for the sterling work she has done on this matter .
It is of course a good example of the European Parliament 's being able to promote the protection of the environment and of public health in Europe .
The Commission only proposed a ban on the marketing and use of one of the dangerous flame retardants , pentaBDE , and , following demands by Parliament , the directive was successfully extended so that the final result arrived at by the conciliation committee also includes two further flame retardants .
With regard to octaBDE , the risk assessment has clearly revealed that the substance entails obvious risks for the environment and public health , and it has now also , happily , been agreed to implement an immediate ban on the use of this substance .
As far as the third substance , decaBDE , is concerned , the Member States and the Commission , on the other hand , initially maintained their opposition to a ban .
A majority of the conciliation committee chose to defer to that state of affairs , so that decaBDE is only included in a recital in the directive and - if , quoting Mrs Ries , I may put it this way - has only been given a yellow card .
It is safe to say that it will be the environment and public health that , for some time still to come , will now bear the risk of the use of this substance .
I find that very unfortunate , and it illustrates of course the importance , in the chemicals area , of our being able to reverse the burden of proof so that it is the producers who have to show that the substances they use pose no risk to the environment and to human beings .
Unlike Mrs Schörling , however , I believe that the outcome , whereby the result of the conciliation is being adopted , is , in spite of everything , a clear improvement upon the current situation .
That is why I shall vote in favour of the conciliation proposal and the outcome of the conciliation in the final vote tomorrow .
Mr President , there was a direct question about the timing of the Commission proposal .
As I said earlier , the opinion of the Scientific Committee in its risk assessment procedure will be completed in the next few months , and then we can complete the risk reduction strategy .
If that is the case , the Commission will be able to make a proposal by June next year .
My reply to Mr Bowe is therefore ' yes ' .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
Madam President , this is a difficult text .
Over the last 18 months a lot of people have asked me , ' What is all this that you are doing in Europe with electronic waste ?
What is the point of it ? '
The point is quite simply that a few years ago we in the European Union decided that we wanted to operate a sustainable policy in the economic , environmental and social fields .
Six million tonnes of electronic waste every year contain an enormous quantity of valuable materials that we want to reuse in future .
That is the reason for this directive .
I would like to extend my sincere thanks to the members of the Conciliation Committee , and also to the Commissioner and the members of the Council who , I think , have scored a minor victory with this report on electronic waste .
They enabled us to reach agreement on difficult points .
We were , for example , able to state that from 2005 consumers will be more or less enjoined by their Member States - I would have preferred it to have been compulsory - not to throw appliances in the dustbin in future , but to collect them separately .
We have set binding targets .
Unfortunately , Europe is always outstanding in its unlimited use of undefined legal terms .
The hurdles we have set in this directive today are not very high , but they are nevertheless defined and binding .
I think that can be called a success .
Unfortunately , we are still rather vague about how such materials will be treated in future , but we have used the best available technology .
I know only too well that in my country the term ' best available technology ' is interpreted in 16 different ways , because Germany has 16 federal states .
There are bound to still be loopholes , but we have nevertheless made real progress in the field of recycling quotas , too .
I believe the quotas for industry are achievable and no one can say we are asking too much .
In 2005 , citizens will be able to take their products to a collection point free of charge , unless the Member State goes a step further .
The Member States can decide that individually .
I think our agreement on ' individual financing ' was a great success .
It is a step forward because we would like to have a guidance instrument and those who today are building computers that lend themselves to recycling - like this one , for example - should also be rewarded and those who want to continue producing boring old-fashioned ones in the future should be asked to contribute to the high costs of disposal .
There were actually countries that did not want to take this approach .
I am pleased to say that by working night and day with the help of other members in other groups we were able to persuade them to agree after all .
Following on from the packaging regulation and the end-of-life vehicles regulation , this individual liability is the first step towards a really sustainable environmental policy which , combined with economic policy , has my full support .
We may have succeeded in shutting out the free riders that there always are with such a system .
There are big firms that order 100 000 refrigerators from the Pacific region just before Christmas and fail to put a logo on them so that the small trader or the citizen has to pick up the bill later .
We have made labelling compulsory so that the costs can also be assigned and resources will be available for recycling , however the Member States do it - and we are more than willing to leave that to subsidiarity .
The important thing is the guarantee that it is done , and the text reflects that concern .
That old appliances must be managed and also paid for - in this case collectively - by the undertakings currently in existence on the market is not in question because there is no other system for doing it .
We have , however , left Member States the possibility of disclosing how it is financed so that there can be a ' visible fee ' , or whatever you want to call it , for old stock .
I believe this was also a good step .
I would have been pleased if , when debating end-of-life vehicles and electronic waste , we could have had a more aggressive and longer debate about how we might do more to encourage a flow of secondary raw materials in future .
Unfortunately , we are still very fond of using new primary materials but always tend to turn up our noses at secondary materials .
I might go so far as to say we should give such secondary raw materials preferential VAT treatment .
That is not necessarily my group 's normal position .
I do , however , believe it would be an incentive to bring about real sustainability in this area .
That is what it is really about , ladies and gentlemen .
We want to reuse raw materials in future .
By motivating undertakings to build appliances in such a way that they can be recycled , we have found a free-market way of getting the parties concerned round the same table , and I do not need to tell anyone that for me that is an important reason .
I was also very pleased to have the NGOs fighting alongside us on this question and that the undertakings and NGOs adopted a joint resolution in support of our efforts .
Nothing like that has happened before in the time I have been in this House - and that is thirteen and a half years .
I would at this point also like to thank those colleagues who stayed on board in difficult moments .
There are always plenty who fall by the wayside when the going gets tough .
Again and again colleagues stuck with it whenever there was pressure from the Council , and in the end , that gave us this success - as did the excellent cooperation you gave us , Commissioner .
Basically , though , this directive does have two parts .
The second part is the question of how we are to deal with hazardous substances such as cadmium , lead and hexavalent chromium in future .
I think we have made a small amount of progress here .
Ultimately , this is about collecting and concentrating , for example , stray lead from light bulbs , small radios and small appliances with which we are all familiar .
Ten tonnes of lead in one place are absolutely harmless .
The same amount in small pieces all over the place , however , is a problem .
The Japanese , for example , have shown us very promising approaches here , and we are now making clear to manufacturers , with appropriate incentives , that in the long term we want to create a society where these highly dangerous substances are more and more a thing of the past .
Madam President , Commissioner , I would like to say a personal word to my personal colleagues who have been very busy here , working long hours and sometimes through the night ..
May I once again thank my colleagues , you , Commissioner , and your staff , who always rendered us excellent assistance whenever we were faced with major questions .
I was proud of this European House and would be pleased if in future things could continue in the same way with the next directives .
Madam President , I would also like to thank the Conciliation Committee for its constructive work .
It has been a very good success for Parliament and indeed for the European citizens .
Waste from electronic and electrical equipment is now one of the fastest growing waste streams in the European Union .
As the Commissioner has said , it constitutes almost 14 kilograms per head and is growing by at least 3 % to 5 % every year .
Electronic and electrical equipment is one of the largest known sources of heavy metals and organic pollutants in the waste stream .
Without proper pre-treatment the highly toxic components can contaminate soil and ground water , as well as polluting the air .
The directive can be seen as one of the basic instruments for an integrated product policy , where the whole life cycle of a product will be taken into consideration and eco-design can be promoted .
The need for business to adapt to a changing agenda , taking more account of environmental concerns , is becoming more widely accepted .
Indeed business and the environmental NGOs have been on the same wavelength during this process , which is not always the case .
It is also accepted that countries and industries which innovate more quickly will end up being more competitive than those which delay .
The adoption of this directive will be a signal in that regard .
The guiding principle behind the directive is the extent of producers ' responsibility .
The objective of the EPR is to make producers financially responsible for their products when these become waste so an upstream effect is created which leads to design for the environment , taking account of the durability , repairability or upgrading , disassembly or recycling of the product .
In addition there is reuse of resources and separate collection , and hazardous substances contained in the WEEE are prevented from entering the environment .
The directive also applies the principle of internalisation of external costs .
Costs of disposal , which up to now have been borne by local authorities , usually as part of waste disposal , are now to be internalised and provision made for the reuse , recycling and demanufacture of this equipment .
Hence the ultimate aim is waste prevention , thus sustainability .
Mr President , Commissioner , rapporteur , I shall be brief for two reasons .
Firstly , I find it rather silly having the same debate here with exactly the same people for the third time in plenary .
The second reason is perhaps more important , however , and strikes a very positive note .
This can scarcely be called a debate ; these are statements by people who actually agree with each other to a large extent .
That is the nice thing about the procedure we have been through since , during the first reading , that was absolutely not the case .
During the discussion we have gradually come closer together .
In that respect , we are a strong Parliament and a strong delegation in the negotiations .
As a result , the major aspects that we put forward have actually emerged .
It is no coincidence that the rapporteur should have dwelt at length on the concept of individual producer responsibility .
I shall not expand on it yet again , but it is of crucial importance .
It constitutes a precedent and it is the way in which we must proceed in the months and years ahead in our environmental policy .
And yet , I should like to set that straight . It is not a matter of collective organisation , but of collective funding .
I should like to mention a few other points that are important because none of them have been fully achieved .
I am thinking , for example , of binding targets .
It is true that we have binding targets , but we had to rein in the level of these .
We went from 6 to 4 kilograms .
I do not wish to make a particularly big issue of this , for the simple reason that I have seen how in my country , Belgium , we have managed , in one year in Flanders , to collect 4 kilos and are increasing that figure at an extremely fast rate .
I am also saying this to my British fellow MEPs .
I should like to invite them to Belgium .
We are not top of the class in the environmental field , but , as regards waste prevention and waste recycling , we are .
We are doing that to tight deadlines .
If the political will is there , you can meet tight deadlines .
That is why binding targets are good in themselves .
What I find particularly deplorable is the question of exporting .
We simply export a host of problems .
In that respect , we have not achieved our target for legal reasons .
I accept this regretfully , but I think we must ensure that this problem is solved through other means .
I conclude with a final point that I personally have always defended , namely recycling .
The principle is contained in the directive .
I hope that , next time , we shall be able to achieve concrete targets regarding recycling too .
It remains for me to thank the rapporteur and my fellow MEPs most warmly for the pleasant cooperation we have enjoyed in the course of the night .
I learned a lot and enjoyed myself greatly .
Mr President , now I know at last how European laws are really made .
They are made in the Council of Ministers building by exhausted people shouting at each other in corridors in the middle of the night - and the rapporteur and the Commissioner will know exactly to what I am referring .
If I am asked to give an example of the way in which the principles of sustainable development can be put into practice , then this directive may well be it .
If I am asked about the burden of new regulations which Parliament sometimes places upon industry in the cause of environmental improvement , I will proclaim this directive as an example of the way in which industry and Parliament can work together .
It is a splendid piece of legislation .
It is not the end , but it is a good beginning and much credit goes to both the Commission and our rapporteur .
I am particularly pleased with the principle of individual producer responsibility , which has been so firmly embraced .
Within the last week we have seen two good illustrations of the way in which industry is responding to it professionally and effectively .
Four of the major manufacturers of electrical goods , including our chief lobbyist , Electrolux , have teamed up to develop a common approach to waste management which aims to be both innovative and cost efficient .
And the mobile phone manufacturers of the world have agreed to cooperate to ensure the environmentally sound management of their end-of-life products .
My principal concern relates to - and I echo Mrs Doyle 's words - the implementation of the directive .
Just a few weeks ago government representatives in that room in the Council committed themselves to this legislation at the conciliation meeting .
It is all supposed to be transposed into national law in about 18 months ' time .
But judging from our experience with the end-of-life vehicles directive , that will not be the case so far as many Member States are concerned .
The UK Government has still not transposed Mr Florenz 's legislation .
I hope the Commission will take advantage of the European Convention to present some proposals to change the enforcement procedures to stop Member States getting away with breaking their commitments and playing the system .
Finally , the text of Article 4 was the matter I referred to in my opening remarks .
I tabled the draft to try and deal with the problem of printer cartridges , many of which are not being recycled for anti-competitive reasons and are instead ending up in poisonous dumps in China .
I hear that , sadly , the UK Government is trying to wriggle out of the intended requirement to prevent producers from making their reuse difficult by claiming that these products are consumables .
It will probably take a British judge to make them recognise the obvious truth , that a cartridge fitted with an electronic chip is an item of electronic equipment .
I hope that other Member States will take the lead in this and in other respects in putting this directive fully into practice , and show by example just what a commendable piece of legislation this directive will prove to be .
I wish you and members of the conciliation delegation , and the Commissioner and her staff , a merry Christmas .
I should also like to congratulate rapporteur , Mr Florenz .
This is an historic breakthrough .
Ten years ago , we , as the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , proposed individual producer responsibility in the packaging directive .
At that time , we were laughed out of court .
We have a packaging directive that , as we say in the Netherlands , ' is not worth a light ' , and that is because there is shared responsibility between the government and the producer .
In the case of car wrecks we were almost successful two years ago .
In that case , the manufacturers are largely responsible , and it is interesting to see that German industry , which at the time was so opposed to the move , now takes full responsibility .
Tomorrow , we shall have achieved our goal , moreover : the manufacturers will become one hundred per cent responsible for electrical and electronic waste .
It is not the case that the industry was united on the matter .
The largest company in the field in my country , Philips , was decidedly antagonistic .
The fact that we in this House achieved a compromise between the various groups as early as the first reading and held our ground up to the night-time session with its accompanying noisy exchanges contributed , however , to our success and , for that , I should like especially to thank Mr Florenz most sincerely .
Mr President , the concerns about increasing quantities of electrical and electronic equipment entering the waste system have been well rehearsed .
There can be no dispute that this type of waste is a problem .
Furthermore , there is no dispute that the problem will continue to grow .
However , there is a world of difference between agreeing that something is a problem and agreeing with a proposed solution .
My purpose in making this address , therefore , is to enter into the record my total disagreement with this directive .
My central objection is that the directive is economically illiterate .
Its effect will be to create massive quantities of materials in a highly volatile market .
When quantities increase as a result of this directive , the value of recycled materials will drop , making the economics of recycling extremely uncertain .
On this basis , producers and eventually their customers , are being asked to sign a blank cheque .
Neither does any serious consideration seem to have been given to the problem of labour recruitment .
Salvaging materials is highly labour-intensive yet the work is unattractive .
Either wages will have to go up sharply to meet the demand for more staff or the scheme will be bedevilled by labour shortages .
The recycling plants required to meet this directive are highly capital-intensive .
With such uncertain returns it seem unlikely that there will be any commitment to providing the necessary facilities .
Finally , I have to add to a list of objections that is by no means complete the fact that , as we have learned to expect from EU legislation , the system is highly bureaucratic , adding massive overheads and a totally unnecessary burden on industry .
It also requires Member States to create yet more criminal offences to regulate the commercial market .
Is turning our businessmen into criminals really what European unity is really all about ?
Is this really what Monnet planned ?
Surely there is a better way .
Logically , if there are tax breaks for companies which use recycled materials and import controls which favour equipment with high proportions of recycled materials as well as tax breaks for companies that process the materials , this would create a market .
One could find that , as with the car batteries ' recycling - before the EU destroyed it - a new market would be created .
Properly designed such a scheme could permit end-users to be paid for delivering waste material , which is exactly what happened with car batteries and the reason why - before the EU intervened - we managed to recycle over 80 % of car batteries .
With that degree of cooperation the most expensive part of the scheme - collection costs - are minimised .
It seems that , whenever there is a choice between a simple and effective scheme and one that is costly , bureaucratic and inefficient and also criminalises the business fraternity , the European Union always goes for the latter .
If you need an explanation as to why there is growing disenchantment with the European Union , just look at this directive and the many more like it .
Mr President , the report by my colleague , Mr Florenz , is one of the most important achievements this parliamentary term from Parliament 's point of view .
Firstly , producers are now to be made responsible for the complete life cycles of the equipment they sell .
The unambiguous application of individual producer liability is something that I , as the person who originally proposed the amendment , am especially glad about .
This is precisely the way we can ensure that product design takes account of the environment and therefore the directive 's whole viability .
If producers know they are the ones that have to pay when equipment reaches the end of its life cycle , they will minimise costs beforehand and ensure that as little waste as possible is created and that that small amount has maximum potential for recycling .
Parliament 's wish to prevent anyone from getting a ' free ride ' has also been taken into consideration in a fair way , inter alia , by demanding that producers should provide a guarantee to cover costs when products are released for sale .
Secondly , we have to mention our rapporteur 's splendid solution regarding the obligation to recycle , something that has been fully achieved , but regarding which there has to be evidence of a rate of four kilograms of waste per inhabitant a year .
Thus , not a gram of waste is to remain without someone taking responsibility for it , although for various practical reasons - and this was the compromise that was finally reached during conciliation - the obligation regarding evidence itself is in respect of just 4 kilograms .
The entire chain , therefore - producers , importers , dealers , consumers , organisers of waste disposal and recycling , and the authorities - will each be in a responsible position , but the balance of responsibility among them that has been found is excellent .
Furthermore , market mechanisms have been used just as they should : there will be positive incentives to encourage more ecological behaviour .
Unfortunately , it has to be said that the position taken by the Council right up to the last moment to solve the question of costs would not have worked in this way and it would not have had such an ecological impact , although it might have been tempting for Member States in terms of taxation .
I hope that the Member States also find a fair solution regarding how collection facilities are organised .
In so far as it is possible , it will be the responsibility of the local authorities , and the producer 's liability for costs starts at the collection point .
I believe that we have found an excellent model in the WEEE Directive , which , hopefully soon , we will be able to apply to many other product groups .
When the Commission is drafting proposals on these may it be encouraged by the unanimous support we have had for the proposal now before us from environmental and consumer organisations , as well as the industry itself .
Mr President , I agree with everyone who has spoken tonight .
This is a substantial and very important proposal .
When fully implemented it will bring about a transformation in the culture of recycling in many Member States .
The rapporteur can be truly proud of his work and he is to be congratulated on it .
The requirements in these two proposals : firstly , to ensure recycling of substantial quantities of waste electronic and electrical goods , and , secondly , to ensure substantial reductions in the amount of hazardous substances in these products will be technically and financially very difficult to achieve for many people .
Patience must be shown with some Member States that are starting from scratch and have very little infrastructure for recycling .
In particular we cannot expect the new accession states to achieve easily or quickly the high levels of recycling of these products that already exist in some more advanced Member States .
We can be pleased that individual consumers can expect to return their waste appliances free of charge , and that the primary responsibility for collection and disposal of waste electrical and electronic goods will be with the producer .
However , we may see the unfortunate situation of local authorities - and consequently local taxpayers - dealing with orphan and some historic waste .
In that situation , the governments that have agreed to this proposal have a responsibility to support financially this necessary work .
Despite all the difficulties that I foresee in implementing this proposal in parts of the Union , we are taking a very important step tonight and tomorrow when we vote on it - it brings us all a very practical step forward towards a sustainable future for the European economy and a sustainable future for all .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I , too , would like to thank Mr Florenz for this report .
I would particularly like to thank him because he initially took quite a different position on the end-of-life vehicles directive .
I think it is a sign of greatness to change your position and make clear that producer liability is possible .
If we had not found so satisfactory a solution to the problems with the end-of-life vehicles directive , we would not have been able to adopt this directive , either , because it would not have been evident why some were excluded from producer liability and others not .
I therefore believe it is a very great success not only for the environment but also for consumer protection .
I think it is very important that consumers will in future be able to have greater certainty that prices are telling the ecological truth and that consumers need not buy new hardware with every new software program .
In this way , we are also giving industry incentives to pursue not only environmentally friendly policies but also consumer-friendly ones .
I think it is very important that we have succeeded in arranging this individual financing and also that we were able to prevent the Council having its way and that small and medium-sized undertakings will not be released from liability .
I would , however , also ask the Commission to strictly control and enforce this individual financing later .
Only then will this directive really be a milestone in environmental and consumer protection .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would also like to begin by offering Karl-Heinz Florenz my warmest congratulations .
He has put his heart into his report , he has fought for it and I believe he has achieved a good result .
I believe putting the focus on firms ' own liability goes to the heart of the problem .
In future , these firms will be able to participate in public tenders , serve local and regional public institutions and invite tenders .
That means things can get much cheaper for consumers .
One problem that of course arises for small and medium-sized firms is how they are to provide a guarantee for various services .
The question of how they are to provide such guarantees in the future is raised at this very time with the Basel II rules , which are all about creditworthiness , securities and transparency .
It is important that national , regional or local political decision makers give some thought to how they can help small and medium-sized undertakings over guarantees in the future .
Another point is the bans on substances .
I think the Commission should be very careful to ensure that proof of sustainability is furnished in the next three years , so that we can see that these bans really do make for a better , more sustainable , more ecological performance .
Consumption and costs must not be allowed to increase in certain areas because of the bans , putting a counterproductive burden on the system .
All in all , I believe the discussion has been most worthwhile .
I would also like to sincerely thank the Commissioner because it is also an important forward-looking step in the area of refuse and waste and because small and medium-sized firms are being given completely new opportunities here .
Thank you very much , Mr Rübig .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .
The next item is the report ( A5-0435 / 2002 ) by Eija-Riitta Anneli Korhola , on the joint text approved by the Conciliation Committee for a European Parliament and Council directive on public access to environmental information and repealing Council Directive 90 / 313 / EEC ( PE-CONS 3667 / 2002 - C5-0512 / 2002 - 2000 / 0169 ( COD ) ) .
Mr President , I would firstly like to thank the Commission for the great support that Parliament has received during a legislation process that has lasted two and a half years .
I do not believe that the result we have now achieved would have come anywhere close to the success it is without that support , even though Parliament 's will has been unambiguous and unwavering the whole time .
I myself have been a steadfast advocate of Parliament 's opinions , as in many ways we are dealing with matters that have to do with Parliament 's essential function .
First of all , with this directive we are granting the public important new rights .
Secondly , we are endorsing the principles of good administration and transparency .
Thirdly , we are promoting sustainable development in the manner outlined at the Rio Summit .
In addition , we are ensuring that our citizens have a healthy environment .
It would be impossible to fit more central issues to the European Parliament than these into a single directive .
The exceptionally large number of differing opinions with regard to amendments was a special challenge during conciliation .
Furthermore , we observed that the Council , once we had actually achieved conciliation , was not at all willing , according to the country holding the Presidency , to produce a directive .
If Mr Florenz 's report can be considered a great victory for Parliament in terms of its content , this directive of mine is one of Parliament 's greatest victories for the very reason that we were able to achieve a positive solution in spite of the Council digging its heels in .
This is not just any solution , either .
This is a directive that represents Parliament 's opinion in a significant way and one that meets the minimum requirements of the Århus Convention fully and even goes beyond them .
The most important details of the outcome of conciliation are those that relate to exceptional circumstances .
As a result of conciliation the opportunities to resort to these are limited , meaning real transparency can be achieved .
In addition , the authorities will be obliged to adhere to the practice whereby the benefit obtained by making an exception is weighed against that achieved by making it public , on a case-by-case basis .
Information on emissions into the environment must always be disclosed even in exceptional circumstances except on grounds relating to defence , safeguarding the course of justice , or industrial or intellectual property rights .
Another important outcome of the negotiations concerns payments .
The directive mentions the principle of providing information free of charge as a general practice and particularly when it is a matter of examining information in situ or using public registers and lists .
When charges do apply they must be reasonable and must not exceed the costs incurred in providing the material in question .
A third important outcome of the negotiations is that a special new section on the requirements for the quality of environmental information was approved for the directive .
Member States must ensure that the information is up to date , accurate , and , above all , capable of being used for comparisons .
With regard to emissions , measurement procedures must also be disclosed so that comparisons can be made .
The quality of information is especially important now that the availability of information is being granted as a right to a wide public , and one , therefore , that is unfamiliar with that specific subject .
Experts should be in a position to suspect that the information on emissions they are examining has been compiled using a very different scale or measurement procedure from the figure to which they are attempting to relate the information .
Another good result is that the authorities will have an obligation to assist and advise people seeking information so that they can apply their rights in the best possible way .
Other practical arrangements agreed in the directive are also viable and fair from the point of view of the authorities that are responsible for implementing them .
We might therefore say that correcting the perceived weaknesses and shortcomings in the implementation of the old directive , which was mentioned as one of the aims of this directive , is being successfully realised .
The objective of the directive that is being realised least satisfactorily in fact is the aim to bring it up to date with developments in information technology .
It seems very easy to make grand statements about eEurope , but when it is a matter of an obligation to create concrete content for an eEurope , some Member States even oppose the Internet being mentioned .
Luckily , we had a special statement approved that said that developments in telecommunications and electronic media would be taken into special consideration in a re-examination of the directive .
I believe that by the time the re-examination takes place the authorities will have realised that in fact it will be to their advantage if there are easy-to-use databases available for the public to use to search for information themselves .
In this way they will not be taking up the time of the authorities in attending to their request .
The outcome of conciliation can be regarded as satisfactory as far as Parliament is concerned , as the minimum targets laid down in the Århus Convention are exceeded in all essential respects and an important step is being taken in the ratification of the Convention .
The end result will be legislation that appears workable and balanced and which the various Member States , including the new ones , can , with moderate effort , make part of their national legislation and implement .
I warmly recommend the acceptance of this outcome of conciliation in tomorrow 's vote .
Mr President , I want to thank the rapporteur for having fought like a lioness for access to environmental information .
I might say that if I abstained in the vote by the conciliation delegation it was certainly not on account of the rapporteur 's or Parliament 's endeavours , but because the Council was clearly unwilling to actually update the directive on environmental information and propose ambitious targets regarding the Århus goals for access to environmental information .
I believe that Parliament succeeded in preventing the Council 's worst aims to allow Member States a very loose framework for interpretation , for example , regarding the exceptions contained in the directive , on the grounds of which it is possible to refuse to provide the public with information .
It is absolutely typical that the administrative authorities in the Member States should want to have the power to interpret such matters , so that they could then refuse to provide information .
I believe , however , that in this case the worst was able to be prevented .
On the other hand , regarding payments , we can be pleased that the principle of non-chargeable information has been established .
I might nevertheless say that , where a guarantee of information made to the public requires some rummaging around in archives and data to be compiled the authorities will still be able to impose charges .
I do not know if a member of the public should be obliged to pay for the government doing what it is expected to do anyway .
Finally , I would like to cite a case .
The Advocate General of the Court of Justice of the European Communities , Antonio Tizzano , recently stated that the public were not able to be given information by virtue , for example , of the Directive on gene packaging labelling .
I would just like to say that this directive is now being tested as regards whether we have a sufficiently broad definition for environmental information .
It mentions , for example , the food chain , and I hope that this really will guarantee that we will be able to provide our citizens with such information in the future .
Thank you very much , Mrs Hautala .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow at 12 noon .

I congratulate Mrs Langenhagen on the excellent report she has produced on Special Report No 2 / 2002 of the Court of Auditors on evaluating the implementation of the Socrates and Youth for Europe Community action programmes in the 1995-1999 period , which I fully support , particularly with regard to the issue of imposing clarity , accuracy and rigour at every stage of the Community programmes , from design to evaluation .
In this context , I should also like to emphasise that the European Parliament must , under the decision-making process that leads to the adoption of Community acts , call for the clarity of texts , simplified procedures and , when appropriate , mechanisms that ensure the effective management and evaluation of the act in question .
Danish presidency
The Copenhagen summit was a very particular moment in the life of the European Union . I had the privilege of representing Parliament during that summit .
One could not help being touched by the sense of history in the making when , at the end , the Danish presidency negotiated to a conclusion the accord with each of the accession states .
I should say also that substantial terrain has been covered in the other work carried out by the presidency .
Here , I am not referring to the main headline of enlargement , but to the work done over many months with this Parliament on conciliation , which was perhaps hidden from view by the preparations for enlargement .
In terms of the attendance of the presidency , this is the 39th debate in plenary at which the presidency will speak .
Contact with committees has been of an exceptional character and it has set us a new headline in interinstitutional relations with the Council which I hope we can build upon going forward .
I certainly want to say on behalf of Parliament to the Danish prime minister how grateful I am at the improved and substantial level of cooperation between our institutions .
The first item is the joint debate on the Danish presidency : the European Council report and Commission statement on the European Council summit of 12 and 13 December 2002 , and the statement by the President-in-Office of the Council on the work of the Danish presidency .
- ( DA ) Mr President , Commissioners , ladies and gentlemen , the last time I spoke in this House was in the course of the debate on enlargement on 19 November .
That was a great and positive experience .
I left it with a strong and clear mandate to conclude the enlargement negotiations .
I am delighted to be here today with an equally clear result .
Following a long and difficult process , the Presidency concluded the negotiations with ten new Member States at the Copenhagen Summit .
It is our common dream that is coming true ; it is our common aim that is being achieved .
The European Parliament , the Commission and the Presidency have fought together for enlargement .
I was especially pleased , therefore , that the President of the European Parliament took part in the final solemn occasion when , on Friday evening , we welcomed the new members into our Community .
The enlargement negotiations of the last sixth months have been like a long-distance race with a series of difficult hurdles that have had to be cleared along the way .
Parliament , the Commission and the Presidency have stayed the course together , and in Copenhagen we passed the finishing line .
Side by side , hand in hand .
I should like to express my thanks for all the efforts made and for the unfailing support and the help along the way .
The decisions taken in Copenhagen closed one of the darkest and bloodiest chapters in the history of Europe .
We put an end to a century characterised by wars and conflicts .
We finally said goodbye to the Europe of the Yalta Conference and the Cold War .
At the same time , we opened the door to a new era in the history of Europe : an era characterised by freedom , peace , growth and prosperity .
The Copenhagen Summit marked a high point in the history of European cooperation : a triumph for freedom and democracy and a gateway to a better future for all our peoples .
The enlargement of the EU was the Danish Presidency 's main priority - but we have a large number of other considerable achievements under our belt .
We have been a presidency that has set priorities , but not at the expense of other issues .
This can be seen from our achievements .
Before I move on to the Copenhagen Summit , I should like to outline a number of the other tasks that the EU has carried out in the last six months .
We have successfully continued the fight against international terrorism and redoubled efforts against illegal immigration .
In the field of asylum , we have reached agreement on what is known as the Dublin II regulation , which lays down common rules for which country should take responsibility for handling an asylum application .
We succeeded in reaching agreement on fully opening up the EU 's electricity and gas markets .
We achieved a breakthrough in EU transport policy .
The rules on the Single European Sky have secured the basis for fewer cancellations and shorter flight times , benefiting passengers , the environment and airlines .
Together we have reacted swiftly and effectively to unexpected disasters .
First there was the flooding in Central Europe .
The EU showed solidarity by approving the establishment of a EUR 1 000 million Solidarity Fund for use in connection with natural disasters .
Most recently , we reacted to the tragic loss of the oil tanker Prestige .
At short notice , the EU showed its ability to act , adopting rules on matters such as the rapid phasing-out of single-hull oil tankers and stricter monitoring in the harbours used by the ships .
Agreement has been reached on the emissions trading scheme in CO2 .
Progress has been made with regard to food safety , including on common rules for the labelling of food containing GMOs .
We succeeded in finding a solution to the question of transit to and from Kaliningrad that is acceptable to all parties .
Lastly , I wish to emphasise the positive and effective cooperation we have had with Parliament : the work on the codecision and budgetary procedures , amongst other things .
For the first time in many years , we actually succeeded in reaching agreement on large parts of the budget as early as first reading .
I should like to take this opportunity to express my thanks for the good and positive spirit that has characterised the cooperation between the European Parliament , the Commission and the Presidency .
Together , we have shown in the last six months that the EU can deliver the goods ; that - despite national , institutional and political variations - we can together produce results , create a better , safer daily life for our citizens , create better conditions of competition for our industries and increase Europe 's influence in the world .
I shall now return to the Copenhagen Summit .
We concluded enlargement negotiations with ten new Member States : Cyprus , the Czech Republic , Estonia , Hungary , Latvia , Lithuania , Malta , Poland , Slovakia and Slovenia .
These were intensive , difficult negotiations to the last .
That is the nature of the beast : it ensured that we ended up achieving the right balance between the wishes of the candidate countries and the possibilities of the present Member States .
The tough negotiations on very specific issues such as milk quotas and credit transfers are , of course , ultimately an indication that the EU is not just a talking shop , adopting meaningless declarations , but an effective forum for discussion , in which we do business and make policy to the benefit of all parties .
The ten new countries can become members from 1 May 2004 .
By then , both the new and the existing Member States will have completed their national ratification procedures .
The first stage in this process - which in many of the countries will entail referendums - is the completion of the accession treaty .
This will then be presented to the Commission first of all , then Parliament and finally the Council for approval , with a view to the treaty being signed in Athens on 16 April 2003 .
I shall call on all three institutions to do their utmost to keep to this timetable .
The conclusions from the Copenhagen Summit also deal with the question of the participation of the new Member States in the institutions of the EU .
We have laid down that the ten acceding states will be able to participate in the 2004 elections to the European Parliament as members .
The accession treaty will lay down that the Commissioners from the new Member States will join the present Commission from the time of the countries ' accession on 1 May 2004 .
Once the European Council has appointed a new President of the Commission , the newly elected European Parliament can approve a new Commission , which will have to take office on 1 November 2004 .
This provides a sensible framework for this fundamental issue .
Here , too , I shall call for cooperation between the institutions to find flexible solutions that ensure the best terms for our new Member States .
With regard to Bulgaria and Romania , the conclusions are clear : the enlargement process is continuing ; and we can confirm that the aim is to be able to welcome the two countries as members in 2007 .
The issue of Turkey came to be one of the main topics in Copenhagen .
We arrived at a balanced and realistic answer .
We acknowledge the important steps that Turkey has taken towards meeting the Copenhagen criteria .
We call upon Turkey to continue its reform process with vigour , and we pledge increased support from the EU to Turkey in these endeavours .
If the European Council decides in December 2004 , on the basis of a report and a recommendation by the Commission , that Turkey has met the Copenhagen political criteria , the European Union will open accession negotiations with Turkey as quickly as possible .
This sent a strong and positive signal to Turkey , but I would emphasise that it is still an essential requirement that Turkey meet the political criteria before accession negotiations can be opened .
This is the way it has to be .
Turkey must be treated in the same way as all the other candidate countries .
Then there is Cyprus .
Cyprus will join as a divided island ; but , at the same time , there is a realistic possibility that the parties will be able to find a comprehensive settlement of the Cyprus issue by 28 February 2003 on the basis of the UN Secretary-General 's proposal .
I would urge the parties to the conflict in the strongest terms to seize this unique opportunity to resolve this unfortunate conflict .
We all stand to gain by finding a solution now , and none so much as the population of Cyprus .
In Copenhagen , we sent out a clear message to the new neighbours of the enlarged EU : to the countries of the western Balkans , to Russia , the Ukraine , Moldova and Belarus , and to the countries of the southern Mediterranean .
Enlargement will not result in the EU shutting itself in ; on the contrary , the EU will strengthen links to its new neighbours .
This will take place both within the framework of , and by means of the development of , the existing cooperation instruments .
In addition , at the Copenhagen Summit , there was agreement on the frameworks for the future agreement between NATO and the EU on European Security and Defence Policy .
I should like to mention by way of conclusion that the European Council also met with the Chairman of the European Convention , Mr Giscard d 'Estaing .
He reported on the work in the Convention , and there was consensus in the European Council that the Convention should present the results of its work before the summit in June 2003 .
It was stated that the new Member States will participate fully in the Intergovernmental Conference .
Bulgaria and Romania will take part as observers .
Now that enlargement is home and dry , the work in the Convention has become the crucial task in European politics .
We have enlarged the EU ; we now have to ensure that the EU of the future , with more than 25 Member States , can also function effectively .
We must simplify the decision-making procedures and stress the EU 's values .
We must describe the division of labour between the EU and the Member States more clearly , we must extend the use of qualified majority voting and the codecision procedure , and we must ensure that we have cooperation that is open and subject to democratic control .
The Danish Presidency is now drawing to a close .
We are passing the baton of the Presidency on to Greece , wishing them good luck and thanking them for the good troika cooperation .
Finally , I wish to turn , once again , directly to the Members of this Parliament , and especially to the President , Mr Cox .
The meeting of the President of Parliament with the European Council in Copenhagen was yet another constructive affirmation of the close relations between Parliament and the Council .
The Danish Presidency has attached great importance to meeting the European Parliament with an outstretched hand and the will to enter into constructive cooperation .
It is with satisfaction that I have been able to note that Parliament has met us in the same positive spirit .
We have had our differences , but the cooperation between us has been characterised by progress , results and a willingness to compromise .
I have experienced this in this House , at our interinstitutional summits and at my meetings with the Conference of Presidents of the European Parliament .
This picture is echoed by Danish government ministers .
I should like to take this opportunity to thank everyone for this constructive cooperation .
Above all , however , I wish to express my thanks for the unqualified support of Parliament for the implementation of the Danish Presidency 's greatest task : concluding the negotiations with ten new Member States .
The decision , in Copenhagen , on the enlargement of the EU marked the reunification of the peoples and states of Europe , the end of the unfortunate division of our continent and the beginning of a new era in the history of Europe .
The Copenhagen Summit also marked the beginning of a new era for the European Union .
In Copenhagen , the EU carried out the greatest task in the history of the Community .
Following the Copenhagen Summit , the European Union stands as the overall framework around the Europe of the future : cooperation based on the shared values of freedom and the market economy , community spirit and social responsibility , democracy and human rights ; effective cooperation that respects the national characteristics of our peoples and states .
The seed sown by the founding fathers of the European Union in Europe 's war-torn ground nearly 50 years ago has taken root .
The enlargement of the EU has made their dream and their vision a reality .
A new Europe is born .
Thank you , Mr President .
President Cox , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , I stand before this House for the last time this year .
A year that started with the successful launch of the euro and concludes with another giant step forward .
We have used a lot of superlatives - too many - in the last 12 months to describe the different stages of this year , which has been the year of Europe .
I am not overstating the case , however , when I say that the Copenhagen European Summit is a landmark in European integration .
When I took office , I pledged that enlargement would be my Commission 's top priority . We have delivered .
Some people might - and do - have the impression that the conclusion of the accession negotiations at Copenhagen was a formality .
Nothing could be further from the truth .
Courage and political will were required on all sides to achieve this result .
I should like to single out the tremendous work done by the Danish Presidency .
As the multiple negotiations went down to the wire , the Presidency maintained a steady hand at the helm and a cool head in a difficult situation .
Prime Minister , this was a great personal achievement on your part .
At the same time , this result is the fruit of our hard work too .
Over the past three years , the Commission has put together 12 remarkable teams of negotiators who have achieved a deal on 31 chapters with each candidate country using a completely new methodology .
Indeed , for over three years , 350 Commission officials and over 700 people in the Commission delegations have been patiently weaving the fabric of this silent tapestry .
I want to voice here my gratitude to Günter Verheugen , who has proved to be an astute , passionate negotiator .
I would also like to thank Mr Eneko Landaburu and all of the Directorate-General for Enlargement for their dedication and first-rate work .
It is a unique privilege to be President of the Commission on such occasions , and today I am particularly proud to be the head of an institution that has contributed so much to the accomplishment of our dream of ' One Europe ' .
Although ten countries have completed the last lap , others still have some way to go .
Romania and Bulgaria have been given detailed road maps to reach their target accession date of 2007 .
In December 2004 we have a date with Turkey to see if it meets the conditions for opening negotiations .
I was heartened by the fact that the first joint act of the 25 current and acceding Member States was to issue a statement in support of the ' continuous , inclusive and irreversible enlargement process ' .
These words echo the vision and generosity that marked the founding of our Union .
The statement endorsed the Commission 's proposal to give Romania and Bulgaria more help in preparing for membership by raising their pre-accession aid by 20 % . I urge these countries to seize this chance to further speed up their preparations .
Turkey will also be receiving an enhanced package to help it prepare its candidacy , a candidacy which , I stress , will be judged on its own merits and according to the same criteria as all the other candidate countries .
This date will give Turkey time to push ahead with the reforms it needs to make to satisfy the Copenhagen criteria and implement them both in law and in practice .
The Commission 's reports and recommendations will continue to be completely objective and impartial .
Last week 's European Council achieved practically all its objectives .
I say ' almost all ' because we came very close to achieving agreement on the Cyprus question .
Despite the fervent efforts of the negotiators and the United Nations Secretary-General , we did not achieve a solution which we can consider to be definitive at Copenhagen .
Nevertheless , both sides expressed willingness to continue with the negotiations and set themselves the goal of achieving an agreement by 28 February .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , as Europe grows its responsibilities grow .
We are inviting the new Members to join our area of peace , prosperity and stability , but our work in promoting these values does not stop at the borders of the European Union .
We must not use the aim of ' One Europe ' as an excuse to erect fresh barriers but to embrace the entire continent in our work to establish lasting peace .
Each enlargement brings us new neighbours which are drawn to the European Union as to a magnet and some hope to become candidates themselves too .
In my opinion , the countries of the western Balkans belong by definition in the European Union and this view was confirmed by the Copenhagen Council .
The Stabilisation and Association Process is a powerful instrument and we must use it vigorously .
The Commission is therefore looking forward to working closely with the Greek Presidency in the run-up to the Thessaloniki Summit , at which , I am convinced , we can offer a detailed , practical response to the letter that the five Presidents of the Western Balkans sent us on the eve of the Copenhagen Council .
We shall now have to think long and hard about where the borders of the EU are and will ultimately lie - this is the major task before us and I shall say so ad nauseam - but this is something we as Europeans shall decide ourselves , after listening to everyone but without any outside interference .
The debate on where Europe 's borders lie is a debate about our identity .
It must be conducted in this House and in the national parliaments and must involve all the European citizens closely .
This search for the roots of our identity does not mean creating divisions .
Indeed , European integration must provide benefits and new prospects for our neighbours as well , even if they are to remain just neighbours .
We need to build a strong network of relations based on shared political and economic values with neighbouring countries , from Russia to the Mediterranean .
This is the new strategic objective of my Commission .
This proximity policy must bring our neighbours many of the benefits of membership without them having to join the Union formally in the foreseeable future .
The European Economic Area is a useful model for such relations , but it needs to be enhanced by a series of measures to develop political cooperation .
Our relations must be based on ' sharing everything but institutions ' .
Our proximity policy must be attractive , unlocking new prospects and bringing mutual benefits .
It must motivate our partners to cooperate more closely with the Union and it must be dynamic and based on a structured , step-by-step approach .
Ladies and gentlemen , we have successfully concluded the accession negotiations and we now have to make European unification a tangible , everyday reality .
At last , final drafting of the Accession Treaty , which - as Prime Minister Rasmussen said - must be ratified and signed in Athens next April , can now proceed .
However , our biggest job in the coming months will be to inform and reassure our citizens in both the present Member States and the accession countries .
The Commission will be mounting an extensive information campaign in which the Members of this House will play a crucial role .
Indeed , just a few years ago , many of the candidate countries were governed by dictatorships .
Many of their citizens fear they might be giving up their new-found freedom and independence by joining another large bloc .
There is concern in the current Member States , on the other hand , about the costs and implications of the entry of countries much poorer than themselves .
Most of these fears are groundless . As Günter Verheugen has said , this is the best prepared enlargement in the history of the Union .
We are all quite aware that the cost of enlargement is nothing compared with the cost of non-enlargement .
We must therefore disseminate these simple truths throughout Europe and we must work together to make the citizens aware of them .
The enlargement process has progressed thanks to tremendous determination , political courage and vision .
We have to convince the Europeans that by coming together we will all gain , and not just materially , through shared prosperity and sustainable development in the largest market in the world , but politically too , as citizens of a democratic , accountable Union .
The credibility of the new , enlarged Europe will , as I have said before , hang , above all , on the credibility of its institutions and its credibility as an active leader on the world stage .
I therefore warmly welcome the EU-NATO agreement concluded at the Summit , which will enable us to conduct military peace-keeping operations in the Balkans from as early as next year .
This is a further responsibility which we will have to , which we will be able to shoulder .
The moment of truth , however , in the coming year will be institutional reform .
We will not be able to make good our promises to our citizens unless we completely overhaul the Union 's structure .
Only by strengthening the Union 's decision-making process can we build the more cohesive , united Union that will earn their respect and admiration .
We must therefore all work together with Mr Giscard d 'Estaing to make the Convention a success .
This greater unity and determination must be reflected in our action on the world stage .
Our growing responsibilities will leave no room for the vacillation and inaction we have displayed in the past .
The task of the Convention and of all those contributing to its work is therefore just as important as the accession negotiations , for if the Convention does not succeed we will have created a Europe which is large but unable to act .
Mr President , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , there are therefore grounds for optimism .
The success of Copenhagen and the generosity displayed there - we had expected egoism and breaking away but what we found there was a sense of unity in countries for which enlargement has a different meaning , is something different , is being experienced in a different way , but which have all understood the magnitude of what has happened - have shown that , if we can overcome the obstacles still facing us , we will genuinely be able to put to good use the blend of vision and pragmatism that have made the European Union a unique model of political integration .
Lastly , President Cox , Prime Minister , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to thank you and extend to you my very best wishes for the forthcoming festivities .
I hope that you all enjoy a very well-deserved , happy , peaceful break with your loved ones .
( Applause )
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , you have come here today , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , with the satisfaction of having done your duty , and you deserve the most sincere congratulations from my group , the Group of the European People 's Party , for having been able to take this historic step under your presidency and with your government , in which I would like to highlight in particular the work of our esteemed former colleague Mr Bertel Haarder .
You made a comparison , saying that the race you have run is a long-distance race .
I believe that under the Danish Presidency this has been more like a race against time , or even a one-legged race , and you have won it .
I believe you deserve special congratulations for that .
It is now up to us , as Members of the European Parliament , and all the members of Member State Parliaments and those in countries that are already part of an enlarged Europe , to take the next steps , and we must not underestimate the importance of dialogue with public opinion , as well as fulfilling our duties .
I would reiterate President Prodi 's words , when he said that there is going to be an information campaign in which we must all participate .
We are prepared to discuss the budget for this campaign immediately .
I would also like to congratulate the Commission - as the negotiating body - its President , Commissioner Verheugen , and please allow me to mention also the Director-General for Enlargement , Mr Landáburu , with whom I have had the opportunity to fight against Franco 's dictatorship and for European integration .
I believe he has acted seriously , using his experience , in this process .
Just one question , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , in relation to the democratic process of integrating these countries - and I see you have incorporated the proposal made by Mr Hänsch , which was adopted by the European Parliament , that these countries might be able to take part in the 2004 elections .
The question is transition .
You said , having taken decisions , that you are going to consult Parliament before the end of January .
Are these consultations on consumer issues or is it an interinstitutional agreement ?
Many issues are currently under discussion .
For example , I do not know if you have decided whether , in accordance with the Treaty of Nice , there will be one or two commissioners , depending on the country , until 2005 .
Will this change or not ?
That is a question that I believe must be discussed , as well as the changes in the Commission : will there be a second Polish Commissioner for three months or not ? What will happen about Members of Parliament ?
We will need to discuss this , but the issue is whether there will be an agreement on this point .
I have just one comment to make with regard to Turkey : I believe our Turkish friends should be told that they missed a great opportunity , during the week of the Sakharov Prize , to let Mrs Leila Zana come here .
Those of us who are in favour of Turkey entering the European Union continue to maintain that what is needed in Turkey is a democracy in which civil power takes precedence over military power .
That is the key issue and that is the question that must be put clearly to our Turkish friends .
As for Cyprus , perhaps Turkey will now have an objective interest in the ever present Mr Denktash changing his mind and finding a solution for February in order to achieve full integration of the whole island .
Mr President , with regard to the Middle East you made a bold statement and I believe we must support it as we cannot agree to put the Quartet 's proposals on hold , as the United States would like , and we should also welcome the fact that the Commission has freed up funding for the Palestinian elections .
I believe Europe has serious responsibilities at the present time with regard to the Middle East .
Lastly , Mr President , I would also like to express my group 's deep dissatisfaction with the way in which the Council and the Commission are approaching the problem of the Prestige disaster .
There has not been equal treatment in terms of what the President mentioned concerning the German and Austrian situation and that of Central Europe , because no fund has been created ; existing funds have simply been re-allocated .
I can tell you that there is disappointment and resentment in my country and a problem that extends to other parts of the Union .
I shall end , Mr President , by saying that now that Denmark has taken this historic step , please , move closer to us , and remove the barriers that still exist in terms of citizenship and the common currency on Denmark 's part .
I am sure you will do this .
Mr President , on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party , I would like to congratulate the President-in-Office on the successful conclusion in Copenhagen of an outstanding Danish presidency .
It is rare in my experience for a presidency to receive such wide praise from all sides of this House .
The improvement in relations between the Council and Parliament has been notable , and we owe much in this regard to the role of our former , much-esteemed colleague , Mr Haarder .
The outcome of the summit is a tribute to the negotiating skills of Mr Fogh Rasmussen and the persistence both he and his team displayed .
Their decision to focus single-mindedly on enlargement paid off handsomely : Europe can now reunite .
However , we must not be complacent .
The full application of the Copenhagen criteria , both in the new countries and in the existing Member States , must remain a matter of concern .
Moreover , there are referenda to be won in all the new countries - referenda in which each and every one of us can play an important part , if we so choose .
Copenhagen offers Bulgaria and Romania the prospect of greater pre-accession aid and the objective of membership in 2007 .
While these two countries will clearly be in the next wave of enlargement , we should continue to be guided by the principle that each candidate will be judged on its own merits .
Liberal Democrats would have preferred an earlier review of Turkey 's readiness for accession .
However , Turkey is clearly now on the path to membership and , if the Copenhagen criteria are met by the end of 2004 , my group will hold the governments to their commitment to open membership negotiations .
An agreement on the United Nations plan to reunite Cyprus would have been the icing on the cake of the Copenhagen Council .
Nonetheless , we remain optimistic that agreement can be reached so that a united Cyprus can sign the Accession Treaty in April 2004 .
We hope that Turkey will seize the opportunity to confirm its European vocation by putting pressure on Mr Denktash to reach a compromise .
However , celebrations over the historic decision to reunite Europe - and I welcome the very prominent role played by Liberals in the Council , Commission and Parliament , whether those on the benches in front of us apply that label to themselves or not - should not be allowed to overshadow another significant breakthrough at Copenhagen .
That was the agreement with Turkey to allow the EU 's Rapid Reaction Force to go ahead and have access to Nato 's resources .
Europe 's security and defence ambitions can now be put to the test as the EU takes over Operation Amber Fox in Macedonia .
This may pave the way for more ambitious missions in the future , including peace-enforcement operations in accordance with the UN Charter .
A wider Europe must be prepared to shoulder its responsibilities in the world , whether in the Middle East - I congratulate the Council on its firm declaration on that conflict - or elsewhere .
We must be a bulwark for freedom and democracy and a force for justice .
In building that strength , we owe much to Denmark .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , pure self-righteousness and self-satisfaction make me want to be a bit sarcastic . ' Lads , you were wonderful ! '
I would also say to the ladies , who helped you , and are unfortunately not to be seen on these benches : ' Ladies , you were wonderful !
You did fantastically well ! '
Enlargement is upon us - doubtless a great achievement on the part of the Commission , the Council , the Danish Presidency and the presidencies that have gone before it .
It is a certainty that the coming presidency will have to shoulder the additional burden of making enlargement a reality , and that will be difficult .
Not only because of all the votes that Mr Wurtz mentioned , that will then have to be held in the various countries , but because we will meet again and can only hope that enlargement does not give us the same hangover that the reunification of the Federal Republic of Germany did , because the finances do not work out quite right , and because people suddenly realise that what they had dreamt of has not become reality overnight .
We will then get back to talking about the financial framework .
Let me tell you , Mr Wurtz , that the problem is not our promise that there will be no direct payments before 2013 , but our own inability to question why we have direct payments , our failure to make the necessary reform to our agriculture here and now in order to establish justice and take enlargement as the means of developing a new policy .
There is no point in enlarging something that is wrong .
The only thing that makes sense is using enlargement to change what is wrong and , together , doing the right thing .
Very often , we have not managed to do that .
That is why what I have to say to Turkey is very simple : ' of course we will pay attention to the criteria ' .
But we have to say what they are .
What we demand of the Commission is that , within the next few months , they tell us what the criteria are to be .
What , in fact , will we have to discuss with Turkey over the next two years ?
Will we be discussing the issue of women wearing the headscarf ?
Is that one of the Copenhagen criteria ?
Of course it is not ; instead , we will be discussing fundamental issues of democracy and of how to make it a reality again .
This is where we need a road map .
Finally , I would like to say something about Iraq .
I approve of what the Council has said .
The UN Resolution can be interpreted in this way and that .
Unfortunately , the German Federal Government , for example , with which I have a great deal of sympathy , interprets it in such a way that it can also be read in the way the Americans do , to mean that there do not have to be further debates in the Security Council .
I see this as the wrong approach , and hope that Europeans , as Europeans , will insist on further discussion and a vote in the Council if the resolution is considered as not having been complied with .
It is not acceptable that compliance or non-compliance with the Resolution should be a matter for the Americans to decide on their own !
At the end of the day - as Mr Poettering rightly said - yes , if we have to stand up to the Americans , then we have to try it out on the Russians .
We have to tell the Russians that , however friendly we are - and we are very close - certain things will not do !
I am grateful to the Danes for not deporting Mr Zakayev - that was the right thing to do , and I hope that the English will not be able to deport him either .
If , though , Mr Zakayev can be granted political asylum in Europe , there must be something wrong in Chechnya .
I do not think there should be any meeting with Russia without us telling them that what is going on in Chechnya is not only bad , it amounts to a colonial war .
That is something that we in Europe never want to see again !
Mr President , President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , I think that it is natural for the European Parliament to express its opinion regarding the outcome of the Copenhagen Summit and I was just about to compliment the three presidents present on the results achieved .
There is no need for me to do so , however , since they have congratulated themselves enough , given themselves a celebratory pat on the back , which , in my view , did seem a little excessive .
So , this morning , then , I find myself partly agreeing with Mr Barón Crespo - which is also astonishing - who essentially said that you have done your work .
If I am completely honest , I must also say that this was a job well done .
I would like to say to the President-in-Office of the Council that he has certainly succeeded and that he has avoided the worst possible situation , particularly in the latest exchanges , in other words endless haggling , when we are in fact facing an historic occasion .
For this , you must be complimented .
This is an historic moment , and this point has been clearly made by previous speakers .
I fully understand that Mr Wurtz does not wish us to make reference to a certain period of our recent history .
The fact remains , however , that this scar , this wound , on Europe 's body has now healed .
This is not an ' enlargement ' process - I think this word is inappropriate and unsuitable - this is a return , a reunion of a continent which should never have been divided .
I would add that the message that we must send to the peoples who are joining us is a message of solidarity , a message of understanding of everything that they experienced during these periods of oppression .
I would also like to say that the shift of emphasis towards the East must not make us forget the South - I know that this point was made in the Copenhagen declaration - and must not make us forget our responsibilities either - I am taking advantage of the fact that the three Presidents are here to remind them of this - towards the outermost regions , because the borders of the European Union are , at present , the borders of these regions , of Spain , France and Portugal .
In this respect , I would like to express my concern regarding the comments made by some of the members of the Commission or the Convention , who stated that , when clarifying the texts , we could certainly delete Article 299 ( 2 ) of the Treaty of Amsterdam , which provides the legal basis for the measures taken to assist the outermost regions .
I would also draw Parliament 's attention to the risks that this would pose in the long run .
Madam President , honour where honour is due .
Mr Fogh Rasmussen has managed much better than the euro .
The Danish Prime Minister and the Danish ambassador to the EU deserve praise for concluding the negotiations on time , but the result forebodes disaster .
Never before have so many rich countries been so miserly towards so few .
Most Polish farmers will be net contributors to the EU .
They will pay more in contributions to the EU than they receive .
On the other hand , the better-off farmers will see a considerable increase in their capital , which future farmers will have to pay interest on .
One hectare of agricultural land costs 30 times as much in the Netherlands as in Poland .
If Polish and Dutch farmers are given the same right to buy land from each other , one can hardly call this equality .
There should now be a radical revision of agricultural systems so that we avoid a situation arising in which financial gain is made from rising agricultural prices , leading to a new need for subsidies and a million Polish farmers being condemned to a life of unemployment in the city .
The budgetary funds and the Structural Funds are also in need of revision .
Subsidies to the rich countries must be eliminated .
Give the new countries free membership instead of theoretical Structural Fund subsidies , which they cannot receive on account of our bureaucratic procedures and the co-financing requirement .
Let us cut EU law down drastically from its 85 000 pages .
Let us only require compliance with our standards in the applicant countries when they are exporting to us .
Let us give them longer transitional periods , more leeway , greater freedom .
Let us allow far greater flexibility than the negotiations have settled on .
I am not criticising Mr Fogh Rasmussen for the result .
He could not have done very much better with the mandate he was given , but he should now say , in his capacity as Danish Prime Minister , that enlargement will not end well unless there are radical reforms .
In an EU that has 25 countries and more on the way , it is not possible to legislate as if it were a state .
The EU should now focus on the cross-border aspects and let the parliaments of the Member States adopt the bulk of the legislation .
An enlarged EU can only function as a Europe of democracies and diversities .
We had this in mind when we named our group .
Madam President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , I concur wholeheartedly with the congratulations that the Danish Presidency has received from all sides .
They are well deserved .
I myself hardly believed that it would be possible to accomplish enlargement in the unbelievably short time available , in the face of all the colossal problems associated with it .
It is an impressive administrative and technical piece of work , which deserves the greatest credit .
I know that the Commission staff , under the leadership of Mr Verheugen ; the Danish Ministry of Foreign Affairs ; the Danish Prime Minister 's Office ; the European Parliament : everyone has pulled together , and it was thanks to the Danish Presidency 's aim that the project must succeed now , that it did succeed .
It was an impressive achievement , which was also due to the fact that the aims and priorities were clearly explained . We were told , ' Help us now , we are listening , we are working together ' , and the cooperation succeeded .
It was an outstanding achievement .
One of the great experiences for me was the meeting , here in Parliament , with the representatives of all the new countries .
It was moving to listen to them setting out their priorities : freedom , justice , the rule of law , parliamentary democracy . Of course , we all wish for these , and this is why we are carrying out enlargement .
We desire peace , freedom , stability and respect for human rights , among other things .
That is what they said , loud and clear .
It was our friends that were meeting with us , perhaps with a higher level of ambition in those areas than we normally voice , but then they have a background that justifies this .
There was one thing which the President-in-Office of the Council did not mention , but which in any case I shall take the liberty of mentioning : for the first time , there were TV broadcasts from the beginning and end of the Council meetings in Copenhagen .
This is a giant step forward as regards openness , and indeed it should be pointed out , because if there is one thing we in the European Parliament have wished for , it is just this increase in openness .
I should also like to say that it was impressive that the Kaliningrad problem was solved in the difficult circumstances that prevailed at the very time this took place .
This , however , was another demonstration of our will , unity and cooperation playing the role that was needed to put this , too , in place .
Congratulations .
We shall be delighted to welcome the new Members to the European Parliament .
Thank you to the Presidency of the Council and to the Commission for making this possible .
Madam President , Winston Churchill once spoke of an iron curtain coming down over Europe .
Today we can safely say that the iron curtain has not only been lifted but has been dismantled , packed up in its box and consigned to the attic of history where it will serve to remind us of the horrors of the past .
We have a lot to celebrate today .
Copenhagen reunited Europe 13 years after the Berlin Wall came down and 21 years to the day after martial law was imposed in Poland and already these things feel as if they belong to a different age .
I congratulate the Danish presidency and the Commission on bringing to a successful conclusion ten sets of parallel and very diverse negotiations , bearing in mind that only a couple of weeks ago , it seemed as if we would not do it .
I think it is impossible to under-estimate the importance of what has been achieved in Copenhagen .
However , at the risk of being accused of putting a dampener on our celebrations , I must point out that we are not there yet .
There is still a lot to be done .
The candidate countries still have to meet our standards and they must not be allowed to slacken their efforts .
The Commission still has to draw up its final report on the candidate countries , and we must ensure that the process does not degenerate into a messy argument about the imposition of safeguards .
We still have to get the process ratified by parliaments , including , in particular , by the European Parliament .
We will scrutinise the treaties with care and attention to detail and no one should take Parliament 's vote for granted .
We still have to sell enlargement to the people , both in the EU and in the candidate countries .
We cannot take the people 's assent for granted .
Notwithstanding Mr Rovsing 's remarks just now , we must still make the Kaliningrad solution work , and work in a way which does not undermine the sovereignty of Lithuania .
We must still ensure that the financial arrangements actually work and we must also ensure that Parliament 's role in those financial arrangements is fully respected .
We still have to reform our common agricultural policy before it bankrupts us financially and politically .
We still have to decide how an EU of 25 or more can work , because failure to reform our decision-making process will guarantee that this enlargement is the breaking and not the making of the European Union .
A lot has been done , but there is still a lot to do .
We must not lessen our efforts towards Bulgaria and Romania , nor must they assume that 2007 is a guaranteed date of accession .
I welcome the decision taken concerning Turkey - although I would have preferred the date of 1 May 2004 - but this must become a defining moment in our relations with Turkey .
We guarantee that negotiations will begin if they meet the Copenhagen criteria by December 2004 , but equally , we must be clear that , if the criteria are not met , then Turkey 's accession will be off the agenda for the foreseeable future .
We must stop playing games with each other .
I welcome the determination to resolve the Cyprus issue and would point out that , because we have always said that we would not allow third parties to veto our future , this is forcing us finally to reach a settlement in this long-running debate .
Prime Minister , I am told by my government that in Copenhagen , you were always well briefed , determined , clever and gave real leadership .
If we are to overcome the obstacles ahead - institutional change and the need for political and economic reform - we need such leadership more often and then we can really celebrate .
Madam President , thanks are indeed due for the great job that has been done .
It seems to me that there is good reason to rejoice today , and I can indeed see happy faces around me .
Mr Fogh Rasmussen is happy , Mr Haarder is happy , and Mr Prodi , we hope , is also happy .
Mr Verheugen has every reason to be pleased with the great job he has done .
The candidate countries should also be pleased with the tremendous job they have done .
I think that this can perhaps get forgotten .
While standing here welcoming the fact that a little country can achieve so much , it is possible to be struck by the notion that this could be a tip as to how to structure the leadership of the EU .
It would perhaps be better to entrust the Presidency to the small countries and let the large ones attend to the battles they are fighting elsewhere .
This , however , is of course a little , humble wish for the future on the part of my country .
As regards all of the good ideas as to what my country should do with regard to the euro , for example , I would say that , if you can get the Stability and Growth Pact to work , Denmark may well consider them .
At the moment , I do not think that there is any reason to .
In my opinion it is not working , and I think that it is true that Mr Fogh Rasmussen has managed better than the euro .
It is of course galling for me that it is a liberal government that is receiving the praise , but the truth has to be told : you have managed well , Mr Fogh Rasmussen .
We have now heard enough historical speeches , and it is perhaps time to get going : not with history , but with the future .
Enlargement has been a success , but we all know , of course , that things will not get any easier .
Enlargement will not make it any easier to work in the European Union .
There are many things that will become considerably more difficult , but it would have been worse if we had not prepared enlargement .
This is the other side of the coin .
For example , it will not become any easier to carry out agricultural reform , but it is even more necessary than before .
I would of course urge both Denmark and the upcoming Presidency to take note of this .
There is something quite wrong in the fact that life is better for a cow in the EU than for a farmer in a developing world country .
That cannot be right .
We must make a start on this task , therefore .
We must also make a start on looking at the EU 's global role .
For what purposes do we mean to use our cooperation ?
Are we to let the USA determine everything in this world ?
Is it to be the USA that dictates the list of terrorist organisations , the policy on terrorism , anti-missile shield strategy , Iraq , etc . ?
Or will the EU find a counterweight to the dominance of the USA ?
What does the EU want when it comes to human rights ?
We have been aware of this in connection with enlargement : we have watched over the applicant countries , given them advice and guidance , made demands of them ; but what then , and what about ourselves ?
What will happen about the rights of the Roma when enlargement has fallen into place ?
It will not get any easier , but it is something we must follow up .
It is a matter of keeping a constant eye on our own situation .
What , too , will the EU do at global level as regards oppressed peoples ?
What will we do as regards Chechnya ?
Will we allow Russia to call the tune there ?
What will we do as regards the Iranians and their fight against the mullah regime ?
Will we let our policy there be determined by feta cheese and oil , or will we really back our grand words up with action ?
There is much to tackle in the future ; it will not get any easier , but we will get through it .
( Applause )
After the men 's turn it is evidently the women 's turn .
Ladies and gentlemen , please allow me to congratulate you on the result - although I do not have so much time that I can stand and eulogise .
Enlargement by ten new countries can now become a reality , as Mr Rasmussen has said , after fifty years of growth , prosperity and , in particular , peace .
An excellent result , but will we now be able to deliver the goods for some 500 million people ?
Is this in fact possible ?
Will we be able to develop institutions that are democratic , transparent and efficient ?
We have not been particularly successful in doing so thus far , and we do not have much time in which to accomplish it .
Mr Prodi said that integration must now become a reality , and I found that a particularly significant statement .
Have you not , however , really underestimated the costs involved ?
Are the European institutions sufficiently credible ?
Not in our citizens ' eyes , according to the opinion polls .
Should we not make more efforts in this regard ?
Or are we going to leave that all up to the Convention ?
Enlargement will increase your credibility , but at the same time there will be a greater expectation that things will remain as good as they always have been for all citizens , including those in the present European Union , when it comes to peace , prosperity and , in particular , solidarity .
The question of Turkey 's accession is first and foremost a matter for Turkey itself .
Turkey must develop her democracy in such a way that the different peoples , including the Kurds , can feel at home there .
Finally , we cannot view this question separately from the issue of how we view our borders .
Do we really see the European Union - and I do mean the European Union - as sharing borders with Iran , Iraq and Syria ?
Is this what we are called to ?
You will have to convince the public .
You will also have to convince me because I do not believe that we are in a position to develop the institutions we would need for this ?
( The President cut off the speaker )
Madam President , one of the great disadvantages of this Parliament is that it is never short of superlatives when it comes to heaping praise upon the presidencies that take place in this regular six-monthly cycle .
The disadvantage is that when we really have some genuine praise to give , it does not come with the force that is deserved .
For my part , Mr Rasmussen has been an outstanding President of the Council .
I would like , on behalf of my party , to congratulate him , coming from - and here I adopt what our President said - not one of the largest European countries .
I had said smallest but I obey the President 's edict on this .
I am bound to say too that my own prime minister may have some personal aspirations for the presidency of the Council if it works on a five-yearly cycle , but I very much hope that Mr Rasmussen has now entered the field in that regard .
It is quite right that reference was made to the visionary words of Pope John Paul many years ago .
I want to make some reference to Margaret Thatcher 's own words at Bruges .
These words have sadly become synonymous with euroscepticism , but the real message that Margaret Thatcher gave at Bruges was about a wider Europe .
In those circumstances her message about Europe not becoming so inward-looking is one that has been carried forward by Mr Rasmussen and is one that we all celebrate today .
I also endorse the remarks of Mr Verheugen .
I distance myself from what Mr Abitbol had to say about him because he was quite right in talking about the moral obligation that we have to candidate countries , about the fact that democracy and human rights are the battle that these countries have taken forward .
Sometimes we adopt too much of a patronising attitude towards these candidate countries .
We have to recognise that both Parliament and peoples will need to ratify entry .
I hope we learn the lesson of Nice .
That is a message for all of us here .
The élites within Europe do not recognise that we have to treat these countries with the respect that they deserve , not only because we want them to vote positively on entry , but because the institutions that we have must become more accountable and more responsive .
That is what the Convention is supposed to be all about .
We have a structured design for six countries which is now difficult to operate on the basis of 15 countries and which shortly will be a mechanism that will have to serve the interests of 25 countries .
The Convention should not become tied down in a debate covering only institutional matters , but must shift its focus to demonstrate how Europe can become a much more accountable and responsive institution for the future .
Mr President , I should first like to add my voice to the hearty congratulations to the Danish Presidency .
I think that the Presidency and the Commission have done an outstanding job on enlargement .
The result has garnered many positive adjectives along the way , and I should like to join in with those who say that almost all the words have now been used up ; but I concur with what has been said , and I would just say that , in my opinion , Denmark can perhaps be pleased about two things in particular .
It was in 1993 , during the Danish Presidency , that the conditions for enlargement were laid down , and now , ten years later , we have the opportunity to close the cycle during a Danish Presidency , too .
I think that this is a very good thing .
The second thing that I should like to emphasise is the additional opportunity we have which is peculiar to our region of Europe .
We now have a region surrounding the Baltic Sea which almost exclusively consists of Member States of the European Union .
I believe that this presents some good opportunities , and we may have high expectations for the situation .
Even if the end of the summit was perhaps somewhat mercenary - it often is - this cannot overshadow the big picture .
Quite simply , we cannot pass a more secure , more democratic basis on to future generations than the strong community that has been created here .
We must also realise that , once the New Year celebrations are over , our feet must be back on the ground , and , in any case , too many major tasks await us - as they do the new countries .
One of these is to push the EU legislation through effectively in the new countries : implement it in practice in both administrative and legal terms , so that the EU 's standards are indeed respected .
The other is to do with agriculture . The way in which the compromise on the budget was reached has perhaps not made it any easier to envisage the necessary , proper agricultural reform .
We all know that the common agricultural policy , as it stands , is grotesque and is very detrimental to the developing countries .
In my opinion , this really is a field in which there will be a need for political courage and responsibility in the future , too .
I wish to close with a few words about Turkey . As you know , two things were made clear as far as Turkey is concerned , which in my opinion are very important .
One of them is that it is a candidate country that can join on the same conditions as other candidate countries .
The other is that if the Commission , in December 2004 , can establish that the criteria - the political criteria - have been met , the Council will also take a decision on starting accession negotiations .
This is a great opportunity for Turkey .
It is now up to Turkey itself to take this opportunity : the ball is in the court of the Turkish Government .
We can establish that today , at any rate , none of the political criteria - democracy , the rule of law , respect for human rights and the protection of minorities - have been met in Turkey ; so there remains a real need for further reforms , and there is above all a need to implement the reforms .
It was , however , a prudent decision that was taken on Turkey last week in the European Council .
Once more , thank you for a superb Presidency and congratulations on the result .
I would like to congratulate the Danish presidency wholeheartedly on the completion of a difficult task .
After all , the summit was not only historic , but also primarily financial in character .
These negotiations are always the most difficult , and the accession countries obviously have an excellent understanding of what the European Union is about .
I do wonder , however , to what extent the financial arrangements are scuppering the political debate , specifically the arrangements with Poland and especially those relating to agricultural reforms .
I also note that although no date has yet been set for negotiations with Turkey , the political criteria are to be evaluated in December 2004 , so it is possible that negotiations may start without a national parliament , let alone the citizens of a Member State , becoming involved in such a decision at all .
I object to this .
I wonder whether this would not be an appropriate time to stop and consider where we are actually going with Europe and how far we want to go .
Finally , I welcome Mr Verheugen 's promise to my party leader , Gerrit Zalm , that the November 2003 monitor report will state which exemption clauses could come into effect in countries that have not solved the relevant problems before May 2004 , and which countries these are .
I found this to be a positive , confidence-inspiring commitment ; one which has unfortunately been paid far too little attention in the Council .
Madam President , as an Independent Socialist I was sceptical , and in August I did not believe that enlargement would succeed , but I must admit that I have lost my bet with the President-in-Office of the Council ; so I shall have to buy Mr Fogh Rasmussen a beer after this debate .
I have a deep respect for the Danish Prime Minister 's leadership .
He , the Danish Government and especially the civil servants have pursued the goal , and have achieved it .
Everyone concerned is to be praised highly for this .
The façade of the new EU house has been built and decorated ; now it is a case of putting the furniture in place .
The greatest task is without doubt reform of the common agriculture policy .
I still believe that the EU should have reformed the system of subsidies to European farmers before the decision to enlarge the EU was taken .
Reform would certainly have delayed enlargement , but then we would have reduced the risk of having a two-tier EU ; and not until sweeping reforms are in place will we be able to look the world 's poorest countries in the eye again , as they are still losing out .
I also wish to say to you , Prime Minister , that the fact that Mr Bonde is opposed to it is the best sign that this is a really good result .
Once again , therefore - congratulations !
Madam President , Prime Minister Rasmussen , Commissioner Verheugen , after the Copenhagen Summit there is every reason to congratulate and thank Denmark , and above all her Prime Minister and the Foreign Minister , Mr Møller , and former Member , Mr Holter , on and for the smooth and steady advance of the Danish presidential term from start to finish , but mainly on account of their success in the enlargement negotiations that required such precision .

Prime Minister Rasmussen told the applicant countries what was what , if you will forgive the expression , but in a way they could accept .
I do not , however , want to forget either the enormous contribution made by Commissioner Verheugen in the negotiations that led to the success of enlargement .
Many sceptics along the way must have aroused justified anger in you .
Perseverance , however , was rewarded with success , and I think Parliament should acknowledge that across the parties .
Enlargement emphasises just how important our neighbours are .
Russia has not become a new neighbour with enlargement , but an incomparably more important one none the less .
The border will lengthen by hundreds of kilometres in 2004 .
When Romania and Bulgaria join in 2007 three countries still in a state of turmoil will be surrounded by the Union and Russia .
These are Belarus , Ukraine and Moldavia .
I am not proposing increased assistance for Russia , even though we spend only a fraction on cooperation with this our most important neighbour compared with what we spend on cooperation with the Mediterranean region .
Nevertheless , the Union 's political focus should be firmly on Russia , and Russia should be helped , and even pressured , to introduce reforms .
After that we can initiate private business interaction on a new level with the Russians and start investing in Russia .
The Chairman of our group , Mr Hans-Gert Poettering , has already mentioned the worst problem : the war in Chechnya .
I am in full agreement with him on this matter .
An example of the injustice and corruption that still reign supreme is the necessity to terminate the TIR cargo system agreement with Russia , as it simply does not work there : drivers of freight have had to be prepared for the most diverse range of charges , to grease palms , rather than engines .
As the Commission will be getting 10 new Commissioners in 2004 , I think one of them should be appointed to be responsible for relations with our neighbours to the east , Russia in particular , with regard to day-to-day problems .
Let us leave high level foreign policy to the High Representative , wherever he or she has her home in the future .
Another Commissioner could focus , for the sake of balance , on developing real content for cooperation in the Mediterranean region .
If one of Russia 's neighbouring countries , including my own , had a Commissioner specially qualified to offer support when problems arise and when positive developments start to take place , the EU could be involved as a background power in talks in quite a different way than is the case now .
There is , furthermore , good news coming out of Russia : the economy is growing .
This is good for both Russia and the EU .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Prime Minister , congratulations on the fabulous result that you , the Danish Government and the Danish civil service have produced .
The result , a unified Europe , belongs to us all , but your good planning and political will were the decisive factors .
Enlargement has finally put the Second World War to rest .
Last Friday , in the Polish press room , this was very clear .
In the last century , Poland was one of the hardest hit territories in Europe , mistreated from both east and west by regimes whose totalitarian ideologies left behind nothing but destruction and terrible memories .
The inequalities of the past have now been eliminated , Europe is reunited , the word ' solidarity ' has taken on a totally new meaning , Europe has been healed .
Now it is justice that holds sway , and not brute force , among our 25 countries and in relation to the countries around us .
The EU thus represents the most binding and only democratic cooperation between independent countries in the world .
We should be proud of this , and so we are .
This unique cooperation makes heavy demands on us , however .
Our citizens expect the right results and solutions ; we have to be able to take decisions and be effective .
We must therefore focus on the essential points while at the same time preserving our diversity .
Decisions in the Council must be taken by qualified majority : this produces a willingness to compromise .
The European Parliament must be an equal co-legislator , and , when the Council legislates , we must all be able to follow the process .
Justice , not brute force , holds sway in the EU .
It is the alpha and omega , therefore , that our common EU rules are observed by everyone , big and small , in the north and south , east and west .
This is only possible if we have a strong Commission .
An enlarged EU requires that we all uphold the values on which the Community is based .
This was the message the summit sent out to Turkey .
Turkey still has a lot to do and has to get back down to work .
In 2004 , it will be assessed in detail and , after this , provided it meets the Copenhagen criteria , will be given a date for the start of its accession negotiations .
Turkey is thus being treated in exactly the same way as all of the other candidate countries ; as it is justice , not force , that holds sway in the EU .
The Copenhagen Summit has shown that the EU is built on great visions and historic decisions , but , at the same time , time-consuming and sometimes even ugly negotiations on milk quotas , suckler cows and all kinds of transitional arrangements .
We politicians must be able to explain both sides of this fantastic European cooperation .
A big ' thank you ' to the President and , once again , hearty congratulations : you deserve to celebrate , and not just with a beer .
I , too , would like to congratulate the Danish presidency , particularly as far as the decision on Turkey is concerned .
I think that this decision has succeeded very well in striking a balance between , on the one hand , recognition of the reforms that have already been adopted and those already announced , and the new government 's willingness to go even further if necessary , and , on the other , the ongoing need to stress that the European Union sees legislative changes as very important but that what actually happens with these legislative changes in practice is even more important .
Consideration of this will take time , and I think that it is right to look at precisely what has taken place by the end of 2004 .
Let there be no misunderstanding ; it is now up to Turkey to act .
The EU , however , must not sit on its hands .
Where Turkey is concerned , it is no longer enough to simply refer to the Copenhagen political criteria , which are somewhat abstract .
On the other hand , there is also no point in producing a whole stack of details without any form of prioritisation .
I would therefore like to underscore the call made by the president of my group , Mr Cohn-Bendit , to the European Commission , and to Mr Verheugen , for it to be made absolutely clear once and for all what the changes are that we expect Turkey to make .
To cite one example : the role of the army .
Yes , this must change - lots of things must change - but what exactly does the European Union want to happen before negotiations begin ?
What must then happen while negotiations are in progress ?
Will the constitution have to be changed , for example ?
Will the National Security Council have to be abolished ?
These are all specific examples of areas in which the EU will have to be much , much more specific .
If we are not , I am convinced that we will end up in a disastrous discussion about the interpretation of the political criteria , one that will be dominated by prejudices rather than by objective assessment .
If we are more specific , however , this will give Turkey a chance - not by exerting pressure but by demonstrating that European values and standards are normative , in Turkey as elsewhere .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , Commissioner Verheugen , ladies and gentlemen , I think I too must seize this opportunity to get something off my chest , as rarely have I experienced a Council Presidency that has concentrated so intently on the core issues and had such success in making them a reality .
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the Commission , and Commissioner Verheugen in particular , for their tremendous cooperation over the past few years , which has also helped us to contribute to this success .
It is our belief , however , that we should welcome our new partners in a particularly splendid way , and there is in my view no better way to do this than on the Acropolis , so that we celebrate the unity of Europe right there on the Acropolis .
At this time , we should , however , also make some critical observations .
For , if the newly-acceding countries are to be enabled to absorb change , efforts must be stepped up to develop the necessary administrative capacities in these countries .
I believe it to be equally important for the monitoring process , which has been agreed , to be implemented utterly openly and with the utmost rigour , so that we do not face problems at the end of it all .
This is in the interests of the European Union as a whole and of its capacity to act even with 25 members .
It is self-evident that we should make particular efforts to implement the institutional process in the context of the Convention 's constitutional debate , and I think that the candidate countries should be given every opportunity to play an active political part both in this process within the Convention and also in the subsequent Intergovernmental Conference in accordance with the Laeken formula .
The discussion in which we are engaged has , however , moved on to include Turkey and other countries .
President Prodi , I am very grateful to you for addressing the issue of the wider Europe , to which we need to offer new options alongside full membership , with something like a ' European Economic Area Mark 2 ' . Here , we must also have the right , as a European Union , to represent our interests in relation to the financial arrangements and the cohesive effect of the legal institution , and be enabled in this way to discuss future memberships or other forms of partnership .
I am , though , especially glad that it has been decided that Turkey is to be dealt with using the Community method .
Instead of discrimination , whether positive or negative , there is a progress report by the Commission , and consultation in Parliament and in the Council as to whether the results justify the inception of negotiations .
I really do believe it to be an essential step forward that this has been made clear and that misunderstandings have been prevented .
I would , though , like to point out in addition that we have to have a clear view of the European Union 's cohesive power , so that the Union may in future retain its capacity for further development , and , when I see that Tony Blair is saying - as reported in yesterday 's media - that , with Turkey we are entering the Islamic sphere and that we should also consider North African membership of the European Union , we should say loud and clear that what lies behind this is a plan to destroy the European Union .
That is something we must have no part in ; on the contrary , we have to remain within the boundaries .
Mr President , Copenhagen has opened a debate not just on the European identity but on the geopolitical borders of Europe and the very idea which must underlie the European Union as a Union of the peoples and regions of Europe .
I believe that the founding fathers too imagined a Europe of cathedrals , expressing an ideal , with an image of a civilisation which is not that of the minarets of Anatolia .
I am thinking of Strasbourg cathedral , which was built by great master builders who , like the master builders of Europe , certainly did not think of Europe as including Turkey , of a Europe which would change its borders and become the direct neighbour of Iran , Iraq and Syria .
What can I say of the inclusion in Europe of a Turkey which has just elected as its leader a person , Mr Erdogan , who said to the Turkish newspaper , jumh Uriet , that millions of Muslims throughout the world are waiting for the reawakening of Turkey to rise up , a Turkey which yesterday refused to allow a former Sakharov Prizewinner , Leyla Zana , to leave the country , preventing her from coming to Strasbourg to take part in the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought awards ceremony ?
This is a further warning to those in favour of Turkey 's accession , whom we would strongly urge to remember the Armenian holocaust which Copenhagen wrongly disregarded .
Mr President , the Danish presidency has won admiration for the intelligent and principled way in which the summit was prepared and was made a success .
In the disputes surrounding the financial arrangements , we have taken sound initiatives .
In the discussions on Turkey , we were surprised by the highly original and appropriate formulations which placed responsibility for accession fairly and squarely on Turkey itself .
A formulation that was even better than the final outcome .
My compliments to Mr Rasmussen in particular .
I must say that I was filled with pride by the starring role played by Bertel Haarder , who was formerly one of our colleagues in this House .
Mr Verheugen can now indeed look back on the difficult task he has now largely brought to a successful end with a feeling of relief .
Bulgaria and Romania still have some way to go , and they accept that .
If they do not achieve the target of 2004 , I believe that they will do so by the 2009 elections .
Turkey is a great deal more difficult .
Up until the summit , Turkey gave us the impression that she was basing her accession to the European Union on seniority of membership applications .
In doing so , she was forgetting that when she applied in 1963 , the European Union was only an economic community with no internal market as we have today , no elected parliament , and no political aspects or ambitions .
She is now suddenly asking a whole lot more , and that is the main issue here .
While the European Union has been developing at high speed , Turkey has remained trapped in the disadvantages of its Kemalist system , a system with great internal tensions and therefore with widespread repression .
Anyone who did not belong to the main population group of Sunni Turkish speakers had a difficult time .
During a recent visit to Turkey I realised that as a Protestant I could not live in a place like Dyarbakir , for example , without coming into serious conflict with the authorities .
That is ridiculous for a citizen of the European Union in an aspiring Member State .
Things have only really been moving over the past two years .
There is therefore still a very long way to go .
Just as with Bulgaria and Romania , I would urge us not to be over-optimistic as regards the speed at which Turkey can change .
You only have to think of the special position of the army , for example , which Mr Lagendijk has already mentioned .
This position cannot simply be changed by means of a few formalities .
The system is too deep-rooted for that .
If you take away a cornerstone , much more may come tumbling down .
It may be important to compile a list of the changes we want to see , such as to public order , which is accorded such extraordinary priority that individual human rights also suffer in many other areas as a result .
I am delighted with the stance taken by Mr Verheugen , who said that his investigation will not be based on any preconceived answers whatsoever and that it will be an honest and thorough investigation .
I think that there is every reason to believe that it will be , and also that we must make sure that we are not too superficial in what we do - something that often happens .
I have great faith in what Mr Verheugen has said .
We want a normal Member State ; we do not , for example , want a Member State that makes demands and goes through life exerting political pressure by banging its fist on the table , as we saw recently .
This is unacceptable ; in my view Turkey will have to demonstrate goodwill by putting an end to torture , the deliberate provocation of minorities and suchlike .
In the meantime we are looking forward to the participation of the observers from the first ten countries .
This is a momentous event , and it is incredible to think that from 1989 to 2004 we have been part of this Parliament that has brought about such major historic changes .
It would be arrogance to attempt to sum up the Copenhagen Summit in two minutes .
I will therefore limit myself to a few points .
First and foremost , I would like congratulate the Danish Presidency - and these congratulations are not just formal , they come from the heart - on the skill with which it has brought lengthy negotiations to a successful close .
Secondly , we are witnessing an historic period of history , the full meaning of which we may not yet have grasped : for the first time in the history of mankind , a union of States is being built on the basis of a project of civilisation and shared values without recourse to military force .
This means that we , the European Parliament , and the Council and the Commission , must evaluate very carefully something which President Prodi mentioned , namely the fact that , at this juncture , now Europe has been built , we need to make the rules .
The rules of our founding fathers , the rules which were the basis for the development of the European Economic Community , now need very careful revision , revision which I am sure will be achieved by the Convention but which needs a further contribution .
I would like to quote a statesman who lived two centuries ago in Italy - Count Camillo Benso di Cavour - who said .
' We have made Italy , now we must make Italians ! '
We have certainly made Europe at Copenhagen - now we have to make Europeans .
And to make Europeans we need this large-scale information campaign promoting Europe - which our President mentioned this morning - which has been announced many times but will have to be implemented practically in the coming months , for what is happening here must be by common agreement between all our fellow European citizens .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , it has been said , and rightly so , that the Copenhagen Council put an end to the post-war division of Europe .
We also need to put an end to a much older division , by which I mean the difficulties preventing eastern Europe from moving from the Middle Ages to the present day , difficulties which condemned it to a period of endless stagnation and cost it dearly in terms of both money and blood .
It is time we paid our respects to the people of eastern Europe for their persistence and for their faith in the concept of progress , which I hope will be vindicated today .
There has been a parallel achievement in southern Europe .
It does not have the same material dimensions as eastern Europe , but it does have similar moral dimensions .
Look at Cyprus , an ancient European people , a Hellenic people , which found itself in the grip of a nineteenth century colonial regime and finally - and rightly - rebelled against it in the middle of the twentieth century .
As in numerous other instances , the consequences of that rebellion were - in English for the benefit of my British colleagues - an ' independence of sorts ' , but an independence accompanied by the partition of two nations , with the colonial power playing one off against the other on the basis of the classic principle of divide and rule .
Today 's Europe , with the admission of Cyprus and the call for the island 's two nations to be reunited , will remedy the tragic consequences of the colonial adventure in - or rather the retrogressive order which governed - this European country .
This is what is important , Mr President , Mr President-in-Office , Mr President of the Commission , not the fact that no agreement was reached .
Of course , the Greek side responds fully to your call for an agreement to be reached by 27 February and , if there is a similar response on the Turkish side , an agreement will be reached .
But what you should really be looking at is the response in the hearts of the Turkish-Cypriots , whose demonstrations show exactly what they think of their reactionary leaders .
This is the real response and the real brilliance of Europe in the hearts of its people , when Europe sticks to its principles , and we must rely on this brilliance to move forward and build the future .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , in closing the Copenhagen European Council which brought together the Heads of State and Government of the Fifteen Member States , the President-in-Office , Mr Rasmussen , stressed the truly historic nature of this event which puts an end to the period of separation .
The subject of our work over recent days was a common vision for the future of our continent .
A stroke of good luck but also intense and extremely commendable work by the Union , and especially by the candidate countries , has meant that the enlargement process , launched in 1992 in the Danish capital and forming the basis of the famous political criteria , named after Copenhagen , on democracy , the rule of law and human rights , has been completed in the same place .
Look at how much progress has been made over the last 50 years ! Look at how many barriers have been torn down , how many misunderstandings have been overcome !
Twenty-five - soon to be twenty-seven - States are finally working together to achieve the objectives of freedom , democracy and responsibility . Such cooperation honours the fight that millions of our predecessors waged at the price of intense suffering and sacrifice .
We still have a great deal of difficult ground to cover , no one has any illusions about this .
The European Union must , in particular , respond to the need to make fundamental changes to the way it works and to its institutions .
This is the work that the European Convention must bring to a successful conclusion under Mr Valéry Giscard d 'Estaing .
We hope that the European Convention will lead to a draft for a single constitutional treaty that is legible and which responds to the need for a Europe that is more efficient , more democratic and perceived to be more legitimate by all European citizens .
Unless we fundamentally reform the way in which the European Union currently works , Europe 's reunification will lead to weaker political will within Europe and this is something that we certainly do not want .
Mr President , although the Copenhagen decision is indeed of historical significance , this is only one stage in the development of the European Union .
It has been said quite rightly today that enlargement of this Union must go ahead .
On the one hand , a number of countries - I am thinking here of the Balkan countries - await membership at a later date , and on the other , there are other countries with a well-founded claim to close partnership and equal status , by which I mean Russia and also the states bordering the Mediterranean .
An enlarged EU must , though , strike a new balance between flexible and efficient decision-making and the aspects of the decision-making structures that have to do with democratic policy-making .
Together with the representatives of the Council Presidency - I see that Mr Haarder is present - Parliament , the Council and the Commission are engaged in the search for a common basis for dialogue on better forms of governance .
Mr Haarder has gone to a great deal of trouble to provide a number of contributions .
Even though he is now the representative of a government and no longer a member of this House , a certain awareness may be at work here .
The main thing , though , is that there are a number of governments that are far more restrictive than he wishes to be .
I see that as highly problematic , as not enough governments have made public commitments to transparency and public access , especially as regards their decision-making structures .
I would particularly like to thank President Prodi for the way in which the Commission has again presented a range of proposals that point a way forward to possibly better and , at the same time , more democratic ways of governing , principally indicating how the Council and Parliament can participate in lawmaking with equal rights .
Not all of the Commissioners have realised , however , that when this House delegates and cedes the power to make laws , we can , of course , do so only on certain conditions and in conjunction with a right of recall .
I hope , though , that the next conversations , which we will be having at the beginning of the Greek Presidency , will bring us a result .
I appreciate it when the Commission and the Council keep on reiterating their obligation to insist on adherence to the Treaties , but I ask them to acknowledge that we in this House have to insist on the principles of democracy being guaranteed by the legislators ' participation in the process of drafting laws .

We will be having elections in 2004 , which we will not win against each other ; we can win them only with each other and only when we make it our real concern that there should be greater flexibility , greater efficiency , and also more democracy in the European Union .
Mr President , the historic decision taken by the Copenhagen Council will doubtless help to restore the unity of Europe lost after the war .
The accession of central and eastern European countries , together with Cyprus and Malta , is another step in the evolutionary process of the unique phenomenon we refer to as European integration and I should like to congratulate both the Danish presidency and the Commission and Commissioner Verheugen on their successful handling of the entire process .
I do not have much time so I will make just two comments .
First of all , because of the economic and financial repercussions of enlargement as the result of the accession of new Member States , the Union will have to be bold in adjusting its financial perspectives if they are to meet the demands both of enlargement and of its citizens and make an effective contribution to the stability and cohesion of the societies of the Member States , especially the new Member States .
Secondly , I should like to comment on the accession of Cyprus and , more particularly , the atmosphere surrounding the Copenhagen Council .
It seems to me that the Council satisfied all of us because it showed that Europe can manage its affairs both wisely and decisively , taking as its criterion the construction of a healthy , democratic structure in which human rights and the proper values of human society are respected .
We must not , however , forget that a solution to the problem still needs to be found and that Copenhagen was unable to find one because the Turkish and Turkish-Cypriot leaders refused to focus on a solution .
We must now make every effort and do all we can to bring about the integration of the whole island within the next two months .
However , I would point out that the solution to the Cyprus problem , however badly needed , must keep the fundamental principles of the Treaties of the European Union intact .
Any derogations from the acquis communautaire , any transitional arrangements included in the solution to the Cyprus problem must not leave factors which violate basic principles of the European Union behind once they expire .
I call on the European Commission , as the guardian of the Treaties , to keep a close watch to ensure that the solution does in fact abide by the Treaties of the European Union .
Last Friday , 13 December , I went to the cinema to see Roman Polanski 's film , ' The Pianist ' , the story of a Jewish musician from Warsaw who survived the Second World War in a miraculous way .
At the beginning of the film we see how his family reacts with relief to the news that the British and the French have announced that they will be coming to help the Poles following the invasion of Poland by the Germans .
We all know that nothing came of that help until last Friday , the thirteenth .
On that day the outcome at Copenhagen paid off an old debt .
The success of Copenhagen is success for everyone - including for this Parliament , which has been so intensively involved in this process .
We can be proud of this result .
To paraphrase the words of the great social democrat Willy Brandt , something that belongs together is now really being given the opportunity to grow more closely together .
What started with Brandt 's historic genuflection in that self-same Warsaw has now been completed in Copenhagen .
The credit for this new historic moment goes mainly to those who brought about the momentous changes in 1989 and 1990 and who were astute enough to make the most of the opportunity to turn the new democracies into fully-fledged EU candidate countries .
Many of those who were leaders at the time have now disappeared from the political stage , but the outcome of Copenhagen is also a tribute to them .
Of course , our own European Union also deserves to be congratulated , as it may well have taken a long time to formulate the starting points and preconditions for accession , but it has subsequently maintained the agreed scenario and adhered to the agreed timetable consistently and efficiently .
In this context I would like to pay particular tribute to Mr Verheugen 's efforts .
The candidate countries are also deserving of praise .
Their staying power has really been put to the test .
As rapporteur for this Parliament for Slovakia , I myself have experienced the efforts made by the Slovaks to meet the EU 's conditions at close hand .
They were far-reaching , and there was very little time .
The emphasis in the reports from the end of last week about the results of the Copenhagen Summit was on the financial arrangements for the negotiations and the Turkey question .
Both aspects are important , but they are not the only weighty matters .
Other problems also play a role in the European Parliament 's final assessment that we have to issue for each candidate country .
It is enough in this case to remember our earlier concerns on matters like the battle against corruption , the lack of administrative capacity in the accession countries and the discrimination against the Roma .
Mr President , I , too , would like to congratulate Mr Rasmussen , Mr Haarder , Mr Prodi and Mr Verheugen on this excellent outcome .


I would also like to join our group chairman , Mr Poettering , in emphasising that this small country has produced a great achievement .
This really means that we will not have to change this rotation system in the future .
Experience teaches us that big countries sometimes do not do things very well , and that small countries sometimes do things very well indeed .
I say to Denmark that you can be proud of the outcome .
Secondly I would like to make some comments on enlargement .
I am delighted that Poland has made it to the first group of accession countries .
This was of course not without problems .
It would also probably be a good idea - and I am addressing this to Mr Verheugen - to give the Member States an even better explanation of what enlargement is really going to cost us .
If we are aware that there is still a leeway of some EUR 25 billion before we reach the EU expenditure ceiling , and if we know that we will only be incurring costs of EUR 12 billion in the first year of enlargement , EUR 12.6 billion in the second year and EUR 14.9 billion in the third year , we will know that despite enlargement we will still have money left over in 2006 .
We must therefore make it clearer that this enlargement is not expensive ; in fact it is cheaper than all the enlargements that have gone before .
Thirdly , I would like to mention Cyprus and Turkey .
It is a pity that Cyprus has not been included in its entirety , but it is a good thing that we have made sensible arrangements with regard to Turkey , which does not yet have a date for accession , but will have to adhere explicitly to the arrangements agreed at Copenhagen and will be tested against them .
I think that this is very important .
Actually I wonder whether Turkey ever ought to accede , as we will then have to tackle the debate about Europe 's borders at some stage .
My last comment is this : you had a visit from Mr Giscard d 'Estaing , and I have the honour of being a member of the Convention .
Mr Giscard d 'Estaing once again spoke about the president of the European Union and the congress that would have to be set up .
Those are his ideas .
I can tell you that there is really very little support for this in the Convention .
If we ever need a president of the European Union , it should be the president of the European Commission , and we do not need a European congress at all .
It is this European Parliament that needs more powers .
That is also what it says in the Benelux statement .
If all small countries endorse this , we will fortunately be able to consign this nonsense of Mr Giscard d 'Estaing 's to the scrap heap .
I hope , therefore , that Denmark will back this .
Mr President , the Danish presidency set itself an extremely ambitious agenda for the Copenhagen Summit .
As a result , two fraught days were spent in Copenhagen negotiating a financial package , with divisions at one stage threatening to stall proceedings .
However , once this had been resolved , the EU formally invited eight countries from Central and Eastern Europe , plus Cyprus and Malta , to join in 2004 .
This was a momentous occasion in European history , finally bringing to an end the divisions created by the Cold War .
However , it must be said that enlargement is not yet complete .
Negotiations have still to be concluded with Bulgaria and Romania and have yet to begin with Turkey .
I endorse the commitment given at the Copenhagen Summit to start the negotiations with Turkey in 2004 , subject , of course , to a review on progress on human rights and rule of law issues .
I have consistently argued that the accession of Turkey could form an important bridgehead between East and West and help consolidate Turkey as a secular democracy and a calming force in an otherwise unstable region .
As a result of these momentous decisions , our new neighbours will be Ukraine , Belarus and Moldova .
Now is the time to consider what sort of relationship we want to develop with these countries and how far we want it to go .
In conclusion , I am pleased that the recent uncertainty regarding the timetable for enlargement , which was partly due to our rejection of the Treaty of Nice in the first Irish referendum , has been removed .
It will now proceed in May 2004 , ironically under the Irish presidency and indeed , Mr President , during your final six months as President of this Parliament .
I look forward to welcoming the new accession countries into the EU family on that historic occasion .
Mr President , Mr President of the Commission , ladies and gentlemen , the year that is coming to its end has been a remarkable one for Europe .
The introduction of euro notes and coins has made the internal market a domestic one .
The Copenhagen resolutions have set in motion the process of ratification for enlargement as a precondition for the reunification of Europe , and have enabled the legacy of Yalta and of the post-war era to be overcome .
This move also has knock-on effects on all the Member States and candidate countries , including my own country , which possessed the longest external - and dead - border .
From Europe 's margin , we have moved back , to be - as the Austrian national anthem puts it - like a heart at its centre .
Our task is to draw closer together , to build up Europe 's stability and its capacity to act , to listen , to be desirous of mutual understanding , to tear down walls and cut through barbed-wire fences - wherever they were or will be set up .
Neither Copenhagen nor participation in the 2004 elections to Parliament bring the accession process to a conclusion .
Information , communication and reform continue to be needed .
The European projects call for the public to be more deeply involved , and not only prior to the ratification of treaties .
Far from being already at an end , the process of enlargement is moving forward , and I am thinking not only of Bulgaria and Romania , but also of Croatia and the countries of the former Yugoslavia , of Switzerland and Liechtenstein .
As my final point , let me say that transit policy is evidence of the fact that the Danish Presidency , to which I am very grateful , is at work right through to its last day .
Let me tell you , as an Austrian , that we give the utmost support to the proposal to be found in COREPER , because it is right and good .
It is my expectation that a resolution will be passed at 3 p.m. this afternoon , or , failing that , at the extraordinary council of Transport Ministers on 31 December .
Let us put an end to transitional arrangements ; let us establish European rules and introduce the infrastructure costs directive in 2003 at the latest !
- ( DA ) Mr President , first and foremost , I should like to express my thanks for a constructive and positive debate and for the many positive comments on the Danish Presidency in general and the course of the Copenhagen Summit in particular .
The Presidency views the cooperation it has enjoyed with Parliament as constructive and positive , and we are delighted to see that Parliament shares this view .
A number of questions have been posed , and so many subjects have been raised that it is impossible for me to comment on everything that has been said in the limited time available ; but I should like to highlight a few subjects that many people have mentioned .
The debate is closed .
I have received six motions for resolution pursuant to Rule ( 42 ) 5
When prices increase , the value of wages decreases .
To protect themselves against this , the trade unions in many European countries have battled for years for indexing .
This means that it is not necessary to negotiate on compensation for the reduction in purchasing power every year but only on the extent to which workers should participate in productivity increases and on the making up of arrears suffered by some occupational groups who have been underpaid for years .
Pressure from employers ' organisations and the support afforded by neo-liberal governments have in very many cases reversed this indexing .
This can result in increasing intransigence in wage disputes .
Attempts are repeatedly being made to place the blame for inflation or the lack of money for useful government expenditure on the shoulders of the workers .
This means that in the eyes of the Right and the employers , the economy will flourish only if a majority of the people accepts a creeping drop in purchasing power .
They do not consider the loss of domestic purchasing power that this can cause , or the excessive profits and too low taxes .
Official statistics on wage costs and the development of prices become an important item of information in labour disputes and in the way in which governments and employers attempt to manipulate these disputes .
The regulation on labour cost index will not eliminate this conflict of interests .
. ( PT ) The Commission considers a labour cost index to be of utmost importance for the European Central Bank , to monitor inflation in the EMU , and for social partners to use in negotiating wage agreements .
The current proposal seeks to remedy that by establishing a common framework for the production , transmission and evaluation of comparable labour cost indices .
In short , it is being proposed that , in order to calculate labour costs , the total quarterly costs incurred by the employer in the employment of labour must be taken into account .
In implementing the regulation , the Commission shall be assisted by the Statistical Programme Committee .
The Commission will submit a report to Parliament and the Council every two years on the regulation 's implementation , including an assessment of the quality of the data supplied .
In its Common Position , the Council has made a number of adjustments to the original Commission proposal . The rapporteur considers that these changes are in line with the spirit of the original proposal and I therefore wish to use this explanation of vote to express my favourable position .
. ( PT ) Having seen that the lack , to date , of a common framework for the production , transmission and evaluation of comparable labour cost indices has been a major weakness in the action plan for EMU statistics - a fact that will also have a detrimental effect on inflation in the Eurozone - I have supported this report , which rightly seeks to guarantee the existence of this common framework .
In fact , as the rapporteur points out , this common framework will enable the ECB to monitor changes in inflation within the EMU and will be of enormous benefit to the social partners in negotiating wage agreements .
As in countless other cases , transparent and reliable information and the existence of clear and understood criteria these days constitute a crucial tool .
This will contribute both to the upstream adoption of fair , proportionate and appropriate measures by national and Community authorities and to serving as a downstream tool for clarifying the role and interests of economic actors and ensuring that the composition of these is balanced .
Whilst welcoming the establishment of this common framework , I still look forward to the results of this new regulation 's implementation , in which the quality of data in particular will be assessed , because the Commission will have to present a report on the new regulation 's implementation to the European Parliament and to the Council every two years .
.
( PT ) I congratulate Mr Pohjamo on the excellent report he has drafted on the Parliament and Council proposal for a regulation on the carriage of passengers , freight and mail by air , which I support , especially with regard to the need to adopt regulations that will enable mechanisms to be set up to provide European carriers with up-to-date and comparable statistics for this sector .
These will help to guarantee the safety of passengers and the efficient management of these companies .
In this context , I should also like to emphasise the importance that this set of regulations will have in helping to resolve the issue of air space saturation .
As a former rapporteur for Customs 2000 , I have an active interest in EU cooperation on customs in the EU and have voted for the Mollar report , which improves the exchange of information .
In all matters relating to the area of freedom , security and justice , a balance must be struck between the freedom of the individual and the urgent need to tackle the rise in organised crime .
It is hoped that the customs file identification database ( FIDE ) will make a positive contribution to the fight against organised crime in the EU .
As regards Mr Nisticò 's report on the regulation of the distribution of human blood , it can truly be said , Mr President , that this conciliation process was a fight to the last drop of blood .
However , blood also indicates nobility , when it is blue , and we have to admit that the rapporteur , Mr Nisticò , is not lacking in nobility .
It also indicates a sanguine nature , which Mr Nisticò , like all the people of Calabria , certainly has , so much so that he has achieved great success in this conciliation .
It also means solidarity , for to give blood is to show solidarity .
Therefore , with the greatest of pleasure , I voted for the report .
Mr President , I would also like to welcome this report and the new directive .
The passing on of contaminated blood can and does have fatal consequences and I welcome strongly the proposals to regulate the transportation of blood and to ensure supervision by qualified staff , which represent an important step forward in this directive .
I would like to thank medical staff at Addenbrookes Hospital in Cambridge and at the Norfolk and Norwich Hospital , both of which are in my constituency , who have given me help and advice so that I could contribute to this directive .
They want to convey the importance not only of qualified staff to supervise the process but also of training for all those who handle blood , because human error is the biggest source of accident in this respect .
Finally , the voluntary donation of blood - which is an important principle for us in Britain in particular - has the added benefit of ensuring the highest possible voluntary screening-out of the health risk associated with blood transfusion .
We should be thanking and congratulating all those millions of people in Britain and throughout Europe who give blood .
We should also appeal to the 94 % of people who do not give blood to do so in future .
. ( PT ) This report has sought to ensure that more rigorous standards are adopted for the eligibility of blood and plasma donors and that blood donations are screened , to establish a Community-level quality-control system for blood transfusion centres , complemented by an equivalent system of control and approval in the Member States and to set common standards for staff training and the traceability of blood from donor to patient .
On 12 June 2002 , Parliament adopted eight amendments at second reading .
Under the written procedure , a compromise solution was reached and accepted by the Council , in conciliation , for donors to be examined by qualified health professionals .
For all these reasons , this report has won my vote .
. ( PT ) This new directive makes it binding on Member States to provide the public with access to environmental information held by the authorities , in terms arising from a compromise reached between the Council and Parliament , which I think is acceptable .
In short , the joint text lays down :
the obligation for public authorities to actively assist citizens in their search for information , encouraging them to use the new technologies to answer their requests ;
quality standards designed to ensure that the information supplied is up-to-date , accurate and reliable ;
the principle that information should be provided to the public free of charge , although it has been accepted that a charge can be made , restricted to ' a reasonable amount ' .
Because this compromise strengthens the citizens ' right to obtain information from national , regional or local authorities , specifically in the event of river contamination , the construction of new projects or the destruction of natural habitats of protected species of flora or fauna , thereby increasing transparency in areas of common interest , I could only vote in favour of this report .
. ( PT ) I have , of course , voted in favour of this important report , which seeks to establish common criteria for access to information , to ensure public participation in the decision-making process and access to justice in environmental matters , because I believe that this access to information - and I am talking about high-quality information - on environmental matters must today be considered to be a standard prerogative of citizenship .
In fact , establishing rules for such access will effectively contribute to control by the citizens in an area that concerns everyone - a genuine Citizens ' Control to protect our environmental heritage .
I therefore feel it is quite appropriate to strengthen the mechanisms for access to information and to information technologies .
The trend of authorities providing environmental information without charge , in conjunction with promoting the use of information technologies - especially the Internet - will lead to this information being widely and freely accessible , subject , of course , to the necessary restrictions when national security , court cases or industrial rights or those concerning intellectual property are concerned .
Lastly , I welcomed the idea of establishing practical arrangements to ensure that information about the environment is used effectively , and of granting of more rigorous powers to the Member States in this context , which will result in greater responsibility for these , but also in the subsidiarity principle being implemented .
That concludes voting time .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.30 p.m. and resumed at 3 p.m. )

The minutes from yesterday 's sitting have been distributed .
Are there any comments ?
Mr President , one very quick question : I have just read in a Spanish newspaper that Nestlé , a large multinational , is demanding USD 6 million from Ethiopia in the middle of a famine .
I really do not know what kind of world we are living in , and I cannot get over my amazement , regardless of the economic and legal reasons this multinational may have .
Whatever the case , the situation is none the less cruel .
I share your concern , Mr Bautista .
The problem is that I asked about the Minutes and , although your contribution was not entirely irrelevant , it is the Minutes that plenary was supposed to be discussing .
( The Minutes were adopted )
- ( DA ) Mr President , I should like to thank Parliament for this opportunity to express , on behalf of the Council , my deepest sympathy with those affected by the devastating and scandalous pollution that followed the accident involving the oil tanker Prestige off the Galician coast .
I believe that we all hoped that , following the Erika accident in 1999 - I myself was present at discussions on this here in Parliament - we had put an end to this kind of disaster in the heart of Europe .
Unfortunately it has happened again , however , and thus maritime safety and the prevention of oil slick disasters is back on the agenda .
Following the Erika accident , the Council and Parliament adopted a number of measures to improve safety and reduce oil pollution at sea .
We still do not know what went wrong to cause the wreck off the Galician coast , but the fact that it could happen is , in itself , proof enough that further action is required .
There is now a need for us to make whatever efforts are necessary to prevent this kind of accident in the future - and for us to send a strong political signal to the population , shipowners , captains , and everyone involved in transporting oil , in particular .
On 21 November , Parliament made a strong statement on the Prestige accident .
I should like to say to Mrs de Palacio that the Commission , in my opinion , has shown great energy in acting on this difficult matter .
Both institutions deserve praise for the Community 's swift action in initiating decisions promoting maritime safety and the protection of the marine environment .
We now have a starting point from which to proceed with the matter .
It has been the Presidency 's intention to treat the Prestige accident extremely seriously .
The matter was placed on the agenda of the Council of Transport Ministers on 6 December and at the Council meeting of Environment Ministers on 9 December , and I was present when it was also discussed in detail at the European Council meeting in Copenhagen last week .
This was one of the reasons why there was a delay , meaning that the ministers did not end up dining with the Queen of Denmark .
It was important to the Presidency that the meeting produce tangible results , and we can now say that it did indeed produce results .
The Council has declared that all the relevant measures will be taken to prevent this kind of accident : at international , EU and national level .
I am happy that the Council Conclusions are fully in line with the views of the European Parliament .
Both the Council and the Presidency hold the view that we have achieved a good result , one which sends out the strong political signal we need : a firm line against single-hull tankers in the EU and the political will to find solutions .
It is my hope that Parliament will make an active contribution - and I am quite sure that it will - to the rapid achievement of the goals set .
In particular , I am thinking of the measures that Parliament and the Council will be adopting together under the codecision procedure .
These include accelerating the phasing-out of single-hull tankers .
I have no doubt that we can agree on this , given the will and resolve that Parliament has shown in this matter .
The Council is also looking forward to constructive cooperation with Parliament , so that there is no unnecessary delay in putting in place the tightening of regulations and the rules on liability that are needed for the purposes of prevention and in order to ensure that , if accidents should happen , it is the right people who are made to pay : that is , those responsible .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , only a few weeks ago , when the Prestige had just sunk , I made clear to Parliament my fury and disappointment that we had been unable to prevent this tragedy from occurring .
Unable to prevent a tragedy that was foreseen , that we knew could happen at any time and that we could not prevent because we lacked the political impetus , the will , the decisiveness required to move more swiftly and decisively in applying the measures proposed by the Commission at the time .
Today I must reiterate this .
I would like to do so because we cannot allow a third disaster to take place .
We cannot , following the Erika and the Prestige , allow another Erika or Prestige to sully our coasts .
The result of this debate and your vote tomorrow , here in Parliament , must therefore be the same result as that of 6 December in the Council of Ministers , in other words , a clear , determined will to implement radical changes , to take decisions immediately , in all the Member States of the Union and to go further , at international level , because , I repeat , we need to protect European coastlines first of all , but Europe also has international leadership responsibilities , which mean that we need to respect and maintain clean seas throughout the world , not just along our own coastlines .
In this regard , I would first like to thank the Danish Presidency for the decisive support given by the Council of Ministers the other day to these measures , which specifically led to Council conclusions that are , if they are really put into practice - and that is the key - a genuine , decisive step forward for European maritime security .
I would therefore like to thank the Danish Presidency for its work , but I would then like to say that the statements made the other day must be put into practice , in each and every country in the European Union .
Putting them into practice means that when decisions are taken to prohibit the entry into and exit from European ports of single-hulled vessels carrying oil , tar , bituminous products or heavy fuel oil , these decisions must be upheld .
It means asking the Commission to present a proposal to bring forward the deadline for banning single-hulled vessels , single-hulled oil tankers , for oil transportation , from our waters and then supporting this proposal when it is on the table at the Council of Ministers .
It means that when we say we are going to increase controls in ports in the various States of the Union , we actually employ the necessary staff , provide them with the necessary means and carry out these controls .
It means that when we say we are going to promote progress in international maritime legislation at international level , adapting international maritime legislation to new challenges , new risks and new social demands , we really do promote this from now on , all together , all Fifteen of us , and , I hope , the ten new States and the other candidate countries .
( Applause )
It means that when we say we are going to allow the Agency , which we are currently setting up and which will begin work , I hope , in January , to begin to monitor and indicate , where necessary , any deficiencies or shortcomings , we pay attention to the Agency when it does point any out and that we take the necessary steps to correct them .
These are the factors we need to promote .
We have already seen the results of prolonged delays , paying more attention to certain problems .
I do not deny that these problems existed but they prevented us from taking swift enough action .
We cannot allow the tragic results of this to happen again along European coastlines .
I must stipulate that , following the Erika disaster , it has been extremely frustrating for me to see that we in Europe have been unable to do what the United States did after the Exxon Valdez incident .
I refuse to believe that we in the European Union should be content with fewer laws and fewer powers than the citizens of the United States , for example .
I repeat , therefore , that the European Union is not enough .
We must also make progress at international level .
Mr President , the Commission , and I shall end here , understands that there are various levels and timetables .
We are now experiencing the impact of these coastlines destroyed by an oil slick , and having to deal with these people whose lives , homes and opportunities are affected . That is the issue we must address first of all .
We must solve existing problems , and European solidarity has been demonstrated clearly here , in the Transport Council and the Environment Council , and , I would imagine , is currently being demonstrated in the Fisheries Council , in any case , in the Copenhagen European Council .
This solidarity has also been demonstrated with regard to funds ; reprogramming funds ; direct access to disaster funds ; economic contributions , but also providing resources , people and efforts by the various countries of the Union which , in different ways , have helped to mitigate the disaster we are currently facing .
Although this must be our immediate concern , however , we also need to act immediately , urgently , to prevent any more disasters of this kind .
We must act , as I have said , to implement bans within the Member States to ensure that the most contaminating products are transported in more secure vessels , to guarantee that these are monitored to the highest possible degree ; but we also need to act immediately , while knowing that this will only bear fruit in the medium term , at international level , to promote change in international maritime law .
Lastly , I would like to say that the Commission , as well as setting up the Agency , as well as authorising and mobilising various funds , as well as making changes with regard to the use and allocation of certain existing funds , will now table a regulation with a European standard to speed up the timetable for banning single-hulled vessels in the field of oil transportation in European waters and ports .
Immediately banning the use of all vessels but the most secure means banning single-hulled vessels in the transportation of the most contaminating products and therefore requiring the use of double-hulled vessels .
In order to make progress in clarifying responsibilities , we need to create a penal classification at European level , in all the countries of the Union , to cover serious negligence , when this type of situation occurs .
I would like , by means of this and other measures , to further increase the security of our ports and our waters , internally and at international level .
Mr President , I would like to end by saying that the Commission , just as it did in the case of the Erika , is responding promptly , swiftly and decisively .
We hope that the Council and Parliament will respond similarly and with the same political and practical commitment , so that we might avoid having to hold another debate such as this in years to come .
( Applause )
Mr President , first of all I would like to thank the European institutions for the solidarity they have shown towards the people and regions affected and I would also like to thank the parliamentary groups that supported us in holding a debate , as Mr Haarder pointed out , on 21 November , and in repeating it today .
It is essential for Galicia in particular , but also Asturias , Cantabria , the Basque country , and the French and Portuguese regions affected , to see very clearly that we shall continue to support them , and that by no means should they feel alone .
I would now like to put forward a proposal that the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats is to table , for the Conference of Presidents to request a report from the European Commission and make the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism responsible for holding a public hearing on maritime transport safety in Europe and the consequences of this kind of accident .
Ladies and gentlemen , this is by far the worst ecological disaster that my country has suffered and it is a disaster of European proportions that no country has the means to tackle alone .
It is true that the sinking of the Erika was a nasty but salutary shock which , as we have seen , was insufficient , and the Vice-President of the Commission is right to express her indignation .
I therefore believe that today we in Parliament should remember the measures she proposed at the time with the support of the European Parliament , which the Council did not support .
That must be the basis for our work , in order to achieve a reasonable level of safety so that this kind of event does not occur again on our seas and along our coastlines .
Mr President , this is not a natural disaster .
There are guilty parties : not the wind or the sea , but people with names .
This ecological , social and human disaster , however , requires us to mobilise all the financial means available to the European Union and also the recently created Solidarity Fund .
It is true that we in Parliament are subject to the Rules of Procedure that all the groups approved , but the situation requires that we act generously and flexibly .
Although this Fund did not exist when the Erika sank , I would also like to ask the European Commission , what means were authorised for recovery operations along the French coast ?
I shall now turn to the Council to ask it to commit to the proposals to increase maritime safety , which have the backing of both the Commission and Parliament , and to fulfil the commitment given in Copenhagen to create a compensation fund for the damages caused by oil spills .
I shall end , Mr President , by calling upon the Socialist Group in general , but more particularly my fellow Spanish Members .
Two motions of censure have already been discussed against the government of the Partido Popular in Galicia , and the Galician Parliament has set up a committee of inquiry .
Here we formally propose that we all work side by side to help those affected and increase maritime transport safety , but if you do not want to , if you do not have the heart , at least let us work towards this .
Mr President , yet again this Parliament finds itself debating another maritime disaster .
We are now faced with a disaster of such magnitude that it is no longer just a transport issue , it is also an environmental , social and fishing issue , which is why my group believes a committee of inquiry is needed to ascertain what went wrong with the Prestige .
On behalf of my group , I express to the people of Galicia our sadness at their tragedy and our solidarity and support in their battle against this modern-day black death that is threatening their livelihoods and damaging their shores .
This Parliament would be fully justified in saying to our own Council of Ministers and to the IMO : ' We told you so ! '
The parliamentary records are full of calls from this body for action on maritime safety .
From the Estonia to the Braer , from the Sea Empress to the Erika .
We have highlighted flags of convenience , inadequate port state control , single-hull tankers and deficient crews and yet , despite our best efforts and the support of the Commission , our own Council of Ministers has failed to heed the warnings and take decisive action and has been instrumental in ensuring that the IMO is one of the most ineffective bodies ever .
I say to the people of Galicia that it should be our own Council of Ministers and the IMO , not them , with oil on their hands at this moment .
They have let the people of Galicia and all of us down on this issue of maritime safety .
The Council of Ministers does not want a committee of inquiry , as there are probably too many skeletons in its cupboard for that .
However , it is shocking that the PPE-DE Group opposes such a move .
It is a clear snub to the people of Galicia .
They seem to be more concerned about protecting political friends than protecting the people of Europe .
This is the worst ecological disaster for years and the PPE-DE Group calls for a hearing - pathetic !
The time for talking is over .
What we need is action - to ban the flags of convenience in our waters ; to improve our port state control ; to ensure that the ships of shame are detained ; to ban all single-hull tankers ; to ensure that those responsible for these disasters pay the full cost of the damage that they caused ; and last , but not least , to ensure that the Prestige is the last tanker to spread its black death over our coastline .
Mr Haarder , take the message back to the Council : no more blocking , delay , subsidiarity or hiding behind the IMO - action is what we demand !
Commissioner , you are not the only one who is angry .
When I see how this event is destroying the livelihoods of so many people and of a whole region , we are all angry .
On behalf of my group I can tell you that our hearts are with them all , and I believe that we must offer them help through all the channels we have .
Here in Parliament we must do what a parliament must do , however , which is to make rules and reinforce existing rules .
The first thing I would like to ask - and I am also addressing this request to my good friend Mr Bertel Haarder - is that we apply the existing rules and that we take Erika I and II in hand .
There is still a document being debated in the Council , Mr Haarder , and I hope that you will do something about this .
We must also tighten up a number of things that are contained in Erika I and II ; I am thinking in particular of ports of refuge and safe anchorages .
In order to prevent major catastrophes , we must make this system compulsory , so that ships that get into difficulties can get help there and are not turned away .
We must draw up a rule for this .
The Commission is supposed to be carrying out a study .
We must have this .
We must also have a compensation rule for ports or places of refuge that take in ships .
We now have a ship lying at a depth of 3 500 metres with 50 000 tonnes of oil still on board , and this ship will be causing problems for years .
We must avoid this kind of thing in future .
Secondly , I would like to comment on port state control , as mentioned by Mr Simpson .
Let us tighten this up for hazardous ships .
It is absolutely no use checking 25 % of ships in good condition ; you must focus the controls on hazardous ships and old ships .
We must make sure that ships passing through sensitive shipping zones are better controlled .
We ask that you enter into negotiations with third countries , including with Russia , with a view to possibly signing bilateral agreements in this regard .
It is time to put an end to the quarrels between the Council , the IMO and the Commission .
The Commission must negotiate and must be given the opportunity to talk about this ; then we will have much stricter rules .
International legislation - and this is clearly stated in the resolution we all agree on - cannot be a reason to destroy the environment and people 's lives .
The one must not take priority over the other .
Finally , with regard to the debate on procedures ; together with the Commission and the Council , we must act fast and get rules down on paper .
We are therefore not in favour of a committee of enquiry , as this would take too long .
Mr President , the speed at which the European Union has taken certain decisions is a perfect illustration of what up till now has been Community inaction in the field of maritime safety .
Clearly if these decisions had been taken earlier , if the Prestige had had an accident , it would not have occurred in Community waters .
Two points should be made in this regard : firstly , to determine the reason for this inaction and the delays in taking decisions , and secondly , to determine whether the measures adopted are sufficient .
In this respect , my political group considers the decisions adopted in Copenhagen to be insufficient , even though they are a step forward , and by way of example , the matter of flags of convenience has not even been addressed .
The Council , and I am now going to refer to its previous management , who could have prevented the current situation from arising , considerably shortened the Commission 's proposal , thus allowing floating timebombs to continue sailing until 2005 , instead of having taken them out of use in September 2002 , which is what would have happened if attention had been paid to the Commission .
The delays in transposing the legislation , or in applying the Erika I and Erika II packages , speak volumes , as do the failures to comply with this legislation , concerning inspections and controls of vessels , for example .
The permissive attitude that allows flags of convenience to be entered in registers by the Member States is no more constructive , and there are other causes for concern .
I think that the issues I have raised constitute grounds for investigating levels of infringement of Community law and poor administration and , consequently , for establishing a committee of inquiry .
Mr Galeote , although you chose to address the Socialist Group , which is very large , and my group is tiny , I am going to speak sincerely , on behalf of a very small group , but one that on vital issues has been involved , modestly , side by side with all our Spanish colleagues .
From this modest experience I am going to say , first of all , that you have forgotten that you prevented a committee of inquiry from being set up in the Spanish national Parliament .
Secondly , it is one thing to take decisions that could be questionable and that , at best , have proved to be wrong , and it is another , more serious , matter to adopt a communication policy to deny the problem , failing to take preventative and corrective action .
The most serious aspect of your government 's management in Galicia is that the State had no plans or instruments to address the crisis immediately .
This comes as no surprise , Mr Galeote , when Mr Aznar supports the idea that we need to reduce State public services to a minimum .
The issue we must now address - as elected Members of Parliament - is the people 's feeling that they have to tackle a disaster with small-scale means and great sacrifice , while the State , to which they pay their taxes , remains either impotent or implacable , I am not sure which .
What is done is done .
There is nothing more to do except think about compensating those affected until economic activity can be rebuilt .
In order to do this , the Solidarity Fund and the Structural Funds need to be mobilised rapidly .
In conclusion , allow me to make one point : at a time of enlargement , we need a large Europe , but not a Europe that is an empty shell , and what cannot go on is the current failure to implement serious processes to prevent those operating on the edge of the law , in search of speculative profits , reducing safety conditions and social protection , from continuing as if nothing had happened .
Mr President , Mr Haarder has described the tragedy of the Prestige as scandalous .
The Commissioner , Mrs de Palacio , has said it was an unnecessary incident which could have been avoided .
This means that both the Presidency of the Council and the Commission and even Mr Galeote feel that there is blame to be apportioned .
This is why we are calling for Parliament to set up a committee of inquiry with the task of identifying where the different responsibilities for the incident and for the subsequent salvage and emergency operations lie , particularly where the Spanish Government is concerned , which , I would remind you , was amongst those who firmly supported the rejection and weakening of the ' Erika package ' and which is now calling in major building and construction firms to clean up the beaches .
We condemn the fact that the Council has only adopted part of the Commission 's proposals . Here , we would like to pay tribute to the Belgian Minister - who , moreover , is one of the few remaining Greens - who was one of the very few people to support the package proposed by the Commission and to fight for it to be adopted in its entirety .
The European Union needs its own legislative framework because we are absolutely sure that the international community will not be able to produce adequate legislation .
We feel that there are two supplementary measures which need to be taken in addition to those already adopted .
Firstly , the port state control bodies must carry out inspections on at least 25 % of the ships entering each of the ports of the individual Member States rather than an average calculation being carried out at national level .
Secondly , there must be new standards ensuring that dangerous substances are transported in smaller container ships than at present with a maximum capacity of 10 000 tonnes .
Moreover , we feel that the Commission proposal for a directive on environmental liability must also include marine pollution and that , in the event of oil spillage , the European Union must adopt the same financial responsibility system as that already applied in the United States , where ship owners have unlimited financial responsibility if blame for the incident can be attributed to them .
Lastly , Mr President , the European Union must provide sufficient financial support through the Structural Funds and through the Solidarity Fund to meet the needs of Galicia and northern Spain and help them to recover from this disaster .
Moreover , we must on no account disregard the fact that many Nature 2000 areas are affected by this disaster .
Mr President , all policy-makers must realise that our dependence on imported oil inevitably brings with it transportation risks .
If we are to reduce this dependence , we will need to invest more in investigating the use of renewable energy sources .
We should also be looking at the possibility of bringing in more oil in through pipelines .
This does not , however , detract from the need to improve the general conditions for transporting oil by sea .
Firstly , this means tightening up the present system of port state control .
More stringent and more frequent inspections should result in unseaworthy ships or ships that are not in good enough condition to carry certain goods being placed under arrest at an earlier stage .
Secondly , the Council deserves support for its plans to speed up the phasing-out of single-hull tankers .
It is , however , in everyone 's interest that we establish double-hull transportation capacity so as to avoid a shortage of supply .
Thirdly , Member States must offer tangible help to ships and areas that are in distress .
By no means all Member States appreciate the need to designate ports of refuge and create rescue , assistance and cleaning facilities in them .
Furthermore , we must also press ahead with the setting up of the COPE fund , which will reimburse affected areas for the damage they have suffered .
Incidentally , our attention should not be directed solely at the cargo but also at the bunker oil used as fuel for the ships themselves .
This can also cause significant damage to the environment and has thus far not formed part of the remit of the IMO .
Sadly , we have already experienced several major oil disasters .
It is time we took a fundamental look at our position and our approach to these .
I hope that everyone concerned realises this .
Mr President , the European Union Member States agreed last summer that ships in distress should immediately be accommodated in a place of refuge .
The Spanish Government , on the contrary , decided to tow the Prestige into open sea , regardless of the consequences .
This week in the Spanish Parliament we witnessed the Spanish Government 's arrogance .
For more than a month it has produced a day-to-day falsification of facts , failing to adjust itself to circumstances .
Mr Aznar , as the main political authority responsible , has been totally unable to achieve a sense of reality .
On the other hand , even if the Galicians have made little progress in their cruel work , they do not lose heart .
Galicians are admirable .
The disaster of the Prestige has become the disaster of José María Aznar and the ' prestige ' of the Galician people .
Mr President , surely the first thing we have to bear in mind when discussing safety at sea and the introduction of any new legislation is the application of existing legislation .
The problem - and it is a huge problem - is that this legislation is not being applied , especially when it comes to port controls .
Secondly , we must not forget that shipping goes beyond national and European borders .
So action is needed at international level .
And that means giving the European Commission the necessary credentials , so that it can reach agreements right from the start with candidate countries and with our neighbours so that we can coordinate our action .
And of course it needs proper credentials from the Council so that it has the necessary authority to negotiate correctly with the International Maritime Organisation , which really does drags its heels .
Thirdly , we must not forget that there are numerous sides to this problem .
There is a lot of talk , and rightly so , about old , single-hull tankers .
But may I remind you that a fairly new double-hulled ship , the Ievoli Sun , which was about 10 years old , sank off the coast of France recently , about two years ago in fact , which just goes to show that double hulls are not necessarily the only answer .
However , nor is focusing on flags of convenience the only answer , because problems are frequently caused by ships not sailing under flags of convenience .
So what exactly am I getting at ?
Obviously we need to address the question of single hulls , obviously we need to examine the question of flags of convenience , no doubt about it ; but we must not overlook all the other questions which we often underestimate .
Port controls are vitally important .
The question of ports of refuge , maintenance of ships , all these questions need to be examined overall , globally , if we want results .
So we need a package of measures to deal with the problem .
As for the committee of inquiry , may I call on my honourable friends not to turn Parliament into a referee in order to resolve internal Spanish differences .
Mr President , I said a month ago that this was a European disaster and requested a European response .
The Galician citizens - my fellow citizens - who are caught up in a titanic fight against the oil that has arrived on their doorsteps , have been the casual victims and have paid the price for all European citizens .
Since day one , therefore I have insisted both here and there on the need to provide a clear and simple European response , as we did for the floods in Germany , which takes account of two aspects : prevention and mitigation .
Should we toughen and change transport legislation ?
Yes .
Should we reprimand ministers ?
Yes .
But we need to do more .
We need to explain to the people who are currently collecting oil by hand why there are no resources and assure them that , if this were to happen again , these resources would be available .
We need to tell them , at the very least , that we are sorry for the lack of resources and coordination that there have been in addressing this disaster from the very beginning .
They are the ones who are enduring this , and their cries for help have reached this Parliament , and we cannot deny this fact .
The Galician , and therefore , European citizens need to feel supported in the long and difficult journey into which the negligence of their own ministers has thrown them .
We therefore cannot understand why anyone in this Parliament would be opposed to knowing what has happened , where mistakes have been made and what we must do to ensure that this never happens again .
This is not a disaster of European dimensions : it is a European disaster and we do not want it to be repeated anywhere .
If it does happen again , however , we clearly cannot act as we have done here .
The pathetic images that have been shown around the world - which have shown what I saw - make it unnecessary , Mr Galeote , for me to give any further explanation .
We Galicians are strong .
We always have been , we have always been able to fight against adversity and we shall not let ourselves be beaten by this disaster .
What my people in Galicia cannot understand is why , if all of Europe recognises the lesson that we as a people are giving , the PPE-DE Group in this Parliament continues to deny us the opportunity to clarify what has happened , assess the damage and propose emergency and crisis management programmes at European level that could serve all Europeans .
We are not the ones who can answer this question , we compatriots , as Mr Galeote says .
Compatriots are not the same thing as accomplices , and we do not want to be accomplices .
Do not insult us by asking us for complicity in the decisions of a government that for a whole month tried to minimise this disaster and has been incapable of mobilising the Community institutions .
On the other hand , Mrs de Palacio , you should ask the Spanish Government a question .
Nobody has been able to use and set in motion the abundant means available to Europe .
Why not ?
Mr President , Commissioner , President-in-Office of the Council , like many of my fellow Members and like many European citizens , I welcome the proposals - which I support - made by the Commission in the wake of the Prestige disaster and presented again here vigorously by Mrs de Palacio .
As we all know , however , they may not be enough .
If we want to avoid finding ourselves discussing the effects of another disaster in the near future , certain measures need to be taken without delay , with less lukewarm cooperation from the Council : port controls must be stepped up , crews must be given training , assistance must be provided to vessels in difficulty , and , above all , ' old tubs ' must be banned and single-hulled vessels rapidly replaced .
I stress the need to speed up as fast as technologically possible the introduction of the obligation for oil tankers and other vessels with dangerous cargoes to be double-hulled .
If we are actually to make a difference in this area , we need practical measures .
I therefore propose that access to certain ports located in sensitive areas should be restricted without delay to double-hulled vessels .
These areas should be progressively defined and delimited at European level , with the introduction of similar measures to those currently in force , for instance , in Venice harbour .
Moreover , the capacity for demolition of old vessels , which is currently inadequate in northern Europe , in particular , must be enhanced with the provision of incentives .
The problems ensuing from this drastic measure will only be temporary and will , in any case , be incomparably less than those which would arise should similar disasters take place in sensitive areas , and I am thinking with horror of certain parts of the Mediterranean .
Are the Commission and the Council prepared to subordinate the economic considerations which thus far have been given priority to the demands of environmental protection ?
The Commission 's response would appear to bode well . I call upon the Council to be equally courageous .
Mr President , the disaster caused by the Prestige oil tanker took place more than a month ago and we still do not know how long we will continue to see waves of oil slicks , which alone is an indictment of the leaders of Spain and the EU for having adopted such belated and ineffectual measures in an attempt to play down the effects of the real tragedy that has befallen the communities and the sea of Galicia , but which has also spread to the maritime territories to the North and to the South , affecting Portugal and France .
Although the tragedy has shown that underlying the ecological disaster are the profits that some shipowners and oil companies seek to make by any means possible , even at the cost of maritime safety and working conditions , specifically by flying flags of convenience , the fact is that governments have allowed them to undertake these activities through increasingly neoliberal practices , including the delay in applying the directives decided on following the Erika disaster .
We must therefore determine the reasons for the current crisis , such as the persistence of the causes , the indecision we have seen and the delay in transposing laws . We must also go further , however , as my group has proposed in the proposal to which I have added my name : banning flags of convenience and the transport of oil products and other dangerous materials in single-hull tankers , establishing shipping lanes that are further from the coast and stepping up inspections are crucial measures for preventing further tragedies .
Mr President , the pictures of the fishermen and the volunteers fighting the oil slick from the Prestige with their small boats and their bare hands demonstrate the enormous strength of an entire people - the Galicians - and prove the culpability of the European Council and the Spanish State .
It is now clear that Galicia 's citizens are suffering the consequences of the serious political conflict which opposes the positive proposals put forward by the Commission and which has led to the selfishness and irresponsibility demonstrated by the Member States of the Council .
The Copenhagen decisions have not answered the anguished questions of the citizens but instead the interests of the predatory capitalism of the oil companies which , taking advantage of the murky and primitive international situation , reject all and any attempt to establish European legislation to protect our seas .
The Council , as well as Mr Aznar , has shown contempt for the people of Galicia by having taken no rapid decision to help that region .
It has shown contempt for the fact that Galicia suffers more disasters than any other part of the world .
The Council has granted Galicia and the neighbouring territories a miserable EUR five million more , whereas the United States , which has strict and specific legislation , clearly lacking in Europe , is claiming USD four billion for the Exxon Valdez accident .
Ladies and gentlemen , our citizens are demanding that we put an end to this situation , starting with setting up a committee of inquiry .
This must never happen again .
Never again !
Mr President , my heart goes out to the Galicians , and to the people who are clearing up the oil , which is now more than a metre thick .
Unfortunately , however , we do not have an emergency response team , and we do not have a professional approach . I find this particularly regrettable .
We must , however , stop simply passing the buck .
Naturally it is important to have this discussion , but not now , and not here .
It is much more important to pay attention to making sure that Europe 's coastline is protected .
My colleague Mr Dirk Sterckx 's specific suggestions about ports of refuge are particularly appropriate .
I would like to call upon the Commission and Council to avoid hot-air politics when it comes to the safety of shipping .
I support the Commission in respect of the agency and the exercising of controls , as Mrs de Palacio has just mentioned .
A ban on single-hull tankers carrying crude oil is soap-box politics and avoids the actual structural problems of international shipping .
A well-maintained single-hull tanker is safer than a badly maintained double-hull tanker .
I am not a fan of the IMO , but it is absolutely necessary for coming to agreements and for honouring and implementing agreements that are already in place .
It looks as if we are creating a more realistic policy than the one you are proposing .
In my opinion it is important to negotiate with Russia on the control of ships that are loaded there and travel along the European coast to Africa .
I think that it is very important to check classification agencies so that we know the responsibilities of the skippers , captains and shipowners and in particular in order to plan clear shipping routes .
I hope that this will result in a better policy .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , Commissioner , we must indeed do something , and we can go even further than what has already been agreed .
I am therefore pleased that the two biggest groups here in Parliament support our proposals for a European coastguard and a European civil ' rapid reaction force ' .
Firstly for prevention . We need a European coastguard to watch over European interests and to prevent ships in distress from being passed from pillar to post by Member States who put their own interests first and in doing so make the wrong decisions .
The coastguard must be the strong arm of the agency for maritime safety .
Secondly , the European civil protection intervention corps must be able to turn out immediately in an emergency and arrive with its own equipment .
These ' Green Helmets ' will then be able to step in anywhere in the European Union , as not all Member States have the equipment and expertise needed to tackle disasters .
I witnessed what was happening in Galicia a week after the disaster , and I saw what a difficult job our Belgian civil protection intervention corps had to do and how long an action of this kind takes to get under way .
I have been told that big construction companies are now having to be called in .
This is of course unacceptable .
Finally I would like to ask the Council to urgently direct its attention to the liability directive , as this lies at the heart of the problem of maritime transport , both in Europe and worldwide .
Commissioner , perhaps you could pass this message on to the next presidency : ' Nunca mais ' [ never again ] .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , in the face of the vast ecological , economic and social disaster that Galicia is currently suffering , which has become a genuine European problem , I believe we must be clear in this debate we are holding .
Prevention first , cure second , it was said here .
The former , prevention , means we must not be distracted from the real culprits in this tragedy .
We are dealing with a floating dump , with dangerous goods , with an opaque network of the interests of soulless businessmen that we should untangle and condemn .
Must we investigate all these aspects ?
Yes .
Should we prevent them ?
Again yes .
I hope and believe that this time the European Union has learnt its lesson .
The European Commission has learnt its lesson .
The European Commission is clear about the matter , and I believe that now the European Parliament and the Council must be intransigent in the face of the laxness and casual attitude of this maritime traffic .
Secondly , cure .
We must focus on repairing the damage that has been caused .
Galicia cannot pay the physical price , in addition to the damage it is suffering .
The real victim is the entire people of Galicia .
Our responsibility now is to work together to achieve the maximum structural funds and the application of the Solidarity Fund ; we are going to achieve it .
An inquiry ?
Of course .
I would like to say here - it has already been said , but I would like to repeat it - that the Galician Parliament has set up , today and with the agreement of all the political parties , a committee of inquiry .
It is applying the principle of subsidiarity so that the closest politicians investigate the matter and therefore we , together with the Liberal Group and the UEN Group , have tabled an amendment for a comprehensive technical inquiry to be undertaken into this complex aspect .
We are going to ask for more European means to achieve better coordination and civil protection ; however , Mr President , seeking to use the tragedy for electoral gain , as some politicians are doing , is simply repulsive .
I believe this division is damaging to the politicians themselves as well to the victims , who are confused and stunned both from the effects of the disaster and from seeing politicians attacking each other with their partisan egotism .
I shall end , Mr President , by thanking , as a Galician European , all of Parliament and the institutions present here today , for the solidarity they are showing us and which I know they will continue to show us over the coming days .
Mr President , Madam Vice-President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Mr Haarder , I am glad that you are here and that we are engaged in discussion , but I must go straight to the heart of all these debates .
I was delighted to read the resolutions from the Transport Ministers ' Council of 5 and 6 December on increased safety at sea , but - alas - I have no faith in them .
Let me give you two examples . Up until now , the Council has always done its utmost to defend the use of single-hulled tankers up to 2015 , and suddenly the Transport Ministers in Council announce an immediate end to the use of single-hulled tankers for the transport of heavy oil .
In addition , there is this wonderful question , Mr President-in-Office : by virtue of which law is this to come about ?
We cannot make it Community law within the next couple of weeks .
Can you quote me any national regulations that will put the Member States in any sort of position to implement the ban on single-hulled tankers ?
My second point , Mr President-in-Office , is that Mr Piecyk and others have already referred to the fact that a number of Member States are failing to meet the obligation imposed on them by the port state directive of controlling 25 % of the vessels calling at EU ports .
Now , acting through the Council of Transport Ministers , the Council has decided to increase its efforts to step up monitoring of controls , if at all possible by 1 January .
Can you , in your capacity as President-in-Office , confirm how many posts have been newly created for inspectors , and in which countries , in the course of the last week or the last ten days , and how many qualified applicants there are for these positions as inspectors ?
You see , Mr President-in-Office , passing fine resolutions is no use at all .
What we want you to tell us is how they are to be implemented .
I would like to refer back to Mr Sterckx , who wrote the report on ports of refuge .
He is perfectly right , and here too , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , the same questions arise .
You have now said that the Member States should set up ports of refuge and register them more quickly , but I would like you to tell us how you propose to ensure that , once the individual states have designated the ports of refuge , they are actually set up .
Let us remember that the Erika wanted to call at a port and was not allowed to , and the question is similar when it comes to the Prestige : if she had called at a port , might she not have avoided breaking up , might it not have been possible to pump out the crude oil more easily and to avoid a disaster of such a magnitude ?
Mr President-in-Office , how do you intend to make sure that the Member States do actually set up these ports of refuge so as to avoid greater calamities ?
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , ladies and gentlemen , the shipwreck of the Prestige has demonstrated the powerlessness of the European authorities and the various Member States when faced with a disastrous situation like this one which , although the coasts it has ravaged belong to Galicia , is nevertheless a European disaster and is felt to be so by all European citizens .
It is precisely the European public , shocked at this appalling event , and the upset and fury of all those affected - particularly the wonderful Galician coastline and its communities - that are demanding that such a situation must not be allowed to happen again on our common coastline .
It is the citizens that are hoping that Galicia will be given appropriate assistance by the EU .
A committee of inquiry is required , in order to shed light on all the circumstances of the disaster and to determine responsibility so that we can learn lessons for the future .
Europe 's citizens are demanding that legislation be made tougher , and that it enter into force and be implemented earlier than planned , without further ado .
Protecting Europe 's maritime industry must increasingly be a common concern and therefore a common policy .
Protecting the marine environment and the European coast are now major challenges for us all .
If the tragedy of the Prestige serves to raise political consciousness and to stimulate action , the despair and the fury of the Galician people - and ours too - will not have been in vain .
Mr President , Commissioner , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , I wish to begin by reiterating my solidarity with the Galician people and with all the communities who might be affected by this tragedy , in Spain , in France and , of course , in my own country .
As time passes , the true scale of this disaster is becoming ever clearer .
I hope that the investigation requested by Parliament will be undertaken in a thorough and timely manner .
And , as I have already said in this Chamber , we must also clear up the mysterious change of direction taken by the ship which , after moving westwards , turned suddenly towards the South , until it sank , thirty miles outside Portuguese waters .
What we need to do now , however , is to talk more about the future and this is why I would like to address four issues .
Firstly , the European Union must provide funds to compensate , as much as possible , for the damage caused by the oil slick .
In this context , I believe we would be justified in mobilising the EU Solidarity Fund , which has not yet been done .
The second aspect is that since this has clearly had a terrible effect on fishing and shellfish farming , we must consider a more integrated and far-reaching package of measures that will provide practical responses for the communities that have been affected .
The third aspect is that a technically and scientifically justified decision must be taken on what to do with the ship , which is now lying on the ocean floor with its 60 000 tonnes of oil .
Unless this is resolved , we will be condemned not only to an oil slick but to a succession of oil slicks for months and years to come .
Lastly , I wish to emphasise that it is now time to properly establish the European Maritime Safety Agency , which means that the Council must agree on where it should be based .
To conclude , I wish to say that we want there to be a rigorous inquiry , as Parliament has already called for .
What we do not want is for Parliament to be used to debate a country 's domestic problems .

Mr President , we could classify the speeches made in the course of this debate into two categories : firstly , those which view the problem from a European perspective and which propose actions to be implemented through European and Community policy and , secondly , those which , at this time of human tragedy , tragedy for a country , which is five months from an election , believe that this is an opportunity to gain electoral advantage without considering what the real consequences for these people are .
There has been talk of a temporary committee of inquiry , in accordance with Rule 150 of the European Parliament 's Rules of Procedure , which must be justified on the grounds of non-compliance with European legislation .
What grounds have we heard here ?
To know what has happened ; clearly we all want to know what has happened , but we are not going to achieve this through a parliamentary committee .
We will be told this in the reports of the experts and that is why the PPE-DE Group 's proposal is that it should be the Commission that informs the Council and Parliament by means of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism .
Assessing the damage ; criticisms are being made , although the time limit for assessing damage ends on 23 January , but today , at the beginning of December , the Spanish State is being criticised for not having assessed the damage .
Measures to be adopted ; Spain has adopted measures .
Coordinating 10 000 volunteers , coordinating the work of the institutions , coordinating international aid ; what is coordinating all of this are the measures that have been adopted .
Mobilise the European institutions ; yesterday we had a meeting with Commissioner Barnier , during which he acknowledged the talks and contacts he had had with the Spanish Government .
The fishermen are being paid , aid is arriving .
Therefore , what are the justified grounds ?
They do not exist .
Simply a will to criticise for political reasons in view of the elections , and this is neither the forum nor the place , and you will not find us participating .
You will find us helping the Galicians , you will find us helping the Spanish and saving these coasts . That is what we are working on .
.
( DA ) Mr President , may I on behalf of the Council state that I agree with most of what has been said , and with the anger , vexation and deep concern that has been expressed , and the demands for action that have been heard in this House .
It is not fair to say that the Council has done nothing , and therefore I would like to start by quoting from the Copenhagen conclusions , which state that ' the conclusions of the meeting of the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism of 6 December 2002 and of the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy of 9 December 2002 should be implemented straight away in every respect ' .
It then continues by expressing satisfaction with the Commission 's work in respect of the economic , social and environmental consequences of the loss of the Prestige .
It also expresses satisfaction with the Commission 's intention to investigate the need for further specific measures , including in respect of liability and associated sanctions .
There was thus complete support in Copenhagen for Mrs de Palacio and for the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
What , then , was decided in the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism on 5-6 December ?
It was a series of paragraphs which approximately correspond to Parliament 's viewpoints , which are indeed vigorous on a great many points and which already meet nearly all the requirements put forward here in this House .
Naturally , there is a certain justification in saying that if steps had been taken a long time ago the catastrophe might possibly have been avoided - yes , we must acknowledge that fact .
But now something is being done , and what is being done is exactly what the honourable speakers have asked for , and the rapid action taken by the Commissioner has been applauded .
I would like to say to Mr Simpson that one of the issues is , of course , that of the parties responsible having to pay .
There are two types of liability . The first is to be met by the funds for covering expenditure on cleaning up beaches and providing compensation for fishermen - and there is nothing to suggest that these funds are insufficient to cover the expenses concerned .
There is also , however , the liability for environmental damage , of course . The possibility of requiring greater liability to be accepted is open to discussion ; and it is agreed that , if at all possible , there must be a requirement to accept such liability .
Mr Sterckx and others are right in saying that it is not the number of inspections which is crucial , but that inspection is carried out at the right points .
It is a requirement that 25 % are to be inspected ; it is also correct that some countries are not meeting this requirement - and naturally that is wrong .
The crucial thing , however , is that the right places be inspected and that they be inspected in the right way .
Mrs Ramos was concerned by certain attacks on the Spanish Government .
Having been present at the debate in Copenhagen , I would like to bear witness to the fact that the Spanish Government put these problems right at the top of the agenda .
With regard to the issue of coastguards and agencies , I would refer to sections 7 and 9 of the Transport Ministers ' resolution of 5-6 December .
With regard to the imposition of liability , I would refer to section 18 . It must be conceded , however , that section 18 of the resolution is not particularly strong , and I believe there is a common hope that the Commission can come up with a stronger solution than that which is being prepared , and I believe that such a solution will have the Council 's blessing .
With regard to ports of refuge , which I did not manage to mention , I refer to section 8 - where the issue of ports of refuge is expressly mentioned , and that is my reply to Mr Jarzembowski .
My final advice to Parliament is as follows : hold the Council to the right declarations that have been made .
That applies to the European Council , the Committee on Regional Policy , Transport and Tourism and the Committee on the Environment , Public Health and Consumer Policy .
Hold the Council to the right things that have been decided .
After all , Parliament and the Council are in agreement concerning what is to be done ; the task now is to put it into practice , as many speakers have also said .
I wish Parliament luck with this and with providing inspiration to forthcoming presidencies in the years ahead .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would begin by saying to Mr Piecyk that on this issue the Commission can hold its head high , because if what we proposed had been done we would not have had the Prestige , because it would have been out of use for several months before it sunk .
Having said this , however , I would also like to say to the honourable Members and to everybody , let there be no mistake , that out there in waters off our coasts and other coasts of the world , there are currently more than 400 Erikas or Prestiges .
There are such vessels with more than 20 000 tonnes of oil or more than 30 000 tonnes of oil-based products .
There are 258 of a lesser tonnage , with 10 000 , 20 000 and 30 000 tonnes approximately , which are also quantities which can cause enormous pollution . And what we have to do is respond so that , as soon as possible , these vessels are no longer off our coasts or , if possible , anywhere in the world .
This is what we have to do and we must do it now .
That is what we are talking about . And this is the first issue we have to confront here .
Secondly , the Erika I and Erika II packages must be implemented straight away .
And what does this mean ?
Implementing them in terms of the controls of the port authorities , and several Members have mentioned this , and it is true that there are two countries which do not even comply with the current legislation which is much more lax and less complicated to implement .
It is urgent that they do so and they have committed themselves politically to it .
The Agency , which will soon be operational - its board of management has already met , because we have brought forward its implementation and although it does not yet have its final headquarters it is beginning to function already - will have to ensure that in all ports of the Union - and it must be in all of them , since there cannot be ports of convenience in the European Union - appropriate controls are carried out in the appropriate way .
In the meantime , however , the Council must approve , by March , the regulations that the Commission will present by the end of the year on the accelerated withdrawal of single-hull vessels from European ports and the European prohibition of the use of single-hull vessels for the transport of heavy oil and bituminous products , tar and more polluting products .
We must make progress in the field of responsibilities and I hope that , in agreement with Commissioner Vitorino , we can quickly present this Parliament and the Council with a proposal for a criminal definition of serious negligence .
And we must continue to make progress because , let us not beat about the bush , who is responsible here , who is responsible for the Erika ?
Firstly , we know very well , the shipowners , who have ships in bad condition .
And those who charter ships at a low cost because it is cheaper and optimises certain profits and who do not care that there are risks , which are then suffered by coastal populations and society as a whole .
This is what we have to prevent once and for all . And this means making progress in the field of responsibility and preventing this whole chain of companies involved from evading responsibility .
But this means action on an international level as well as on a European Union level .
( Applause )
And this means , ladies and gentlemen , that the Commission must be a full member of the International Maritime Organisation in order to be able to promote its work .
The fifteen States are already members and have acted in a coordinated fashion , but more is needed , the Commission must also be able to participate in this forum , in which it will be able to promote issues such as the responsibility of States with flags of convenience , that is , the system of obligatory audits which is being proposed within the context of the International Maritime Organisation .
And we must make progress on the issue of flags of convenience .
Ladies and gentlemen , we must distinguish between two types of flag of convenience : fiscal and financial convenience and the convenience of those States which give their flags to wrecks , to ecological time-bombs , to ships which under no circumstances deserve to sail the seas .
We must combat both types and I am also prepared to combat those which simply become tax havens .
Also within the context of the IMO , the FIFG Funds , achieving the EUR 1 000 million we have proposed and if not , to promote the complementary European fund which is on the table in the Council of Ministers and which , of course , if in May there is no resolution within the IMO , will have to be approved quickly so that we may at least have that complementary fund .
Ladies and gentlemen , somebody spoke of the human factor : crews .
Before the summer you will have proposals under the Greek Presidency which place great emphasis on promoting training and which furthermore - let us make this clear since there are many different opinions on this - clearly opts for a quality maritime sector .
I would also like to say that we must continue to make progress on international maritime law .
We all know that it takes years , but we must do what is necessary so that it takes as little time as possible , and meanwhile we must talk to our neighbours .
We must talk to Russia , we have the Baltic , which is an enclosed sea , where any accident , just as with the Mediterranean , would be much more tragic and would have much more dramatic consequences from an environmental point of view than in an open sea such as the Atlantic Ocean , which has greater capacity for regeneration .
Therefore we have to speak not only to Russia , but to all the countries of the Mediterranean and the Black Sea , that is , the Mediterranean in the broadest sense .
Because we must manage to strengthen , guarantee and safeguard all our coasts and those of our neighbours and make progress in the international field .
The honourable Members say that there has been no progress at the Copenhagen European Council .
Ladies and gentlemen , I would like to say that I have the conclusions of the Council of Nice and , in fact , they ask for the Erika I and Erika II packages to be implemented as soon as possible , even before the dates for their entry into force , and this has not been done .
Copenhagen has said the same thing , and I hope that this time it will be done .
Ladies and gentlemen , it is too horrendous that after the Erika we are now talking about the Prestige .
I am sure that this time the States of the Union will really honour what they have said .
And if not , we will say it and remind them of it here ; and if not , I hope that all the honourable Members with connections and with national parties will raise the issue by means of your colleagues in national Parliaments as well .
Of course , the Commission , by means of the Agency and the reports we will present here , will specifically monitor true compliance by the Member States with the issues agreed .
Amongst other things , the entry into force of the Erika I and Erika II packages , without waiting for 30 June 2003 or February 2004 .
I would like to point out , ladies and gentlemen , that this includes , for example , ports of refuge , which have until February 2004 .
I do not believe we can wait until February 2004 . We have to get to work now and in January we are going to begin talking to the Member States in order to confront this .
Let us make it very clear that a port of refuge is not just any port .
A port of refuge must be a port with special facilities , easily accessible , so that a vessel with manoeuvring difficulties can access it during difficult storms .
Because that is when accidents take place .
They take place when the sea is rough , with winds of more than 100 kilometres per hour , in situations where ships have problems with manoeuvrability , with waves of 8 or 10 metres as in the case of the Prestige or the Erika .
This means equipping these ports in a special way , providing them with access which is particularly easy and suitable .
Providing them with material and human resources and action plans which allow them to deal with emergency situations .
And that is what we have to deal with .
Ladies and gentlemen , do not confuse a port of refuge with just any port , they are different things and this is a very complex issue .
I would like to continue with the issue of funds , which the honourable Members have mentioned .
Ladies and gentlemen , in the case of the Prestige I believe that European solidarity is clear .
In the case of the Erika , do you know how much support and contribution to funds Europe has provided ?
Well I will tell you : a reprogramming of EUR 10 million , of the Objective 2 funds , which Brittany benefited from .
In the case of the Prestige , it is true that the disaster is even greater .
But we are talking about a reprogramming of fisheries funds - FIFG Funds - of a supplement of other funds relating to fisheries which would be added to those FIFG Funds , we are talking about access to the Solidarity Fund to combat disasters which , it is true , is 2.5 % of the amount for disasters , no more , but it is a European solidarity effort in any case .
We are also talking about reprogramming the Cohesion Funds or Structural Funds allocated to Spain or to Galicia .
European solidarity is shown through funds and the Commission has been able to use them , as have the authorities , for example , of the Council , which has said yes clearly , and which has raised the possibility of adopting additional specific measures because , ladies and gentlemen , there are unfortunately still 50 000 tonnes of fuel oil on the sea bed .
50 000 tonnes of fuel oil in two wrecks which , unfortunately , are still leaking oil .
The Commission is also participating in the Scientific Committee organised by the Spanish Government , which also includes French representatives and , if I am not mistaken , Portuguese representatives , and I hope that that scientific committee will tell us soon exactly how that fuel oil on the sea bed is developing .
Because naturally what we cannot tolerate is that these two submerged sections of hull should continue giving out and expanding the oil slick .
We must provide a solution .
We will have to see what solutions are possible and we will also have to see how Europe can show solidarity , and I sure there will be no lack of it .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , coastguards have been mentioned .
I believe we must make progress on this , but I would also like to say that while we are able to create coastguards and other European bodies , which I am sure we will create in the future , what we need , at least , is to improve the coordination of all the maritime services in the States of the Union .
I hope that , following this tragedy , all of this will be strengthened and that we will be able to make further progress and prevent any more tragedies such as the Erika or the Prestige .
( Applause )
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
To conclude these Council and Commission statements , I have received 7 motions for resolutions presented in accordance with Rule 37 ( 2 ) of the Rules of Procedure .
Mr President , I feel that Mr Galeote has made personal comments about me , in my capacity as President of the Spanish Socialists in this House .
I would ask him to withdraw his falsities and slurs .
I really do not understand Mr Galeote .
I do not understand why Mr Galeote is determined to turn a European debate into a Spanish debate .
I do not understand why he provokes us , I do not understand this narrow nationalist attitude , trying to bring about a debate amongst Spaniards , when what we should do is resolve - as the Commissioner has said - a problem which is European and which should be resolved from a European perspective .
However , Mr Galeote , from one Spaniard to another , I will define what I think of your attitude by means of two traditional sayings .
The first is that ' offence is not caused by those who want to but by those who can ' , and the second , which is also very traditional and descriptive , because we all have memories and we all have history , Mr Galeote , is that ' the thief believes that everybody is like him ' .
History has recorded what your attitudes have been and what our attitudes have been and still are , the attitudes of the Spanish Socialists here in this Parliament and those of the Spanish Socialists down there , in the Spanish Parliament .
Mrs Díez , you felt that personal comments were made about you and the Presidency has given you the floor .
Perhaps the second of your sayings , although the Presidency understands what you mean by it , contains a word which perhaps , for the sake of parliamentary courtesy , you should also withdraw , Mrs Díez .
Mr President , a saying is a saying .
In no way have I tried to call Mr Galeote a thief .
It is a saying which means : everybody believes that others are like them .
He has accused us of dishonest conduct , which has never been the case , and he knows that there has been dishonest conduct in his ranks .
The Presidency is grateful for this clarification , Mrs Díez , which restores our sense of parliamentary courtesy .
Mr President , Mrs Díez , of course I would withdraw any type of insult or slur in my speech , if I could , and I would challenge you to read the verbatim report for this sitting and tell me whether it contains any insult or slur , because I will withdraw them without question .
What I want to say , Mr President and Mrs Díez , is that committees of inquiry are laid down in Rule 151 of our Rules of Procedure - I would ask you to read them , please .
And this request to create a committee of this type is justified by non-compliance with Community law , and it has been said here , explicitly and literally , by some of your colleagues and compatriots , that the intention through this committee is to establish the responsibilities of the Spanish Government in relation to the Prestige disaster .
This has been said here , literally .
What I am saying is that you cannot say in Spain that we are going together to ask for more funds and then say here that the funds should not be given because the Spanish Government is at fault .
That is what I meant .
.
( DA ) Mr President , thank you for this opportunity to give an account of this very important area of work in which my dear colleague Commissioner Vitorino has been extremely active ever since he started , and in which I believe we are starting to reap rewards of which I am pleased to give an account .
With the Treaty of Amsterdam , it was decided that various measures on asylum and immigration should be taken within five years of the entry into force of the Treaty of Amsterdam , that is , 1 May 2004 .
As we know , the European Council repeated and reinforced its desire for action in these areas in Tampere in October 1999 , in Laeken in December 2001 and in Seville in June of this year .
In Seville , specific priorities were devised along with deadlines for adoption of the individual legal acts .
We have not simply met these deadlines ; we have gone even further .
As was stated in the Seville conclusions , the Council must find the right balance between , on the one hand , an integration policy for immigrants who have settled lawfully in the Member States of the Union and an asylum policy that complies with the international conventions - first and foremost the Geneva Convention of 1951 - and with the efforts required , in particular the efforts to combat illegal immigration and human trafficking .
The implementation of the Seville conclusions has been a task of the Danish Presidency .
This applies also to the issue of combating illegal immigration and administering the external borders .
Seventeen different projects and initiatives have been implemented with a view to strengthening border controls at both sea and land borders and at airports .
In addition , a general dispatch programme and a specific plan for the return to Afghanistan have been adopted .
These two were approved a couple of weeks ago .
With regard to asylum policy , substantial progress has been made in respect of implementation of the Treaty of Amsterdam objectives and the priorities set in Seville .
The European Fund for Refugees was established back in September 2000 , and in July 2001 a directive was adopted on minimum standards of temporary protection in cases of mass influx of displaced persons .
Further progress has been made on the area of asylum under the Danish Presidency .
There is now agreement in the Council on the Dublin II regulation , which is expected finally to be adopted .
This was the particular task to be achieved under the Danish Presidency .
This task has been achieved ; there is political unanimity .
There is possibly one more parliamentary reservation , but I am sure that we will be able to adopt the Dublin II regulation - possibly as soon as tomorrow , when there is a Council meeting in Brussels .
The Commission 's proposal for minimum standards for the reception of asylum seekers is similarly expected to be adopted at the Council meeting tomorrow .
Over the past six months intensive negotiations have taken place concerning the Commission 's proposal to set minimum standards for the recognition of third-country nationals and stateless persons as refugees or persons in need of subsidiary protection .
Substantial progress has been made , and there is now political unanimity on the definition of a refugee and political unanimity on the definition of subsidiary protection .
This unanimity is based on the Geneva Convention and the European Convention on Human Rights .
We have achieved political unanimity on virtually all of Articles 1-19 concerning the basic terms used in refugee law .
All that remains is the issue of the rights of refugees and of persons with subsidiary protection , which is why we can expect the proposal to be adopted by the summer at the latest , as was decided in Seville .
The things on which agreement has been reached are some of the difficult things .
Some might say : that is all very well , but where is the skill in adopting something based on conventions that have already been in force for a long time ?
The answer is : it is skilful because it means that from now on these conventions must be observed in every country , and that includes the new Member States that we decided just last Friday to bring into the Union .
Moreover , there is a big difference between having conventions and having directives .
The difference is that the Commission has much greater authority when it comes to considering whether the directives are being complied with , and finally there is also the possibility of going to Court if countries breach the conventions .
The answer to the question that I myself asked is therefore : it makes an incredible difference that the standards of these conventions are now being introduced in the form of directives .
At the Council meeting in October we had an open debate on the Commission 's revised proposal on minimum standards for asylum procedures at which the ministers of the Member States contributed various comments on the proposal . This proposal , too , will be adopted by the end of 2003 .
As far as immigration policy is concerned , the Seville conclusions state that the Council must approve the Commission 's proposal for provisions on family reunification and long-term residence status by June 2003 .
Substantial progress has been made in the negotiations on the revised proposal for a directive on family reunification - the proposal that was submitted by the Commission in May this year - and it is expected that it will also be possible to adopt this by the deadline set in Seville , that is , by June 2003 .
As regards the proposal on long-term residence status , on 15 October 2002 the Council discussed a number of outstanding political issues .
A certain amount of progress has been made in this area under the Danish Presidency , but a number of crucial issues remain - including the right to a certain form of free movement .
The Council will work towards meeting the deadline laid down in Seville for adoption of the proposal .
At the same time , an open debate was held in the Committee on Justice and Home Affairs on 15 October 2002 on the Commission 's proposal for a directive on the conditions for entry and residence by third-country nationals for study purposes .
Parliament has been consulted in all these cases , and Parliament 's statements have been incorporated , or will be incorporated , into the basis for the Council 's decision .
The Council considers it very important that Parliament be involved in this area , to which the codecision procedure does not yet apply .
The Council looks forward to even closer cooperation with Parliament in the area of asylum following the entry into force of the Treaty of Nice .
I hope that I have , in this way , given you a comprehensive status report as regards the results achieved within the area of asylum and immigration policy .
I believe that , overall , it conveys a positive picture .
I agree that matters have proceeded too slowly .
I know that the Commissioner felt this too , as indeed I myself did , when I sat on the relevant committee here in Parliament .
Though I say so myself , I think that the Council has picked up speed , that we have eventually started to see quite a number of results and that we have started to live up to our own aims .
It is important that the deadlines are met .
Asylum and immigration policy is of great significance for the people concerned , and it is important that we achieve results and find the balance that I spoke about in the introduction to my speech .
Mr President , I could have spoken for much longer , since in reality there are a great many initiatives - for example , in the area of border controls , in which a full 17 initiatives have been implemented - which I could have talked about for a long time , but everything must come to an end , so I will stop here and let the Members ' contributions decide what we will discuss in more detail in the hour ahead .
Mr President , although the Commission has presented all the proposals required by the Treaty 18 months ahead of the deadline set by the Treaty of Amsterdam , it is true that only a few of the objectives defined for the establishment of a common asylum and migration policy have effectively been met .
I hope that the Council will continue to press ahead quickly with the examination and adoption of the several measures under discussion , as the European Council requested at both Laeken and Seville .
I recognise that under the Danish presidency significant progress was made , not only as far as the Seville conclusions are concerned , but in particular on the development of the common asylum policy .
This progress was due to the personal engagement and knowledge of Mr Haarder , whom I praise for that .
In fact , the Dublin II regulation is expected to be formally adopted in the Justice and Home Affairs Council tomorrow .
Together with the start of operation of the Eurodac system , which is scheduled for 15 January 2003 , this will constitute a positive step forward .
I am fairly optimistic about the discussions in the Council on the directive laying down minimum standards for the reception of asylum seekers in Member States .
I share the President-in-Office 's view that it is possible for the Council to have this directive adopted tomorrow .
Thanks to the adoption of this legislation , the first phase of the common European asylum system is progressively taking shape .
Two main elements of the system are still to be adopted .
However , as the President-in-Office said , good progress was made , thanks to an energetic Danish presidency , on a common definition of ' refugee ' and a common approach to subsidiary protection .
Little remains to be done on this key proposal which could be adopted by the Council at its first meeting in 2003 .
I also expect the Council to speed up the examination of our amended proposal on asylum procedures , which we presented six months ago .
It is of the utmost importance for the credibility of the Union in these areas , which are at the heart of public opinion 's expectations about Europe , that substantive progress is really achieved .
In such sensitive policy areas , the strategy of small steps will prove to be efficient and win the confidence of our citizens .
Moreover , the time has come to consider seriously the forward-looking ideas that were recently presented by the High Commissioner , Ruud Lubbers , and which have been blessed by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees Executive Committee .
In early 2003 the Commission intends to put forward a communication where we will express our own views on the main elements of this new agenda for protection presented by Mr Lubbers .
As you know - and as already mentioned by the President-in-Office - the directives on family reunification and long-term residence status are still under examination .
I encourage the incoming Greek presidency to finalise these negotiations as soon as possible .
It is possible to have them adopted during the first half of next year .
The rules on admission of third-country nationals for the purpose of employment , presented by the Commission in July 2001 , have now been complemented by a new proposal , presented in October , on the conditions for entry and residence for study purposes .
Urgent progress is needed on these two texts , which are key elements for an active EU immigration policy .
Moreover , with regard to international relations , the Commission has recently put forward , on a joint proposal by myself and my colleagues , Mr Patten and Mr Nielson , a communication presenting our views on the nexus between migration and development .
In this document we also elaborate on the possibilities , but also the limitations , of the Community budget in this area .
I would like to take this occasion to confirm that the Commission will put forward a proposal in 2003 with the aim of establishing a multiannual programme of cooperation with third countries in the field of migration , working on the experience that we have gained on the basis of the use of budget line B7-667 .
Our intention is to respond in a specific and complementary way to the needs of third countries in their efforts to ensure better management of all aspects of migratory flows and to stimulate them in their preparation for implementation of the readmission agreements or to assist them in the implementation itself .
This programme complements other Community cooperation and development instruments .
The degree of harmonisation attained or currently being negotiated has often failed to meet the Commission 's expectations .
Certainly more could have been done .
However , the harmonisation being attained is worth our effort .
Those of us involved in the formulation of this policy should not forget that we have been pioneers in laying the first building blocks of European legislation and policy on such a difficult subject as migration and asylum , and Parliament most of all .
Nevertheless , this first attempt at building a policy has also taught us a few lessons .
This policy is still encumbered by too many institutional and legal constraints , as the President-in-Office was commenting in his remarks on conventions .
Codecision should become the norm and general provisions should allow the Commission to formulate a fully harmonised policy .
The objective should not be simply the achievement of minimum standards but a fully common asylum system .
Unanimity in the Council - especially in view of an enlarged Union - appears more and more to be an invitation to stalemate .
Therefore , I am very pleased with the constructive conclusions reached by the Bruton report within the framework of the Convention .
They point in the right direction as to the future of European policy on asylum and migration .
I am sure that those conclusions will receive the full endorsement of the European Parliament .
Mr President , we have spoken much in recent weeks about the enlargement of the European Union .
That enlargement extends our borders to Russia , to Ukraine and Belarus - it is hardly surprising if issues of border control and immigration policy are centre stage .
But when it comes to immigration , no country is an island .
A real debate is needed at European level , and not the kind of distasteful sloganeering that we suffered at the Seville European Council .
As a policy issue , immigration is simple .
Unless we open our markets to goods from poorer countries , thus helping their people to prosper , we will take their people .
And unless we set our own immigration policy , either anarchy will reign or - more worryingly - criminal gangs of human traffickers will set that policy for us .
What a pity that our governments did not listen a little more carefully to the advice of the Canadian Government about how , if we wished to get on top of the trafficking in people , we should open our front door a little to legal migration , in order to close our back door more effectively against illegal migration .
I congratulate Commissioner Vitorino on the proposals that he brought forward a couple of years ago at the beginning of this whole debate .
I deeply regret that Member States did not adopt them as proposed .
The debate has been dominated by the repressive aspects of migration policy and has shown scant regard for its humanitarian aspects .
The strategy has hardly been one of small steps as the Commissioners suggested - one of ' faltering feet ' is perhaps a better description .
I had the honour of chairing the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs in this House for the first two years of that discussion .
I regret not only the EU 's failure to establish effective and complete policies on immigration and asylum , but also its failure to ensure responsible stewardship of our economy which is intimately linked with immigration .
The Commission 's review of the European economy in 2002 shows the devastating economic consequences of stagnating population growth , which could lead to the rate of potential economic growth falling by 1 % of GDP per annum for the next 50 years .
What should we do ?
Well , exhortations to procreation have never been known to work .
The evidence suggests that the higher our living standards become , the less people will want to have children .
So for economic reasons too , we need a mature debate about a policy of managed migration .
I hope that this afternoon 's debate will contribute to achieving some joined-up thinking on immigration policy .
I have been asked to report on the readmission agreement with Hong Kong .
I regret that Parliament has been neither consulted nor kept informed during the negotiations on this readmission agreement , that we find ourselves in the position of having to deliver our opinion after the agreement has been initialled - and , moreover , after the Agriculture Council on 23 December adopted the decision authorising its signing .
According to Rule 97 of our Rules of Procedure , throughout the negotiations - and here I quote : ' The Commission and the Council shall inform the committee responsible regularly and thoroughly of the progress of the negotiations ' .
I deplore the fact that did not happen , all the more so because this is the first readmission agreement negotiated by the Community .
In the case of future agreements , I ask that Parliament be kept informed about the state of negotiations by the Commission and the Council .
Readmission is about the return of persons found irregularly on our territory .
Few in this House would deny the need for a policy of return .
It is an integral part of any credible immigration policy .
Effective return safeguards the integrity of asylum policies and of regular immigration programmes and it acts as a deterrent to irregular migration .
Return has risen to prominence essentially because of the way in which our over-stretched asylum systems are being used as alternatives to a closed-door immigration policy .
When the Council adopted its return action programme at the end of last month , I am sure it took into account the many advantages of assisted voluntary return , as well as the possibility of forced return .
The advantage of assisted voluntary return is that it permits return in a non-punitive and a cost-effective way .
It has been shown to work in Germany , in the United Kingdom , in the Netherlands and in Belgium .
It is more convenient and it is less costly , both financially and politically , than deportation .
It has been almost exclusively a European phenomenon and we need more research on the sustainability of return under AVR programmes .
But our policy needs to be rational , driven not by prejudice , but by a sober assessment of our needs .
It must be carried out by governments who ought to resist the temptation sometimes to deport in order to seek approval from the mob .
That policy must also address gender and health issues which are vital in this debate .
The readmission agreement on which I have been asked to report is the first readmission agreement that the Community is entering into .
I share the Commissioner 's appreciation of the willingness of the Hong Kong authorities to negotiate this with us .
There is a danger that today 's debate will be confused with a debate on Hong Kong tomorrow which reflects concern about the implementation of Article 23 of the Basic Law .
Some may argue that Hong Kong is not a safe country .
I accept the assurance given on 10 December by Donald Tsang , Hong Kong 's Chief Secretary , when he gave his personal guarantee about the free flow of information and the freedom of speech remaining essential characteristics of Hong Kong society .
Nor have I any doubt that the Hong Kong administration is competent to administer a readmission agreement .
Moreover the agreement itself refers to international commitments to the protection of vulnerable persons .
However , what concerns me about this agreement is that it is the first in what will be a series of such agreements .
Authorisation has already been given for the negotiation of such agreements with many countries - some of them have even been initialled .
The fact is that some of those agreements will be far harder than this one .
Therefore , I would ask the Commission this afternoon to clarify a number of issues .
The first concerns the scale of voluntary and forced repatriation promoted by the Member States , the categories of people involved and their countries of origin .
Are the measures that Member States have adopted adequate and effective ?
Since this House is also very concerned to ensure that the policies of return and the readmission agreements we negotiate respect fundamental rights , I would also ask how the Commission proposes to ensure that the rights of individuals are respected in the event of repatriation , especially if this occurs on a large scale .
Is the Commission sure that the readmission agreements it is proposing are compatible with our obligations under international refugee law ?
Will the Commission commit itself to establishing joint monitoring mechanisms with the countries with which we make readmission agreements ?
The House would like answers to all these questions .
I would also like to know why the European Parliament is never mentioned in the Commission 's communication on a Community return policy .
I would like clarification as to which coherent and transparent financial instrument will be used for the return policy in question and readmission agreements in particular .
The role of the European Parliament as one arm of the budgetary authority is clearly important in this , and I would be interested to know whether we will , from a financial point of view , need a new legal base for this policy .
The human rights clause in the readmission agreement used for Hong Kong is not strong enough to protect us against all eventualities in such agreements with other countries .
We should recognise that , while concluding the agreement with Hong Kong was a relatively easy matter , as we were able to offer them visa-free access to the EU in return , cutting a deal with countries such as Russia and Morocco will be not a whit as easy .
We will need to provide incentives for many third countries to cooperate with us , rather than threatening them with economic sanctions , as Mr Blair and Mr Aznar proposed in Seville .
That is why I welcome the Commission 's recent communication on integrating migration issues into the Union 's external relations policy .
If we join up the dots between this paper , our development policy , the negotiations on readmission and our economic need for immigration , we will be demonstrating the joined-up thinking we so urgently require in immigration and asylum policy .
Mr President , it is a pleasure to be here and address these issues again with Mr Watson who has made a major contribution to this debate in the House as Chairman of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
I am happy to see that has carried on and followed the evolution of these issues .
Commencing with Hong Kong , we welcome this first ever European Community readmission agreement with a third country or territory .
It proves not only the willingness of Hong Kong to commit to cooperation in the management of migratory fluxes with the European Union , but it also reinforces the credibility of the ' One Country , Two Systems ' principle .
As far as this concrete agreement is concerned , we have adopted a balanced approach .
As you may recall , the European Union decided to grant visa-free access to Hong Kong citizens in March 2001 and , at the same time , we proposed the negotiation of a readmission agreement .
I recognise that we should have kept Parliament better informed regarding these negotiations .
In my defence , the only thing I can say is that there was only one round of negotiations .
It would have been difficult to inform Parliament in the middle of the talks .
Nevertheless , we take seriously the fact that we will now negotiate several readmission agreements .
We need to introduce practical ways of consulting Parliament and keeping Parliament informed .
I can assure you that I have already contacted the secretariat of the Citizens ' Rights Committee to establish how Parliament can be granted direct access to information on how negotiations on readmission agreements are developing .
I hope that I will be here next time to discuss readmission agreements with you and that I will then have a better story to tell you .
As far as the oral question is concerned , the Commission does not have exact figures concerning the overall scale of voluntary and forced repatriation promoted by Member States .
I can tell you that an average of 40 % of the money allocated to Member States in the European Fund for Refugees is used to finance voluntary return .
Only voluntary return comes under the provisions of the Fund for European Refugees .
According to CIREFI statistics for 2001 , with returns from 12 of the 15 Member States - the UK , Ireland and the Netherlands did not provide figures - a total of around 333 000 people have been returned .
In 2002 , from January to September , 98 000 people have been returned by Member States , but this figure does not include the UK , Ireland , the Netherlands and Luxembourg which have not provided us with the figures .
I recognise that we need to have more accurate statistics on these issues .
For instance , I cannot distinguish between voluntary returns and forced returns because national Member States ' statistics do not make the distinction .
I can give you the citizenship of those who have been returned but I cannot tell you to where they have been returned because , as you know , some of them have not been returned to their own country , they have been returned to the countries through which they entered the European Union .
We recognise the need for better information and , therefore , we will present a proposal during the Greek presidency to have a specific instrument for exchange of harmonised and standardised statistics so far as asylum and migration policy are concerned .
With regard to enforcement of decisions to return people , the Commission has no responsibilities so far as enforcement is concerned .
That is exclusively the responsibility of the Member States .
Nevertheless , we believe that some instruments should be adopted at European level .
For instance , mutual recognition of expulsion decisions is a key element .
There is an instrument with very limited scope in this area ; we are now assessing how it has been working in practice and I hope that next spring we can present you with our evaluation of how mutual recognition of expulsion decisions works in the European Union .
The same applies to the standards for expulsion .
We believe that we should have some common standards at European level for decisions to return people ; I therefore hope we will be able to present some specific proposals on this topic fairly soon .
I recognise that the Commission does not have any instrument for monitoring post-return situations .
It is not within our remit and we do not have the tools to make such an evaluation .
Of course , I welcome the idea of having a broad debate on return policy .
As you know , we have published a Green Paper , we have presented an action plan and the Council has endorsed this action plan .
I hope that , in the framework of the debate on communications about migration and development , we will be able , together with Parliament , to discuss what the key elements of return policy in the European Union are .
I am looking forward to hearing Parliament 's view on this subject .
Mr President , Mr Haarder , at the last Justice and Home Affairs Council , thanks to the complexity of Community procedures , you adopted a very effective measure in the fight against illegal immigration , but you probably did not realise - because it was the final point on the agenda - that , without debate , you approved the conclusion of an agreement extending and increasing the quotas for the import of tomatoes from Morocco .
Apart from this decision , you have not taken any great measures , either in this Council or in any other , in relation to the field of immigration at least .
We have on the table a full range of proposals from the Commission in relation to immigration policies , a proactive immigration policy , and I will not list them since I will bore Parliament if I do so in every speech .
None of them have been adopted .
At the European Council in Seville , without having done its homework in this field , the Council once again established priorities and time limits in relation to immigration policy .
They began to talk there less about this policy and more about the fight against illegal immigration .
But we have not made much progress on that either .
In any event , what did happen there was to begin to talk about this in a different way which gives me some concern .
They began to talk about the return of immigrants , the control of external borders , in a way in which there is not much room for many concrete proposals .
There was talk of security , the term border control was introduced into this field and , listening to you , it appears that illegal immigration has to do with lack of security .
If you take a walk around our cities , you will see that illegal immigration has more to do with domestic staff , people working in agriculture and people working in our restaurants .
And we know who they are .
To give you a figure , in my country , and in just one town close to Barcelona , L 'Hospitalet , which has 800 000 inhabitants , 17 670 people have been recorded , many of them illegal immigrants .
During this period , the Commission has presented two proposals which provide a global approximation of the issue , as laid down in the Tampere conclusions : the Green Paper on return , the inclusion of the immigration policy in the Union 's external policy .
Of course , this global approximation must include a repressive aspect , but in order to ensure the fulfilment of an immigration policy , in order to control illegal employment - if Berlusconi will allow me - in order to establish a policy for integration of external trade .
If we do not have this global approximation , if we do not focus on this approach , we are not going to be effective in the fight against illegal immigration .
Mr President , we all acknowledge that there have been two problems in the achievement of common asylum and immigration policies : lack of speed and lack of balance .
On the speed problem , there has been a spurt on asylum policy under the Danish presidency .
I too pay tribute to the energy of Mr Haarder .
However , on the question of balance , I still feel very frustrated that legal migration and rights of migrants have been neglected .
There is so much criticism of migrants who fail to integrate , but little is done to assist them through , for example , family reunification or rights of free movement .
Let us take , for example , the reception conditions directive which highlights the classic danger of the ' lowest common denominator ' approach imposed by the unanimity rule .
This is not Mr Haarder 's fault .
After apparent agreement on the text last April , debate was reopened .
The result was that the Germans got their way , and consequently there is no requirement to allow asylum seekers to work if a decision on their case is not forthcoming within a year .
The British have got their way in that Member States will be allowed to refuse reception assistance where the asylum seeker cannot show that he has made his claim as soon as possible .
If there was qualified majority voting and codecision with this Parliament , neither clause - I am sure - would be in this text since a more progressive majority would have prevailed .
On the question of return , are we forcing women to return to Afghanistan , to an environment described by Human Rights Watch as being just as oppressive as it was under the Taliban ?
Spied on by teenage boys , women are marched to hospital and forced to undergo abusive gynaecological examinations to prove their chastity .
They still have to wear the burkha , which is medieval .
I suggest that we cannot guarantee the security of women returned to Afghanistan .
I would like assurance that we are not returning women to Afghanistan .
Mr President , there are two aspects to this issue : firstly , the problem of excluding unwanted migrants from the European Union - or at least controlling their access ; and , secondly , the reasons for migration .
Excluding population pressure , political instability and regional war , it is clear that the main pressure stems from economic disparities .
In short , the bulk of immigrants seeking access to the European Union Member States are economic migrants .
Therefore , any successful policy must deal with not only the exclusion issues but also the causes of migration .
Here it seems clear the European Union is making things worse .
Virtually all its external policies in respect of third countries and its policies towards the candidate countries seem geared to causing migration from less-developed countries .
The Union has rigid quotas , tariffs and other protectionist policies restricting trade with third countries .
While it subsidies its own industries - especially agriculture through the unreformed common agricultural policy - and it dumps subsidised goods on the world market , all of this destabilises third-world economies .
In terms of fishing agreements , the Union pillages third-world waters , instead of encouraging local industries .
It also takes skilled , educated workers from these countries , depriving them of the building blocks of economic development .
All of this cruelly exposes the imperialism of the European project .
Instead of getting on with practical issues , you launch upon idealistic common policies . These policies are making the problems worse .
It would make far more sense to stop damaging third-country economies , rather than embarking on these extraordinary new ventures .
In other words , leave immigration control to the Member States - a policy that my party supports - and address the failures of existing policies .
There it seems to me , in deference to the Council member present , you must try harder .
Mr President , credit is certainly due to the Danish Presidency for producing a more judicious immigration policy , particularly as regards questions such as the very sensitive issue of asylum , for policies on these matters have , for a long time , in practice , actually tended to encourage illegal immigration .
However , although we are more aware of the dangers related to illegal immigration , that does not mean that the Union has practically implemented all the most effective measures for opposing it , such as , for example , readmission agreements with third countries , which must progress much faster and be much more practical , given that - as we are all aware - the Union has strong tangible grounds for putting pressure on these countries .
On the coasts of southern Italy , the flow of illegal immigrants ferried to the country by sea continues , despite the adoption of new , more stringent criminal legislation against traffickers , precisely because there has been no fall in the support or complicity traffickers enjoy in countries such as Albania or Turkey .
The measures announced to combat illegal immigration include the project for a European police force to deal with all border control , not just control of sea borders , although this police force must be properly trained .
This project must be given full support and pursued without delay , and proper training in this field must be given to the police forces of the new Member States , which will very soon have to address these issues - if they are not already addressing them - for their borders will become ours in this respect too .
There is , however , another important warning bell which it is our duty to ring too : we cannot continue to turn a blind eye to a number of proven cases of active members of Bin Laden 's network who have penetrated our cities as regular immigrants in order to prepare the ground , as has recently been discovered in France , for biological weapons attacks , possibly with what are known as dirty bombs containing nuclear waste .
This danger is now present within Europe .
We must take care that we do not help those intending to bring about incidents similar to those which took place in New York , Mombassa or Bali with excessively generous provision .
Mr President , Mr President-in-Office of the Council , Commissioner , I would like to thank you for being in the European Parliament today to discuss issues which do not only have a large human component , but which also have a very high profile in the media and in politics ; immigration and asylum .
I will refer firstly to immigration .
It is a good thing that it is said and repeated time and time again in this House that regulated migratory flows make a very positive contribution to the development of the receiving country , the situation of immigrants themselves and even the development of the country of origin .
But it should also be repeated that the unrestricted arrival of persons in an illegal manner leads to a saturation of the structures of our societies and ends up exceeding those societies ' capacity for reception , resulting in situations of inequality and marginalisation .
We therefore need a coherent European policy which takes account of all the elements inherent to the phenomenon of migration .
The European Councils in Tampere , Laeken and Seville have represented a significant advance in the field of immigration .
Nevertheless , not without reason , many people have criticised the lack of agreement in non-repressive fields , as my colleague and predecessor , Mr Watson , has said ; it is true that , on the basis of such tragic events as those which take place on an almost daily basis in the waters of the Straits of Gibraltar , or on Italian coasts , vigilance , border control and the fight against mafias and exploiters of illegal workers , can and must be the response to the concerns of the citizens , who are increasingly sensitive to issues such as insecurity and human trafficking .
Nevertheless , I would like to stress the importance of other aspects still awaiting substantial progress .
Firstly , the intensification and reconsideration of the policy of development aid in order to generate , in the countries of origin , a dignified and promising environment and thereby prevent the exodus of people - the majority of whom are young - who , rather than fleeing towards the unknown , risking their lives , could and should play an essential role in the development of their own countries .
Secondly , to begin work on the implementation of an observatory , which at the moment is virtual , for migration , which by means of analysis and distribution of information , would allow us to deal with the phenomenon of immigration on the basis of true facts , which are reliable and comparable between Member States , as the Commissioner has just acknowledged .
Thirdly , promoting the integration of legal immigrants , one of the keys to the success of any immigration policy , by means of measures which include family reunification , the education of children , non-discrimination , access to housing , facilities for the learning of the language of the reception country , or social or health measures .
Now , in order to prevent clashes with the receiving society , and as was acknowledged at the fourth Mediterranean forum in Bari , held on 17 and 18 June , it is necessary not to forget the twin aspects of the phenomenon , that is , the need to also work to ensure the respect on the part of the immigrants for the principles and values of the society receiving them .
Finally , cooperation with countries of origin and transit in a spirit of partnership and co-responsibility , as agreed at the aforementioned forum , on the control of migratory flows , the fight against illegal immigration , the adoption of national readmission agreements and integrated management of the Union 's borders .
This is a task which , in order to be successful , must be carried out in close cooperation with the third countries bordering the European Union .
And to move on to the field of asylum , Mr President , I would like to stress the importance of , and respect for , the Geneva Convention , regulating , in a complementary manner , other necessary forms of international protection for those cases included in it .
However , I regret once again to have to make a criticism , as I did when we discussed the directive , for which I was rapporteur , in relation to the conditions for receiving and asylum because , in practice , the negotiations on the different aspects of the asylum policy are still being carried out in a confused and disorganised fashion .
There is a saying : ' do not bite off more than you can chew ' ; and I have the feeling that this is the current situation in the field of asylum .
It is also incongruous to discuss proposals which , in their provisions , depend on concepts regulated by others , the negotiations of which should have been concluded earlier , but which instead are making no progress .
I would therefore appeal to you to rationalise the European process , and let us not get tied up in vicious circles which are highly influenced by national interests .
Finally , Mr President , last but not least , I would like to draw the attention of the Commission and the Council to the fact that , with the entry into force of the Treaty of Nice , scheduled for 1 February , the Parliament-Council codecision procedure , and the qualified majority , will be applicable in such sensitive areas as all those which relate to the minimum standards regulating the different aspects of the procedures , requirements and conditions for asylum .
As many people have already said , the common asylum and immigration policy is progressing in a very unbalanced way .
Where repressive measures , including combating illegal immigration , are concerned , the Council has once again done a lot of energetic work this year .
There is , however , currently no sign of an actual common asylum and migration policy , and that is not the Commission 's fault - no , it is the Council 's fault .
The Council has opted for a highly unilateral approach .
It has put control of our external borders and sanctions against offering assistance to those entering and staying illegally right at the top of the agenda .
The removal and return policy has now been added to this as a priority .
In this context we are talking today about the readmission agreement with third countries , in this case Hong Kong .
Parliament was more or less left standing on the sidelines during the negotiations for this agreement , and has not been able to act in accordance with its allotted role .
This should not have been allowed to happen , particularly as this agreement will be a model for future agreements of a similar kind .
I have taken note of Mr Vitorino 's promise that this will not happen again , and I intend to remind him of this .
My group can otherwise live with the content of the Hong Kong agreement , but we do endorse Mr Watson 's critical approach .
Leading on from his questions , I would like to make the three following comments .
Firstly , to what extent are the deportation measures already taken effective in general , and how do we prevent people from third countries who have been deported from coming straight back into the EU countries they came from ?
Or is our policy of return primarily a virtual policy intended for domestic consumption , and is it supposed to mask the fact that the political courage to tackle the real problems is lacking ?
Secondly , is forced return not supposed to be a tailpiece of our policy of return , a last resort , and what instruments does the European Union actually have to promote voluntary return in order to avoid forced return ?
My last point : collective deportation is forbidden , including in the European Charter of Human Rights , but how are European Union Member States supposed to ensure that decisions to deport individual illegal immigrants from third countries are individually monitored , and how do we then prevent the principle of ' non-refoulement ' from being violated ?
Mr President , the will of the Commission in response to the orientations of the European Council to establish a global and integrated policy of migrations is very laudable , but the police and Interior Ministry approach , which can be gathered from the communication , clashes directly with this Parliament 's view of the relations the European Union must maintain with the developing countries , whose immigrants , by the way - and according to the Commission itself - are not a problem from a quantitative point of view .
As the Commission itself points out , more than 90 % of the world 's immigrants live and work outside the European Union , close to their countries of origin .
At the time of the Seville European Council , we warned of the danger of making cooperation for development conditional upon the control of immigration on the part of the countries in which it is generated .
Development cooperation is not an instrument for resolving the internal problems of the donors of aid , but a tool for fighting poverty .
The origins of migration , whether legal or not , lie in poverty , political repression and armed conflicts .
These are the causes which must be combated through development cooperation , rather than using it to repress their effects .
This Commission 's desire to integrate European immigration policy is a wonderful opportunity to ensure that , instead of spending development funds on monitoring borders and the forced repatriation of immigrants , they are assigned to more constructive activities in accordance with the principle of combating poverty which governs European cooperation policy .
It is a question of co-development or , in other words , contributing to the development of the areas of origin of immigrants , so that they can return with hope for the future .
In this way , the Commission would be acting coherently with itself , since it states , in the communication we are debating today , that it is aware that the European Union 's relations with the developing countries must be based on solidarity .
Article 13 of the Cotonou Agreement on readmission led to problems and protests .
Therefore , we say yes to negotiated readmission within the framework of global development programmes , but no to forced repatriation , especially when this is paid for from development funds .
We will be vigilant in order to prevent , by means of the reallocation of the scant resources in category 4 , any modification of the development priorities established by this Parliament , especially given that the Commission 's report demonstrates the concern at the lack of money available for resolving this problem .
Mr President , there is certainly no lack of suggestions when it comes to asylum policy , suggestions which can provoke feelings either of fear or of excessive generosity and tolerance .
It has , of course , been pointed out here - and I agree - that what we need instead is good sense , wisdom and , above all , a great ability to recognise the complex nature of issues .
I would therefore like to ask the Commissioner whether the position of minors , in particular , is being addressed , with regard to the right to asylum and migration issues , and if so how , and whether a huge problem known as ' Eurocracy ' - in other words the fact that waiting times for both the rejection and the acceptance of certain applications relating to what are still extremely lengthy , complex procedures are excessively long and certainly do not respect what we call human rights - is being addressed , Commissioner , and if so how .
Lastly , a fundamental question .
You talked about harmonising asylum laws and thus of the need for a clear legal framework and , I would go so far as to say , constitutional framework for all the European countries , for our credibility depends on this .
I agree with you on this point and I hope that you will work towards this goal .
Mr President , at the Seville European Council , three fundamental aspects of the Union 's immigration policy were specified : firstly , the necessary management of migratory flows , in cooperation with countries of origin ; secondly , taking account of the integration of legal immigrants ; and finally , opening up negotiations of readmission agreements at European level .
With regard to the first point , initiatives such as the proposal for a Directive on the free movement of citizens or family regrouping , or those relating to the conditions for entry for work purposes for immigrant or third-country nationals , should be approved by this Parliament as soon as possible and with the greatest possible consensus , in order to demonstrate that we are in favour of a single immigration policy .
With regard to the second point , the success of an immigration policy undoubtedly depends on the integration measures which must accompany it .
Therefore , reception and integration must be considered as an essential part of the general immigration policy and this means agreed action , not only on the part of the European Union , but also on the part of national and regional governments , civil society and the immigrants themselves .
We must take advantage of the generally positive impact which legal immigrants have on our economies and ensure an appropriate balance between the rights of third-country citizens and the rights of receiving communities .
I am happy to support the measures of the Danish Presidency with regard to readmission agreements .
I would point out that in one of the Convention 's working groups it was said that the negotiation of readmission agreements with third countries has been shown to be more effective when carried out at European level .
Another important point is the creation of an integrated system of management of external borders .
In this regard , I would also praise the Danish Presidency , which wished to promote a rapid and secure exchange of information between the Member States , with a view to strengthening cooperation on the control of borders .
In this regard , it is appropriate to mention the report adopted last week in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs on this issue .
I would like to end with a quote from Mr Vitorino , which I have often used : ' immigration is neither a problem nor a solution , it is a phenomenon of a clearly human , social , economic and political nature ' .
Mr President , I fully support Mr Watson 's excellent report , particularly the text of the question in which the European Parliament calls upon the Council and the Commission to take seriously the fundamental human rights which the European Union proclaims every day .
We believe that it is possible to respect human rights while pursuing a proper policy of combating illegal immigration .
However , we do need appropriate instruments , appropriate forms of control , for otherwise a blind , bureaucratic system of rejection and forced repatriation will lead to tragedies such as that which occurred recently in Italy .
In Milan , a family travelling from Syria , in transit from Amman to Casablanca , was forced to be repatriated to Syria , where the head of the family was immediately arrested and is in danger of being tortured and may be sentenced to death .
We call upon you to ensure that similar tragedies are avoided so that nobody can say , as is stated in the minority opinion , that the Union 's readmission policy leads to the death of human beings .
I call upon the Commission and the Council to make every endeavour to remedy the consequences of that tragic act carried out in my country , which can lead to a person being killed in another country .
Mr President , Commissioner , on the eve of 2003 , the Greek Presidency has promised to give the very fullest attention to the decisions taken in Amsterdam , Tampere and Seville .
Greece 's extensive coastline forms the external border of the European Union with the countries of Asia , countries from which immigrants are now flooding into Europe , which is why it is vital that the Greek Presidency introduce a framework policy to divide obligations and responsibilities fairly between the Member States of the European Union .
Of course , as other members have also pointed out , immigration policy means more than just guarding borders .
It means more than repressive measures , repatriation and readmission .
It also means recognising the human rights and fundamental employment and civil rights of immigrants and what they have to offer and can contribute to the development of Europe .
It means fully recognising the rights of anyone who has resided in the European Union for five years , as we have repeatedly proposed here in Parliament .
It also means recognising that women who have left home under the threat of religious fundamentalism or barbaric traditions and practices which clash with the modern perception of respect for human rights have a right to apply for and be granted asylum .
.
( DA ) Mr President , I will start with Mrs Hazan , who complains that there is disagreement concerning asylum policy and that therefore it will not really come to anything .
I did not entirely understand this remark , because I was after all able to say that we have just reached agreement on the cornerstones of a common asylum policy .
We have agreed on the definition of a refugee , on what is to be understood by subsidiary protection and on the directive on reception conditions , and by all accounts all this will be confirmed at a Council meeting tomorrow .
In addition , we have also agreed to convert the Dublin convention into a Dublin directive .
The agreement is based on the first receiving country being responsible for the first year and thereafter the country in which the person concerned has resided for five months , and if the person concerned has not resided in any country for five months then it is the country in which the application for asylum is submitted .
That may sound very easy , but the opposing interests of the various countries are so enormous - depending on where they are situated in Europe - that it has been tremendously difficult to reach agreement .
I believe it is extremely satisfactory than we now have agreement on these cornerstones of a common asylum policy .
Mr Vitorino and I met for the first time in the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs .
He was the chairman and I was a member .
The first thing we talked about was these things , which we wanted to lead to a common policy , and we talked a lot about Eurodac .
When will it come to something , we asked the Commissioner .
Now we can answer : something will come of it on 15 January , that is , next month .
So I think we have achieved a great deal .
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to repeat that .
Mrs Sbarbati is right that something must be done for asylum-seeking minors in particular , and I can only state that in my home parliament I have introduced a Bill which ensures that an adult is present , that a lawyer is present when necessary and that cases involving minors are processed extra quickly .
Similar efforts are in progress in other countries .
Turning to Mrs Ludford , I would say that if not much has come of a common immigration policy , that is partly to do with the number of work permits to be issued .
Most governments maintain that this must be a national decision .
This is why it has also been difficult to arrive at common rules on the right to free movement between countries .
It is only natural that reaching agreement on this point is a difficult task , not least because some countries have very high levels of employment whilst others have very low levels of employment .
We will probably make some progress , but as I have mentioned , it is not that easy .
I would go on to say to Mrs Swiebel that one specific aspect of the common asylum policy on which we have now agreed is that we ensure compliance with the conventions in every case .
With regard to Mrs Swiebel 's concerns regarding forced returns , I believe that all the governments are doing everything to ensure that those whose asylum claims are rejected are returned voluntarily ; likewise illegal immigrants , if the governments wish to return them .
One cannot rule out forced repatriation , however ; if we were to rule that out , we might as well pack up and forget all about an asylum policy , including a common asylum policy .
Regarding what Mrs Ludford said about women being returned to Afghanistan , it is naturally the case - as it should be - that nobody must be sent back to persecution , torture or degrading treatment .
To reassure her I can state that the Afghans in most countries - this is true in my country at least - are young men from the Kabul region .
Even they are not being sent back home at the moment ; but it is obvious that , when this becomes possible in the spring , then it is only reasonable that , if their asylum claim has been rejected , we ensure that the person in question returns one way or another .
I think it is great that Mr Vitorino has now achieved agreement in the Council not just on a general return policy , but also on a special return programme for Afghanistan .
For this aspect of the matter must be included .
Finally , I would say to Mr Olle Schmidt that I thank him for his interest in Danish legislation .
It already meets all the common minimum rules that we are talking about , and even goes beyond them .
So thank you for your concern .
Thank you very much , Mr Vitorino .
Mr Berthu has the floor for a point of order .
Unusually , we are going to give the floor once again to Mr Vitorino .
I would ask you to be brief .
Thank you very much , Commissioner .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place tomorrow from 11 am .
Question No 1 by Josu Ortuondo Larrea ( H-0724 / 02 ) :
Subject : Charter of Fundamental Rights : signs at the railway station in Bayonne ( Basque Country , France )
The Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union , solemnly proclaimed at Nice in December 2000 , stipulates , inter alia , that ' the Union shall respect cultural , religious and linguistic diversity ' ( Article 22 ) and that ' any discrimination based on any ground such as ? language ? [ and ] membership of a national minority ? shall be prohibited ' ( Article 21 ( 1 ) ) .
However , on 14 October the French Government detained a number of people in the city of Bayonne , in the northern Basque Country , for erecting a sign at the railway station in the Basque language , Euskara .
The sign read BAIONAKO GELTOKIA , which simply means Bayonne railway station .
In the Council 's view , is the French Government complying with the stipulations of the Charter of Fundamental Rights in suppressing the use of a language , especially in its place of origin , where its use predates that of French ?
Does it not believe that the French Government itself should see to it that Basque citizens are provided with all public signs in their vernacular language so as to prevent them from suffering discrimination on grounds of language or membership of a national minority ?

Mr President , thank you for drawing attention to what this question is about . I frequently have a bad conscience about answering questions that no one has heard .
As you mentioned , however , it is about the fact that French authorities have removed a sign in the Basque language which points the way to a railway station .
And the question is : does this not contravene the Charter of Fundamental Rights ?
The answer is that the Charter addresses the EU authorities and the national authorities when they administer EU policy .
Consequently , I am forced to answer ' no ' .
Whatever may be thought about this language dispute , this case will never become relevant to the EU 's Charter of Fundamental Human Rights because the Charter is aimed at the EU and at the Member States when administering EU policy , and as we are aware , the EU has no policy on railway signage .
On 28 October , the Council of State of the French Republic approved a resolution declaring illegal the integration into the French public network of Diwan schools , which teach the Breton language , another autochthonous European language , like Basque , Catalan and also Alsatian , which originates from this very city of Strasbourg .
Does the Presidency-in-Office of the Council not believe that , in order to comply with the Charter of Fundamental Rights , which was so pompously proclaimed in Nice by President Chirac and the former President of the European Parliament , Mrs Nicole Fontaine , the French Government should legally guarantee public access to the learning of these other native European languages within their respective territory ?
This is an issue , Mr President , which is included in the European Union 's Charter of Fundamental Rights , which states that linguistic diversity and all cultures will be defended .
And this is not only an inter-State objective , but also a European Community objective .
Mr President , that was precisely what I was trying to say .
I have the greatest sympathy for regional languages .
I believe that they have a future and I believe that we will become more aware of them , but in this connection I am forced to say that , where the Charter talks about the Union respecting cultural , religious and linguistic diversity etc . , it is talking about the Union 's policies and not about the Member States ' policies .
Question No 2 by Manuel Medina Ortega ( H-0726 / 02 ) :
Subject : Expulsions in Northern Cyprus
What action will the Council take in connection with the expulsion from Northern Cyprus of 16 Spanish citizens , including 10 journalists and two university professors , after they had held meetings with trade unionists , non-governmental organisations , journalists and television broadcasters ?
Bearing in mind that the authorities in Northern Cyprus are dependent on Turkey , what consequences might such measures have for Turkey 's application for membership of the European Union ?
The Council was asked what measures the Council would take after 16 Spaniards were expelled from the northern part of Cyprus .
I can answer that the Council has not been informed of the event in question .
The Council , which met on 24 and 25 October , was pleased to see the significant steps that Turkey has taken towards meeting the political criteria from Copenhagen .
And the Council established that the country has made progress with regard to the economic criteria and adaptation to current Community law .
The Copenhagen European Council on Friday once again called upon Turkey energetically to continue its process of reform and urged Turkey to take further practical steps .
As part of the accession partnership Turkey has undertaken fully to support the efforts of the UN Secretary-General at finding a solution to the Cyprus problem .
After the Secretary-General submitted his plan for a solution , the Council noted a declaration by the Danish Presidency in which the Presidency confirmed that the EU was willing to adapt to the terms of an overall UN solution in accordance with the principles on which the European Union is based .
On Friday , it was confirmed that the Council is willing to adapt the accession treaty to these terms , and the European Council expressed its pleasure that the Greek Cypriots and Turkish Cypriots had agreed to continue negotiations with a view to arriving at an overall solution by 28 February 2003 .
I agree with the opinions expressed by the President-in-Office of the Council .
Of course , I completely disagree with the view of Mr Giscard d 'Estaing that Turkey 's entry should be conditional upon certain racist requirements ; but what is clear is that we MEPs have an obligation to communicate to the Community institutions any cases in which a candidate country is not complying with the conditions demanded of it .
Bearing in mind that Turkey 's candidature still has a long way to go , does the President-in-Office of the Council not believe that the Turkish Government should be made aware of these facts in order to demonstrate to it , in a specific manner , that this type of measure - the expulsion of journalists carrying out their work - is not compatible with membership of the European Union ?
Specifically , does the Council have any type of mechanism for informing the Turkish Government of these cases , in order to prevent any repetition of these incidents , and in order to demonstrate to them in a practical way what the democratic functioning of the European institutions consists of ?

As I have said , I cannot comment on the specific case , but I would like to remind you of what Mr Verheugen said in very strong terms on Friday evening shortly before midnight at the press conference and which he has repeated in even stronger terms today in this House , namely that Turkey will be assessed according to the same strict standards as the ten countries that have just been accepted , that the Commission will carry out its work zealously and meticulously , and that torture in prisons , political prisoners and the theoretical existence of what Mr Medina has spoken of are naturally unthinkable in a country which is to start negotiations for accession to the European Union .
I must tell you that the third question , raised by Baroness Ludford , relates to the debate we have held today , but there is a part which refers to the draft directive on the status of long-term resident third-country nationals .
With this in mind , I would ask the President-in-Office of the Council to answer the question .
Question No 3 by Sarah Ludford ( H-0728 / 02 ) :
Subject : Integration of third-country nationals
Following the meeting of the Justice and Home Affairs Council of 14-15 October , the Council Conclusions on the integration of third-country nationals were approved .
These Conclusions encouraged active participation of third-country nationals in community life and emphasised how integration measures are a key element in developing a common EU immigration and asylum policy .
Why is it that , when the Council sends political signals that it is committed to such goals , originally set out at the European Council in Tampere three years ago , it has been unable to make any substantial progress on the Draft Directive on the status of long-term resident third-country nationals ?
Does not the Council think that the way to encourage and ensure integration is to offer third-country nationals stability , security and rights similar to EU citizens as set out in the legislative provisions of the text rather than to keep repeating general statements and offering only a ' network ' of best practice ?
Does not the failure to deliver legal rights make the supportive statements appear hollow and insincere ?
The issue of the integration of third-country nationals is one of the priorities of the programme of work of the Danish Presidency .
Its importance and the need to prompt and encourage integration were recognised and underlined by the Council in the conclusions adopted on 14 - 15 October .
As a follow-up to those conclusions , the Presidency called upon the Member States to establish national contact points for integration by the end of this year , and all the Member States have accepted this .
Using these contact points , we will exchange best practice and learn from each other 's successes and fiascos .
I would add that a major conference on integration was held in Copenhagen in July , which also provided opportunity for such exchange of experience and best practice .
The relevant bodies of the Council have considered various proposals for Council directives , which the Commission has submitted with a view to implementing the Tampere conclusions in respect of the entry and residence of third-country nationals .
These legislative instruments are aimed at creating a legal framework of rights and obligations at Community level for third-country nationals wishing to enter and reside in the territory of other Member States .
The aim is naturally that , as far as possible , they be treated in the same way and be subject to the same conditions as EU citizens are when travelling from one country to another .
This will contribute to integration but , as I said during the debate that we have just concluded , it is not that easy to reach agreement concerning these conditions .
There is no doubt as to the aim , however .
When I tabled this question two months ago I did not know that , coincidentally , there would be a debate this afternoon on immigration and asylum .
I would like to thank the President-in-Office for that reply .
I do not underestimate the importance of the exchange of best practice on national integration policies and I pay tribute to the measures put in place in Denmark under his stewardship .
However , we still do not have this directive .
What kind of timetable is there to get this directive agreed ?
It will give the estimated 20 million people who are legally long-term residents in the European Union the legal framework of rights and obligations that will help to integrate them .
Is it not ludicrous to keep calling for mobility of labour to boost economic growth while preventing those 20 million from going to work in another Member State ?
They are a rather obvious category of people who might be inclined to do that .
Is there a timetable , is there a target date for getting this directive agreed ?
Mr President , I am afraid there is no such target date .
We could easily arrange one if we were prepared to accept a bad directive , but , if we want a good directive , we need more time .
Question No 4 by Jonas Sjöstedt ( H-0729 / 02 ) :
Subject : Common patent system
The Commission 's proposal on a common patent system has been the subject of debate and negotiation in Parliament as well as talks between Member States ' governments .
Some of the most difficult aspects to agree on have proved to be which languages should be used for the detailed description of an invention and the process of establishing a legal system and common case law .
Concurrently with these negotiations , the London Agreement is being implemented under the European Patent Convention .
For companies which make large numbers of patent applications , the present situation is creating uncertainty as to what rules will apply in the long term .
What is the timetable for the introduction of a common EC patent ?
What steps have been taken to bring the negotiations to a successful conclusion during the current presidency ?
Which aspects of the Commission 's proposal are causing most controversy in the negotiations ?
Since the Commission tabled its proposal concerning EU patents in August 2000 , the Presidency has made a significant effort to promote the work on this proposal .
In recent months , the work has been concentrated on the patent system 's court-related aspects .
Its starting point has been a working document submitted by the Commission in August .
Following intensive discussions , the Presidency tried , at the meeting of 14 November , to reach agreement on a number of central principles for the court system as part of an overall compromise , but it was not possible to reach agreement on all the features .
In spite of the lack of progress , the efforts have continued .
At the meeting on 26 November , the Presidency concluded that COREPER should continue its work , giving high priority to the issue of finalising an agreement and so paving the way for a political agreement .
The Presidency also concluded , however , that the Council would do its utmost to reach such an agreement in good time before the European Council 's spring summit in 2003 .
Against the background of an overall political agreement , the aim is to have the matter of the EC patent finalised and adopted as quickly as possible .
The most important issues in the negotiations are as follows : the role of the national patent authorities ; languages ; costs and who is to pay these ; the distribution of fees ; and the whole court system in connection with the patent .
It may sound simple , but it is in fact fiendishly complicated , and when I think of how many debates there have been in my own Parliament in Denmark , I can readily imagine the problem that rotating presidencies will have in getting 15 - and soon , in fact , 25 - parliaments to agree on the same rules .
This must happen , however .
It is absolutely crucial , so I want to thank Mr Sjöstedt for his question .
We must get this matter finalised .
I think it has to be said that this issue is all of a piece and that agreement on one point also requires agreement on the other points , for everything is of course interrelated .
I am not in a position to say whether one of the subjects might be more difficult than others , but I can in any case imagine that the issue of expenses is something that has a role to play .
The Council is carefully following the work of the Convention and is of course aware of the structure for a constitution , presented by Mr Giscard d 'Estaing in October .
As is well known , it will be the forthcoming Intergovernmental Conference that will adopt a final position on the issues raised by the two MEPs .
It is rather difficult for me here and now to predict what the Intergovernmental Conference will say .
I also believe that , as matters develop , the Convention will go a very long way towards finding a solution acceptable to all the governments .
That solution will , on the other hand , be less ambitious than some might have wished . I believe , however , that it will be viable and also be able to survive an Intergovernmental Conference .
Mr President , I wish first of all to express my surprise at the question asked by the President-in-Office of the Council .
I personally feel , as I am sure do all the Members of this Parliament , that an enlarged Europe will be a political Europe , with more democratic institutions and a Constitution , a fairer Europe , with greater internal solidarity , a Europe which takes its place in the world as a power , a force , a Europe of peace and solidarity , a Europe that improves the European Union , contributing to the historic unification of the continent , but not a Union that is institutionally different or new .
Its name must be the European Union then , a name that is furthermore clearly pleasing to the ear and appropriate .
With this in mind , I would ask , what then is the meaning of Mr Giscard d 'Estaing 's proposal - which the President has just implicitly accepted - that the European Union 's name might be changed ?
Is this a desire on his part to play a leading role ; vanity ?
Could this be a sign that the Chairman of the European Convention is attempting to reduce the Union 's political power ?
Can you give us a straight answer , Mr President , as to what you really think about this ?
The Presidency does not share responsibility for the proposals tabled by Mr Giscard d 'Estaing .
He is perfectly entitled to table them , but the Presidency has no comments to make , either on its own , or on the Council 's , behalf .
What Denmark , as a nation , thinks is something we shall make known after the New Year when , in common with so many other countries , we shall declare our position , but I do not wish , here today on behalf of the Council , to adopt any kind of position whatsoever on Mr Giscard d 'Estaing 's proposals .
I shall simply answer your question , Mr Martin .
Does the Council also adopt that line of reasoning etc ?
Is that the Council 's view ?
The Council has no view . Nor should it have , either , for we have left it to the Convention to prepare all these things .
I must not therefore , on behalf of the Council , stand here and evaluate the proposals that are made in the Convention .
I am certain that many here in the Chamber , including Mr Duff , would explode with rage if I did that .
I shall spare him that .

I am able to state that Mr Solana has not visited Cyprus since he took office .
He has had a wide range of contacts with many of the actors involved and has taken every opportunity to call for a constructive solution .
He has expressed support for the efforts made by Kofi Annan and , on 12 November , he expressed satisfaction with Kofi Annan 's decision willingly to present a proposal for solving the issue of a united Cyprus .
At the European Council meeting held on 24-25 October , it was decided that a three-year programme should be set out for the period 2004-2006 for the benefit of the northern part of Cyprus and with a view to implementing a political solution .
No practical priorities have yet been set or more specific provisions laid down .
Last Friday , the European Council called upon the Commission to cooperate with the Cypriot Government in considering how economic development might be promoted in Northern Cyprus and how Northern Cyprus might be brought closer to the EU .
In connection with the Council meeting of 19 November , the ministers debated the Cyprus issue over lunch , once the UN Secretary-General had presented his plan for a solution to the situation .
Subsequently , the Presidency presented a President 's statement , warmly endorsing the Secretary-General 's plans , and noted that the EU is prepared to respect the conditions of an overall solution in accordance with the principles that form the basis of the EU , and this with a view to arriving at a solution that makes it possible for Cyprus to accede to the EU as a united island .
Last Friday , the European Council meeting welcomed the fact that both Greek and Turkish Cypriots had promised to continue the negotiations with a view to reaching an overall solution on the basis of the UN Secretary-General 's proposal before 28 February 2003 .
In the Council 's view , Kofi Annan 's proposal constitutes a unique and historic opportunity to put an end now to the conflict that has devastated this beautiful island for far too long .
Mr President , I would like to thank the minister for his reply , but I must say that the fact that Mr Solana is so detached from the process of settlement of the dispute in the island of Cyprus fills me with great disquiet .
Would the minister agree that it is fear for their security that is proving the principle obstacle to Turkish Cypriot compliance with the Annan proposals ?
Would he not also agree that peace-keeping on the island will be a central responsibility for the European Union , through the process of settlement and following this process , for a considerable period before tranquillity and stability truly return to that poor strife-torn place .
Mr President , just as I have the greatest respect for the engagement that the honourable Member has shown in the Cyprus issue , I can certainly follow his reasoning . I must just underline that the Cyprus negotiations take place under the auspices of the UN and not under the auspices of the EU .
There is a perfect relationship between the UN and the EU .
Each knows exactly what the other is doing .
If the UN were to ask the EU , via Mr Solana , to work with it towards a solution , we in the EU would do so immediately .
Mr Solana would go to Cyprus straightaway .
There is , however , a division of labour and I think we should keep it as long as this is the wish of Kofi Annan .
Question No 9 by María Izquierdo Rojo ( H-0738 / 02 ) :
Subject : Repercussions of enlargement on the least-favoured regions
In the light of the most recent Council meetings on the forthcoming EU enlargement and bearing in mind the existing forecasts for agriculture and CAP reform , structural policies , policies on economic and social cohesion and the ' British cheque ' , can it be deduced that it will be the weakest who will end up paying the bill for enlargement ?
Will enlargement have a negative impact on the least-favoured regions ?

Enlargement will have no consequences for the regions in the present Member States until 2006 , whereupon a decision will have to be made on the policy in relation to all the regions .
At its meeting in October , the European Council concluded that EU expenditure must be such as to ensure that the enlarged Union has sufficient resources at its disposal to ensure the orderly development of its policies for the benefit of all its citizens .
The needs of producers living in the disadvantaged regions of the present European Union should be safeguarded .
It was added that multifunctional agriculture will be maintained in all areas of Europe , in accordance with the conclusions of the 1997 Luxembourg European Council and the 1999 Berlin European Council .
In any case , the Community must go on endeavouring to reduce the differences between the various areas ' levels of development in accordance with Article 158 of the EC Treaty .
To contribute to this process , the Brussels European Council decided that , with a view to enlargement , all commitment appropriations must be added to the structural funds and the Cohesion Fund to the tune of EUR 23 000 million in the period 2004-2006 .
The financial consequences of enlargement were reported on in the Presidency 's conclusions arising from last Friday 's European Council summit in Copenhagen .
The overall , well-balanced result forms a solid basis for integrating ten new Member States , at the same time as ensuring that the enlarged EU is able to function effectively .
I would therefore refer you to the conclusions of the summit , showing the economic situation throughout the period .
I am able to reply neither fully nor otherwise , because enlargement will have no consequences for the regions before 2006 , and that is precisely of course because a proper amount of time will be needed to adjust this policy to the new situation that will arise following enlargement .
I am also able to refer to paragraph 11 of the President 's conclusions stating that EU expenditure must continue to respect both the imperative of budgetary discipline and efficient expenditure and the need to ensure that the enlarged EU has sufficient resources at its disposal to ensure the orderly development of its policies for the benefit of all its citizens .
Moreover , paragraph 12 reads : ' The needs of producers living in the disadvantaged regions of the present European Union should be safeguarded ; multifunctional agriculture will be maintained in all areas of Europe , in accordance with the conclusions of the 1997 Luxembourg European Council and the 1999 Berlin European Council . '
I cannot be more precise at the present time , but I think that a framework has in this way been set that should reassure the honourable Member , for there is of course no question of any sort of revolution .
There is no question of a huge amount of money being transferred from the one part of Europe to the other , so I would say , rest assured , there will be enough time to sort things out after 2006 .
As the author is not present , Questions Nos 10 and 11 lapse .
Question No 12 by Bill Newton Dunn ( H-0745 / 02 ) :
Subject : EU-US ' secret agreement ' on criminal matters
When will the European Parliament , and the Member States ' parliaments , be consulted about the arrangements which are currently being negotiated secretly ?
These arrangements were due to be debated in depth for the first time at Copenhagen on 13 September at the Informal Meeting between EU Justice and Home Affairs ministers with Mr John Ashcroft , US Attorney General .
These subjects would include the death penalty , extradition , the creation of joint investigative teams , and ' a common approach to searches , seizures , and interceptions of telecommunications ' .
There is really no secret about the fact that negotiations are being conducted between the EU and the United States on cooperation in criminal matters .
The Council took an open decision to embark upon these negotiations on 20 September 2001 and , following the usual relevant procedure , the Council gave the Presidency a precise negotiating mandate on 25 April of this year .
It is on this basis that the Presidency conducted negotiations .
On 28 November 2002 , the Council was informed of how far the negotiations concerning a draft had progressed , and due note was taken of this .
The Council agreed upon the strategy to be followed in subsequent negotiations , and I can tell you that the issue will be on the agenda of the General Affairs Council 's meeting tomorrow .
In accordance with Article 39 , paragraph 2 of the Treaty on European Union , the Presidency intends to inform Parliament of the negotiations concerning this matter once the negotiations have reached an advanced enough stage for such information to make sense .
It will do so even though Article 24 of the Treaty on European Union does not oblige the Council to consult Parliament .
With regard to the national parliaments , it is , in accordance with the latter 's own rules , the Member States ' task to inform or consult them .
That is all I can say at the present time .
Mr President , the fact that negotiations are taking place is no secret : that was why I was able to ask the question - we do not disagree on that - but the problem lies in the content .
It is awfully nice of the Council to tell us that it will inform us afterwards , but we - the only democratic body in the EU - would like to be consulted as it negotiates whether or not it is currently written in the Treaty .
The principle is real exposure .
I have a suspicion that the President-in-Office is personally in favour of transparency .
He should therefore tell us what is really going on .
I would like to wish the President-in-Office a happy Christmas and say thanks to him for being with us over the last six months , because I have a terrible feeling that we will not see him again .
Thank you very much for your kind wishes .
I can assure the honourable Member that , if these contacts with the Americans lead to any sort of legislation or any change in the acquis , all rules will be followed .
It is quite normal for governments to communicate with each other and if they agree on something that involves the parliaments this will be referred to the parliaments .
I could provide the honourable Member with written information on what the subjects are but , as stated in the question , they concern the death penalty and it is clear what the European Union 's opinion on that is .
In accordance with the scheduled programme and the time available , we are going to put a final question to Mr Haarder .
Question No 13 by Paul A.A.J.G. Lannoye ( H-0749 / 02 ) :
Subject : Weapons used in Afghanistan
At the sitting of the European Parliament on 9 April 2002 , the President-in-Office of the Council said that no weapons or munitions containing depleted uranium had been used in the military operations in Afghanistan in the autumn of 2001 .
However , it is clear that guided bombs made of very high density metal were used to destroy Taliban command centres .
If this high density metal is not uranium , what is it ?
As far as the Council knows , there is no ammunition of the type referred to in the question and produced in Europe that contains depleted uranium .
Various types of special steel and / or tungsten including wolfram are used for remote-controlled missiles , but not depleted uranium .
I can only repeat that , as far as the Council knows , no ammunition of the type concerned , containing depleted uranium , is produced in Europe .
As the time allotted to questions to the Council has elapsed , Questions Nos 14 to 36 will be replied to in writing .
European Year of Education through Sport 2004
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we used to learn at school : ' Mens sana in corpore sano ' - a healthy mind in a healthy body , and we are , in theory , all acquainted with this wisdom from ancient Rome .
Of all leisure activities , sport is the most widespread , with one out of every three Europeans participating in some form of it , some of them , indeed , continuing to do so well into old age .
Physical activity promotes health , and competition in sport develops a range of social skills , such as friendship , team spirit , solidarity , commitment , perseverance and , last but not least , fair play .
As you will all be aware , you can tell a good sportsman by the way he wins , but a great one by the way he loses .
Despite sport 's essential social role , ladies and gentlemen , there is no policy on it at Community level .
We have therefore been campaigning in this House for a number of years already , for the legal basis for this to be enshrined in the Treaties .
We can therefore unreservedly welcome the way the Commissioner has at last responded to the aspiration expressed in my last report on sport , produced as long ago as 1996 , and proclaimed a year of sport .
It is admittedly not being called the Year of Sport , but , for many understandable reasons , the ' Year of Education through Sport 2004 ' .
It is about using a large number of projects to highlight sport 's role in informal learning and its educational value , and also the close partnership between school sport and the services provided by the many kinds of sporting organisations that exist in Europe .
To come to the point , the objective and rationale of the ' European Year of Education through Sport 2004 ' is not to show what people are capable of in the sporting arena - something that we can demonstrate to ourselves to our own satisfaction every day of the year on dozens of television channels - but to show what sport can do in human terms and for people .
There is consensus in this House as regards the Year 's seven objectives .
It is to promote cooperation between educational institutions and sporting organisations , the development of social skills through sport , voluntary activity , pupils ' mobility by means of international competitions , a balance between mental and physical activity , as well as consideration of how the educational needs of young sportsmen and women are to be met .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Council has accepted the essential points of the report passed by this House at First Reading stage .
What is important is that it has confirmed the amount of funding involved , the EUR 11.5 million that the Commission believes to be sufficient to complete in this Year those things that it has in mind to do .
If everyone now plays their part - and that includes the media - then this Year can be of truly great significance for sport .
I very much hope that the trend towards the decreasing importance of school sport can be turned round .
By means of this Year , we want to build up networks and give an impetus to cross-border cooperation .
What we do not want is for the small amount of money to be spent on even more interminable research projects .
Research is always in progress , and that is not what this Year is for .
I believe that the only research we need is to ask ourselves , when it is all over , ' what has this Year achieved ? ' but otherwise not to spend money on it .
The Council shares our view on this .
It has also accepted my idea of organising a European competition in the run-up to the Olympic Games - incorporating it , not into the Treaty , but into a protocol .
I am very happy about this , and I very much hope that the Commission will respond to our concern by announcing a competition culminating in its victors being allowed to be present at the lighting of the Olympic flame in Olympia in 2004 .
That would be a fitting climax for the Year of Education through Sport .
What , ladies and gentlemen , is all this about ?
It is our intention to establish a platform for educational measures in sport above and beyond frontiers , institutions of state education and organisations .
We want to kick-start cross-border initiatives and networks , and we have to set up an ideas exchange , enabling exemplary projects and initiatives - that is to say best practices - to be followed by as many as possible during the preparations in 2003 and the actual Year in 2004 .
The Community projects instrument will receive 80 % support , and those things done at national level alone will receive 50 % co-financing .
This seems to me to be very well suited to putting this Year 's European dimension centre-stage .
I think I will leave it at that , but would like to thank the Council and the Commission and express the hope that we will all be able to take the idea of this Year of Education through Sport back to our communities , and that , eventually , the Convention will be astute enough to give sport a legal basis .
Ladies and gentlemen , I have an announcement to make to you , which has to do with the tragic accident to the oil tanker Prestige , which foundered off the coast of Galicia , and the final conclusions newly adopted by the Council in Copenhagen .
I have received from the Commission a proposal , relating to these events , for a regulation instituting specific measures to compensate the Spanish fisheries , shellfish industry and aquaculture affected by the oil spills from the Prestige .
In view of the circumstances of extreme urgency and the grave effects involved , the Council will do everything in its power to ensure that this proposal is adopted without delay and , if possible , during the Council meeting that is currently in progress .
Parliament should deliver the opinion required of it as soon as possible .
The proposal has been agreed with the Committee on Fisheries , and I propose that we should change the agenda in such a way that we can vote on this proposal at midday today .
As there are no objections to this proposal , that is how we shall proceed .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I often have had the pleasure of speaking in this House , but I have to say that today is a special occasion and I share with you the feeling that what we are doing here is of great significance .
I would even go so far as to say that it is almost a historic moment for the young people of our countries .
Indeed , you are about to adopt the decision to make 2004 the European Year of Education through Sport .
This is the first time that such a large-scale initiative has been launched at Community level in the field of sport , particularly one focusing on its educational value .
It is also the first time that such a clear message has been sent to our citizens , showing them that the Community institutions will henceforth be concerning themselves with the social and educational potential of sport and its fundamental role in informal education .
It was right that the recognition of this value should take place in the European Parliament , for it is the European Parliament which has been calling for years for more focus on sport .
Within the framework of the European Year , resources , good intentions and imagination will be mobilised throughout an entire year to promote a policy , to promote an approach , to enable civil society to participate .
I am sure that a European Year of Education through Sport can make a decisive contribution to the promotion of the ideals we share , the ideal of sport as having an educational role and as a means of imparting values .
Today , therefore , the decision that you are about to adopt with your vote is good news for the worlds of education and sport .
It is also the formalisation of the astute work carried out together by Parliament , the Commission and the Council .
Our spirit of partnership , our faultless cooperation and our consensus on the text mean that , today , if this were an Olympic competition , we would have to share the gold medal .
All this means that everything is now in order and we can therefore move on and start the practical work , for the discussions have progressed quickly and well .
There has been no need for red cards to be given out , to use a football metaphor , which is clear evidence that our joint effort has been carried out in a spirit of sincere friendship .
Moreover , the European Parliament has played its part fully : our original text has been amended and altered and the result - I am not ashamed to admit - is an improvement on the Commission 's text .
Ladies and gentlemen , you emphasised the need to carry through practical measures relating to basic sport .
You placed the emphasis on projects in the field rather than on reports and studies .
You highlighted the need for a partnership between sports organisations and education organisations .
Lastly , you clarified the objectives of our Year of Education through Sport and you pointed out the need to respect the principle of subsidiarity and the respective competences .
All these demands have been taken into account and included in the final decision .
At its last meetings , the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport deemed that the Council 's common position gave due consideration to Parliament 's main concerns , and I believe that is the case .
I have noticed , during my travels throughout Europe and my conversations and meetings how popular this new initiative is already and how high the expectations are of our citizens , in our schools , in sports organisations and public authorities .
I am therefore quite convinced , ladies and gentlemen , that this European Year of Education through Sport will be a great Year .
If , by way of example , we consider the European Year of Languages and the way it developed through the contributions of the citizens , I am sure that , run along the same lines , the European Year of Sport will be even more effective and have an even greater effect on our different societies .
Some days ago , in Vienna , at a conference on the subject of Europe and ethics , President Prodi said : ' Europe ? needs ideas and a soul ' .
Our work on the value of sport , on social and educational sport , will help to bring this about .
I am delighted to say that education and sport are at the centre of everyone 's daily concerns .
The only thing we have to do , and we will succeed in this , is to promote the positive aspects of sport over the negative tendencies .
On a practical level , I can now tell you that my staff have already been working on the calls for proposals which need to be launched in the coming months .
We are already thinking about a schedule , events and setting up an advisory committee .
I must admit that , as you can see , this vote is not the final whistle marking the end of an impeccably played political game .
Rather , it is the starting pistol .
Of course , Parliament will be regularly informed of the progress made on the European Year .
The Commission does , of course , have a formal obligation to keep Parliament informed , but this will also give me the opportunity to hear your ideas , for you have made such a useful contribution to the initial development of the idea of the Year .
Mr President , I spoke just now of the historic vote on education through sport .
The year 2004 , as everyone knows , will be a historic year in many other respects too : enlargement , then the Convention and many other major events .
In this connection , I would like to ask you to reflect on the following questions . In a Europe which wants to be close to the citizens , can we continue to see sport just as a commercial activity ?
Should we not take notice of the fact that sport has pride of place in the citizens ' daily lives ?
Is sport not an important part of any citizenship policy ?
Mr President , I know that Parliament has started to discuss these questions and that you are already aware of the role played by sport in European integration and in awakening a European spirit in our fellow citizens .
In a similar way , the sporting values that we are going to promote vigorously among the younger generations and citizens of Europe will be the basis for active citizenship in which there is respect for others and respect for the European ideal .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate the rapporteur on the hard work she has done and to say once again that sport has shown itself to be a very effective tool in education .
Both in normal situations and in extreme situations , in marginalized areas , when there is a need for integration , amongst many others .
Furthermore , it is a great tool for educating on issues such as the environment , food , health , teamwork etc .
We should take the greatest possible advantage of this .
We must take advantage of the fact that 2004 is the European Year of Education through Sport in order to demonstrate to the Europeans that we in the European Union are also concerned about sport and that we attach much importance , for example - since I do not want to give an interminable list - on the benefits which it brings for health , for the integration of people in our Europe and for the fight against xenophobia .
We must also take advantage of the possible impact of 2004 to demonstrate that it is entirely compatible to work for sport in the 15 Member States - or 25 , when enlargement takes place - and also at Community level , at the same time , and that they must not fear that we are going to take over their competences .
What we do want is to fill the vacuum left by subsidiarity so that the Europeans can benefit from the numerous positive aspects of sport .
I therefore ask that we all make an additional effort so that , in the next review of the Treaty on European Union , an article relating to sport may be included , once and for all , so that the Europeans may see that here , in the European Parliament , in the European Commission and in all the European institutions , we care about sport as an essential tool for improving their quality of life .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am glad that sport has been put on the agenda for today without , as is so often the case , having to be deferred until the evening .
I see it as a good start that we are able , today , to discuss it during the day .
I am glad that 2004 will be so fully devoted to sport .
The Olympic Games , the Paralympics , the European Cup in football , to name but a few , will draw the attention of millions of people , filling many of them with enthusiasm , disappointing others , but also prompting people to themselves get involved or step up their involvement .
The European Year of Education through Sport can make use of this public interest in order to highlight the social value of sport .
There is already evidence , provided by numerous studies , of sport 's educational value , of its capacity for preventing ill-health and rehabilitating after illness , of the social skills that it imparts to young people and the elderly , and of much else that has already been mentioned .
So I welcome the fact that we will be producing no more new studies , but will be gathering new insights from practical experience of the Year of Sport 's extension of activities such as the encouragement of cooperation between schools and sporting organisations .
That is of great importance in bringing the two together and maximising the advantages to both in terms of the mobility of pupils , clubs and officials , and also supporting sport in performing its social functions and discharging its social obligations .
For me , however , it all keeps coming back to the importance of asking what we mean by fair play , which is inseparable from sport .
I believe that racism , doping , and the treatment of sportswomen and sportsmen as commodities have left deep scars on the image of fair play .
In the same way , we should be treating women in sport with a new respect , and doing something about their status in this area too .
That is also underlined by our call for clubs to be involved in the Year of Education through Sport - something not called for in the first proposals .
There are 600 000 sports clubs , with thousands of officials , and they make a very important and essential educational contribution that we can never dispense with .
Ladies and gentlemen , 2003 , the Year of People with Disabilities , is almost upon us .
I believe that here too we have to make use of this issue as an early preparation for 2004 , asking even now how many opportunities disabled sportswomen and sportsmen have to integrate ?
What activities can the sports clubs - all 600 000 and more of them - offer these people ?
This is where there is a need for public awareness and also for financial support .
All this underscores our demand for this to be incorporated into the Treaty .
I would like to start by congratulating the rapporteur on this important report .
Parliament has been pressing us for a European year of sport in previous resolutions , the last of which was in 1997 .
Up to now , the European Union has primarily paid attention to professional sport and much less to recreational sport and its cultural , educational and social merits .
As has rightly been said , this is probably and primarily due to the fact that the Treaty still contains no articles giving the European Union explicit powers in this area .
Yet in view of the fact that a third of EU citizens actively participate in sports and that there are more than 600 000 sports clubs , sport is undeniably an important social phenomenon .
Sport is not only important on a social and cultural level but on a financial one as well .
According to estimates , the sector accounts for about 2 % of the European Union 's total gross domestic product .
Sport is of great significance as a disseminator of positive values such as willpower , courage , tolerance , loyalty and friendship .
In view of its enormous impact , however , sport is also often approached negatively with feelings of chauvinism , racism and violence , and it unfortunately also gets negative publicity as a result of violence , corruption or hooliganism .
In this European Year the spotlight will be on sports education and training for young people , and this is therefore something to be celebrated .
It is also true to say that less and less time and attention is devoted to sports education at school , a trend that urgently needs to be reversed .
This is where sports clubs can play a complementary , supporting role for schools .
It is therefore essential to improve links between clubs and schools .
Sport should primarily be creating a physical and mental balance as well as social integration , and , as we are heading for enlargement in 2004 , this is more than important , particularly at a time when intolerance is increasingly raising its ugly head .
Mr President , I commend the rapporteur and welcome this excellent initiative .
Apart from being an important social phenomenon and a way to improve psychological and physical health , sport is also an excellent educational instrument which helps young people acquire important social skills .
That is why I strongly and warmly welcome the celebration of the European Year of Education through Sport 2004 .
I am most looking forward to seeing the positive impact that sport will have on the lives of young people from disadvantaged communities as a result of this programme .
It will present sport as a way of improving the social inclusion of these groups and communities .
Nevertheless , I regret that both the Council and the Commission rejected Parliament 's amendments providing for the organisation of school competitions which would have allowed winning schools to attend the next Olympic Games in Greece .
That said , however , I welcome the Council 's recognition of the will of Parliament on this issue .
Mr President , the value of sport as a tool to promote national identity and further integration has long been recognised .
Not for nothing have both democratic and totalitarian governments used taxpayers ' funds on sporting activities .
In terms of the construction of Europe , the role of sport was formally recognised by the Communities in the Adonino report presented to the Milan European Council in June 1985 .
There can be no question that this issue was seen as a major asset , enabling the Communities to foster active engagement of the citizens of Europe in the construction of that project .
Therefore , whatever the fine rhetoric that might flow from this House , the true aim of this particular European Year is to promote further European integration .
In other words , this is naked propaganda .
It is not a coincidence that the Year has been declared to coincide with the Olympic Games .
Members of this House may think otherwise , but this is a cynical attempt to hijack the Games in order to promote the European agenda .
It is therefore outrageous that European taxpayers ' money is to be spent on this project .
The sum of EUR 11.5 million may be a small amount in the grander scheme of things , but it is still a lot of money .
There is no justification .
We are not here to finance such naked and cynical propaganda .
Mr President , I feel that the presence in this Chamber , among the many esteemed Members , of a number of people whom we remember as sporting champions of history , immediately makes the meaning of what we wanted to convey in cooperating with Mrs Pack on this report clear .
Our dear friends , Mrs Zabell , Mrs Matikainen-Kallström and Mr Mennea , are in some way an example , evidence of the simple fact that educating people through sport means producing a generation which knows the value of things as well as the price .
Precisely because it understands their value , it is able to display a great passion for social values when it matures , displaying a strength and commitment which are not limited to the quest for results at all costs , and that is why these Members are fully entitled to sit in this Chamber and are worthy representatives of the European Union .
Our intention is to convey this concept and these values in a debate which embraces the education systems too .
At the moment , if there is any severe criticism in our report , it is criticism of the European education systems , which are devoting increasingly less time to the playing of sport in schools and under which there are an ever-increasing number of schools with dilapidated sports facilities .
These must receive support and assistance . This is one reason for the rapporteur 's concern to approach the matter in a practical way , promoting a practical debate on the educational potential of sport through the staging of the competitions .
In other words , I believe that the European Year of Education through Sport may be the right stimulus to get schools to do something for the European youth of tomorrow , to change the fate of a generation , so that , in the future , we have different young people who not only become champions but , more importantly , become people who see sport as a path to truth , in other words who become champions of humanity , for a champion of humanity can become a sporting champion too .
Mr President , Commissioner , the main effect of sport on those who participate in it is the promotion of physical and mental health , as well as education in tolerance , respect for rules and acceptance of a result by everybody .
These rules are profoundly democratic and promote dialogue and companionship .
In this world where single , absolute and reductionist thinking is dominant , the promotion of the values of sport is the key antidote to intolerance and xenophobia and favours social integration .
Educating through sport means ensuring democratic values for future generations and this must appear in the Treaties .
Mr President , I want to thank my colleague , Mrs Doris Pack , for the valuable work she has done in producing this report .
You have done some really excellent work for many years now to promote sport and physical education .
It has been a genuine pleasure to work with you .
It is excellent that the Commission should have begun to organise a Year of Sport .
The positive role of physical exercise as a basis for mental and physical well-being is now becoming common knowledge throughout Europe .
Leaving aside for a moment the benefits of having a regular , wide-ranging hobby and an attitude to life that goes with it , even a little exercise prevents heart and vascular diseases , ailments that affect the organs of locomotion , rheumatic illnesses and mental health problems .
The very fact that exercise is able to prevent mental problems often gets little attention .
Exercise can help keep a nation 's major economic problems in check .
An enormous amount of lost working time could have been prevented through exercise .
Seen in this light , the budget of EUR 11.5 million granted for the Year is at least not oversized .
Schools in many Member States organise important optional activities after the school day has officially finished .
Resources to make these afternoon activities possible must be increased considerably , as there is a huge demand for what they can provide .
Afternoon clubs organised voluntarily often do valuable work .
Afternoon sports programmes help children satisfy their natural desire and need for exercise .
At the same time , they are doing something meaningful and social problems and exclusion are being prevented .
Why can we not talk of sport as sport ?
It is ridiculous that sports projects in the legal basis have to be hidden away under other articles , as there is not one for sport .
It is better to call things by their own name , both now and in future .
Mr President , I will be very brief , because I know that time is flying by and that you have a very full agenda .
I would like to add my congratulations to those of all the Members who have highlighted Mrs Pack 's remarkable work and her vigorous , tenacious endeavours over many years , which have , at last , brought success .
Today one might say , her baby is being taken to church to be baptised .
I would like to respond briefly to a number of specific questions which have been asked .
Although it has not been possible to include in the text Parliament 's suggestion that schools competitions could be staged and that winners could be present at the ceremony of the lighting of the Olympic flame in Olympia , I can let you into a secret .
My co-workers are already working with the International School Sport Federation to see what can be done to accommodate Parliament 's request .
I am fully aware , Mr President , that Parliament does not want an avalanche of studies on the matter .
That is all well and good , provided that it does not turn round afterwards and say that studies would have been useful after all .
While I acknowledge the need for practical work , I still feel that it is necessary for an evaluation to be carried out afterwards , as , moreover , happened in the case of the European Year of Languages , which was such a success that I feel we can use it as a model in terms of what to do and what not to do .
I can let you into another secret . I have already received numerous requests from the major European sports federations , who want to contribute to or participate in the project or to work with us .
They all want to be involved and to make their contribution to the enterprise .
They will not ask us for money , for they have much more money than we have !
The EUR 11.5 million budget is intended to encourage , to set in motion a driving force , for it is civil society , sportspeople and schools which will actually do the practical work .
A number of questions have been asked relating to the European Year of People with Disabilities , on which we are actively working .
The Special World Olympics will take place in summer 2003 in Dublin .
In this context , we will fund the hiring of Irish volunteers to make this major sporting festival for people with disabilities possible .
This is an experiment which will be repeated throughout 2003 and 2004 : getting young volunteers - 100 , 200 , 300 volunteers - from all the countries of Europe to work together in the service of sport during major events of great symbolic importance .
The first experiment , in Dublin , will thus bring together 200 volunteers from all over Europe .
This will be repeated in Athens for both the Olympic Games and the Paralympics , and for all the major sporting events where the voluntary contributions , good will and idealism of our young people can come into their own .
In other words , our young people will take centre stage .
You can therefore see that practical measures are currently being taken .
As I promised you , you will be kept informed of developments , and I am also counting on your contribution so that we can make this year the year of all the citizens in your regions and your countries , for , as representatives of the citizens , you have a major role to play in this sense .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 11.30 a.m.
The next item is the Commission statement on services of general interest in Europe .
Mr President , the issue of public services is the subject of a major debate in Europe and elsewhere , and the general trend observed during the past 20 years has been a development of the role of the public authority , which no longer produces directly but regulates and establishes the rules for the game .
This is the case in Europe , in particular , where the goal - which was also a necessity - of creating a single market has certainly facilitated this development .
Experience has shown that the creation of a single market based on the system of healthy competition is fully compatible with socioeconomic concerns , of which services of general interest are one of the most practical elements .
Furthermore , a higher level of competition throughout the economy has led to an increase in the effectiveness of services of general interest .
The history of the Community has always been consistent .
At each new stage in European integration , progress has been made towards both freer movement of goods , persons , services and capital and greater inclusiveness and cohesion .
Each step forward in the area of the internal market has gone hand in hand with the introduction of measures to ensure that the weaker regions and citizens are not left lagging behind .
This was the case as regards the Single Act and the case at Maastricht and Amsterdam too .
One example is the inclusion in the Treaty of the policy of economic and social cohesion , of consumer protection and of environment policy , all of which are intended to complement and balance the strategies of opening up the markets and liberalisation .
Article 16 of the Treaty , introduced at Amsterdam , explicitly recognises the role of services of economic general interest .
It confirms the need to find a better way of reconciling harmoniously and coherently the principles relating to services of general interest and the other objectives of the Treaty , particularly the internal market and free competition .
The Commission has always recognised the primordial role of services of general interest .
In its 1996 communication on services of general interest in Europe , it proposed a reference to the promotion of these services .
The sectoral legislation adopted at Community level relating to major network industries , particularly the energy sector , contains extremely ambitious goals as regards high quality public services .
Moreover , the Commission has always applied competition and market rules in such a way as to avoid the supply and development of high quality services of general interest being hindered .
I could mention by way of example the communication on public broadcasting , introducing rules on state aid , which was drawn up by Mr Monti and myself last year and which is an example of the way we can apply competition rules intelligently while giving governments all the leeway they need to organise public services properly .
Services of general interest are thus an essential component of the European model of society .
They contribute to the citizens ' quality of life and are an essential condition if the citizens are to be able to exercise many of their rights fully .
In its report to the Laeken Council , the Commission declared its intention , and I quote : ' to examine the suggestion to consolidate and specify the principles on services of general interest underlying Article 16 of the Treaty in a framework directive '
The Commission decided to carry out this examination within the framework of a Green Paper .
There are two main reasons why it has adopted this approach .
Firstly , the questions raised are very broad in scope and cannot be addressed in a debate limited to a proposal for a framework directive .
Secondly , given the expectations and existence of very different positions with regard to the feasibility of a framework directive and the added value it would represent , it appeared essential to establish a reference framework first .
We must not underestimate the technical and conceptual problems which would certainly be raised by the establishment of a framework directive either .
The Green Paper will allow the Commission firstly to examine whether a framework directive would be appropriate and secondly to launch a large-scale debate on the overall issue .
Therefore , the purpose of this Green Paper is not to delay the feasibility study on a framework directive .
Quite the opposite : given the diversity of the traditions , structures and positions existing in the Member States , only a broad European-level debate will be able to draw out enough common ground for an overall Community framework to be established .
In addition , alongside the preparation of the Green Paper , we are working on other dossiers , particularly in the area of the application of rules on state aid and in the field of the evaluation of services .
This work could , moreover , be a useful contribution to the Green Paper .
As regards the timetable , the Green Paper should be adopted in March 2003 and the conclusions drawn before the end of the year .
This , Mr President , is the Commission 's statement on this matter .
Mr President , Commissioner Reding 's task today is a difficult one , to make a statement on the Commission 's behalf on action that the Commission has been putting off for a year .
It is the case that , thirteen months ago , Parliament delivered its opinion on services of general interest by a well-supported vote , with 435 votes being cast in the final vote .
Since then , the Commission has done little .
It has submitted four documents .
The latter two of these , submitted before the Copenhagen Summit , just as the submission of the others six months ago preceded that in Seville , say nothing more than that rulings are awaited from the European Court of Justice .
I do not at all understand , Commissioner , why the Commission does not have its proposals debated here in Parliament , openly and with no holds barred .
If , as in this case , you gaze fixedly at the European Court of Justice in the same way that a rabbit gazes fixedly at a snake , you are not acting as if all options were available to you .
Although , Commissioner , you are affected by this only tangentially , this being primarily a matter for the Competition Commissioner , it is for this reason that I really do want to insist with some emphasis that the Commission should not just hand out ' non-papers ' that it sends to governments - the last was on 12 November this year - but should involve Parliament in this debate .
We are not prepared to take the rap for whatever decisions the Commission comes up with if Parliament cannot be properly involved in the legislative process .
So let me say quite bluntly that , as you have already mentioned , we called for a framework directive .
We called for a framework directive on the basis of Article 95 , which deals with the internal market .
That means that this public debate on the basis of Article 95 leads to a decision by Parliament and the Council by way of the codecision procedure .
What has been submitted to us so far says only that previous procedure in competition policy was being followed , in other words , that a decision by the Council would be sufficient , that Parliament would be informed and should then see what happens next .
It is exactly as you have said : the topic will give rise to a great debate on social and economic policy .
Far from being something that the Commission can sort out with the Council behind closed doors , that must be done in public view , here in the directly-elected Parliament .
The reason why I make these somewhat pointed observations is that these issues are dealt with in none of these documents , which are numerous and of varying quality , the non-paper being far and away the best of those that have been submitted .
The evaluation methodology set out in the summer was put together so carelessly , and was of such poor quality , that it cannot serve as a basis on which to raise proper awareness .
I call on the Commission to stop biding its time and do the business at long last !
The European Court of Justice 's ruling in the Ferring case is a workable basis on which to evaluate state aid and public services .
I call upon you to be prompt in submitting decisions based on it and to delay no longer .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , I would naturally like to thank the Commissioner for her announcement and for the prospect of a Green Paper .
However , I do not often find myself in complete agreement with what Mr Langen has said .
My group is particularly disappointed with the Commission 's reluctance to proceed with presenting the European Parliament with a framework directive .
As you yourself said , services of general interest are the cornerstone of our European social model .
I am talking about people 's social rights , basic facilities such as water , energy , public transport , communication and healthcare , which are furthermore essential for social cohesion and for the proper functioning of our economies .
My group , and in fact the whole of Parliament , has been pressing for this framework directive for years .
Even the Council is ahead of the Commission , as the Council pressed for this framework directive in Nice and then much more explicitly in Barcelona .
Despite this , the Commission insists on broad consultation first via a Green Paper in the spring of 2003 .
I understand that the problems surrounding services of general interest are complex .
I understand the differences in approach between the Member States .
I know that there are public and private players involved , and it is therefore true that there are differences depending on the sector .
However , in the meantime we are constantly being confronted with standpoints concerning the liberalisation of various sectors in the economy without having a framework directive that sets out the general principles .
Let there be no misunderstanding : my group is in favour of the internal market , subject to certain social and ecological adjustments .
However , the market is an instrument , and the market has its limits , and when it comes to people 's basic social rights , it is not the rules of the market and competition that should be laying down the rules of play .
The Green Paper will furthermore arrive too late to contribute to the discussion in the Convention about the role of services of general interest .
We are already holding this discussion at this moment . We will be completing it in February , and the Commission will not be presenting a Green Paper until March .
I think that the Commission will be missing the boat .
Finally , there is one last reason , one fact that causes me great concern , and that has to do with Mr Langen 's comments .
So far the Commission has always assumed that Member States were allowed to finance their services of general interest as a social mandate without this being regarded as illicit state support - and rightly so , in my opinion .
However , the Treaty is undeniably lacking in clarity .
Recent conclusions by two advocates-general at the European Court of Justice have demonstrated that this principle is no longer above suspicion .
The Commission will now obviously conclude that they cannot give legal security to Member States in the area of the financing of services of general interest .
So what has happened to this much-vaunted autonomy to organise their own public services ?
Ladies and gentlemen , the conclusion is clear to us .
Firstly , we will immediately ask the Commission to issue a framework directive , as we have repeatedly done .
Secondly , the Convention must provide the opportunity to establish the basic principles of public services with complete respect for the powers of the Member States .
Thirdly , our constitution must clearly specify that services of general interest are our people 's social rights and must not be left to market rules and competition .
I hope that the Commission can support us in our ambitions .
Mr President , I was going to say on behalf of my group that we are pleased to see that a Green Paper is forthcoming , but perhaps I am in the minority in saying that I am pleased to see that a Green Paper is forthcoming in the sense that something is actually happening .
The promise of future consultation and feasibility studies is to be welcomed , but this should not be an excuse for doing nothing .
In that sense I agree with my colleagues that something has to happen sooner rather than later .
Process can be important , and we must get that right .
I would like to make two points on behalf of my group , the first relating to competition .
Competition is excellent - we agree with the internal market - in that it is a way of raising standards generally and can also be a way of raising standards in the services concerned , but not for its own sake .
Perhaps it would be interesting to look at a country outside the EU - Switzerland - in terms of energy policy .
Recently the Swiss had a referendum to ascertain whether they should liberalise their energy provision , presently provided by their local cantons .
Swiss citizens voted against this because they were not satisfied that choice in that sense would raise standards - it might just prove confusing .
That question was put to the citizens of Switzerland .
We , on the other hand , are waiting for a framework to establish how we should introduce such choices across Europe .
The second issue of particular importance to my group is universal services provision .
This guarantees social cohesion across Europe .
Taking my own constituency , for instance , and the current issue of broadband , letters are flooding into my office from constituents in rural areas who complain that broadband is available in certain cities , but not for them .
Such matters have to be resolved so that we can provide the same level of service to all our citizens and therefore guarantee the social cohesion which is so important to Europe .
It is ridiculous that the Convention and its working groups are currently discussing these issues .
These matters call for coordination as we move forward with the development of Europe .
So it is good that something is actually happening , it is good that there has been a statement , but let us get on with it .
Mr President , I welcome the fact that we are debating services of general interest once again , on the occasion of the Commission 's statement .
I believe that services of general interest are at the heart of European integration , or rather that they ought to be .
Although their place and role in the Union are indeed recognised , in principle , in Article 16 of the Treaty , they are still subject to competition rules , with all the ensuing consequences .
There has been growing pressure for faster liberalisation in many sectors .
The Brussels European Summit , last March , was a decisive moment in this sense , moreover .
Energy , transport , a new era for the postal services sector : the recurring argument is that liberalisation would be the solution to the need to modernise these services .
This is not true , as we can see from numerous examples .
I believe that one of the functions of services of general interest is to ensure social and territorial cohesion .
They must guarantee access to high quality services for all citizens throughout the whole of the territory and at the same price .
However , the rules of profitability and the principle of competition run counter to these objectives and these functions .
The citizens ' needs as regards high quality European public services are currently being expressed in many Union countries .
The drawing-up of common European rules allowing harmonisation from the top downwards has become a necessity , particularly in view of enlargement .
The modernisation of services of general interest must be part of a measure not seeking to open up the market to competition but intended to respond to the needs expressed .
That requires genuine democratisation and the genuine participation of workers and users in the development of these services .
In this connection , the European Union has a particular responsibility .
It must , first of all , allow a proper evaluation to be carried out of the different liberalisation processes , country by country .
Despite calls from the European Parliament on a number of occasions , this evaluation of the consequences for safety , the environment , quality and social concerns has never been carried out .
Why ?
I too believe that we cannot wait for a Green Paper to be drawn up in a few months ' time to address this issue , however useful a Green Paper might be .
Although a Green Paper might serve some purpose , I feel that services of general interest should no longer be seen as an exception to competition as they have been hitherto but , quite the opposite , that they must be seen as one of the European Union 's priority responsibilities .
They must therefore no longer be subject to competition .
Work is being carried out on a new Treaty within the framework of the work of the Convention with a view to the 2004 Intergovernmental Conference .
We must address this issue in the debate on the Treaty .
It is time to listen to the demands of the citizens , of the trade unions , which are demonstrating everywhere in a plea for high quality services .
These demands go hand in hand with the need for a Europe of social progress , a more democratic Europe .
That is why we cannot be content with a minimal definition of a European universal service .
We must be ambitious for social Europe .
We must place services of general interest at the centre of European integration and European citizenship .
Commissioner , I am quite surprised to hear you say that it has been proven for 20 years that the single market governed by competition law is perfectly - as you said - compatible with social objectives .
I have already heard more sense from the Commission , when it started to express a doubt precisely as to this ability of competition law to bring about the achievement of all the social and environmental objectives .
I believe that , in actual fact , we , and the Commission , in particular , would find it much easier to make these self-congratulatory statements if we had an evaluation , as my fellow Members have said .
I feel that there is absolutely nothing to be gained in any quarter by underestimating the huge expectations of the European citizens , who are demanding more services , better quality and a higher level of safety .
I believe that , if we were to turn a deaf ear to the doubts being expressed today regarding the continuity and sustainability of these services , particularly since they have been called into question as a result of disasters and particularly since this deterioration is currently evident in a number of public services , we would be severely jeopardising the future of Europe and the result of the decision that its citizens will have to take on the future Constitution .
You have decided to open a broad consultation process on the Green Paper .
It is true that this initiative is very surprising , given its connection with the - extremely problematic - debates that we wish to hold within the Convention with a view to fully enshrining the right to public service in the future European Constitution .
I would therefore like to hear you speak about the organisation of the agendas , for it would appear quite incredible that a debate should be opened on the feasibility or usefulness of a framework directive under the current Treaties , even if the aim of the debate is to achieve the recognition of and basis for a European approach to public services in the future Treaty .
Moreover , as regards the consultation procedure , we have already been sufficiently traumatised by a number of proposals which were clearly going against a whole range of different interests within European society .
I would like the Commission to explain clearly which public method of hearing will be used to enable the different players - users , trade unions , NGOs , local and regional authorities etc. to make themselves heard during this consultation on the Green Paper .
Mr President , Commissioner , as regards services of general interest , the Commission is attempting to reconcile two requirements which are , in a number of respects , opposed : the need to guarantee the provision of certain services which the market is considered not to be able to provide efficiently and at affordable prices , and the need to prevent certain services becoming a source of distortion of the market or distortion of competition .
I believe that the Commission 's concern continues to focus too heavily on the first point and too little on the second , the distortion of competition .
This is not surprising , because the governments , and , therefore , the Council , are pushing in this direction because of the existence of a clear conflict of interests .
There are key sectors , such as the telecommunications , energy , water , transport , television and media sectors , in which the governments are both referees and players , they have to juggle with a burdensome conflict of interests , they are not regulators and legislators , they themselves are entrepreneurs with large multinational businesses which are sometimes used for political and other ends .
Today , this conflict of interests has yet to be resolved in many European countries .
Indeed , in these sectors , a no-man 's-land is being created where , rather than the good of the European consumer and the general interest , the specific interests of companies and of the economic and political potentates associated with them are being pursued .
There are countless cases of the allocation of inappropriate market spaces to such companies .
One example is Deutsche Post , which uses its monopolist 's profit in the postal services sector to overcome competition through take-overs too , as happened in the case of DHL International , which Deutsche Post acquired , exploiting its monopolist 's profit to knock a competitor out of the market .
Not to mention EDF : France agreed to work towards opening up its energy sector within the country , in the sure knowledge that EDF , which was 100 % state-owned and not quoted on the Stock Exchange and which could give loans guaranteed by the state , would acquire companies abroad , in Italy and elsewhere , in other words that it would go shopping , consolidating a dominant position in the European market .
Then , in Italy , there is the case of a major television company such as the RAI , financed with huge sums of taxpayers ' money , which competes in every way with other television companies as a commercial channel .
This is the situation : there are public services which ultimately create state companies that distort competition .
When the states have freed themselves from all the companies , it might be easier to imagine a regulatory state , a state which contracts out or puts out to tender services which it considers that the market alone cannot provide adequately .
I would like to make one last point , Mr President , Commissioner .
There is a service , the mobile telephone service , which the Commission does not deem to be a service of general interest .
I feel that this is a serious mistake and that , now , the mobile telephone service is to all intents and purposes a service of general interest .
Indeed , it is one of the services which is provided most effectively throughout Europe , extremely efficiently and with optimum prices , and it is a service of general interest which the market provides through a system of competition .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies , gentlemen , and our erstwhile lady colleague , I believe that any framework directive or Green Paper should take into account our previous experience with services of general interest .
That being so , I want to give an example of how we in this House can bring some influence to bear .
If we were actually to manage to at last make some progress with the legislation on local public transport , we would have done a substantial chunk of Parliament 's and the Council 's work .
Here , for once , I would like to give the Commission credit for submitting a very specific proposal for a regulation on local public transport as long ago as 2000 .
We in this House delivered an unambiguous opinion on it in 2001 .
And what is the Council doing ?
It has shoved the draft in a drawer , done nothing with it , and still does not want to do anything with it .
I believe that we have to make it clear to the Council that we will not put up with further delays on matters as fundamental as the right range of services provided to people in towns and in the regions , but may well have to consider bringing proceedings against the Council in respect of its failure to act .
Why , ladies and gentlemen , is this issue of legislation on local public transport so important ?
The law on the situation we are in is unclear .
We have the option of awaiting rulings from the ECJ , but we want the decisions on what public transport systems should be like to be taken politically , and so we , the towns , the communities and private enterprise , need legal certainty as to how local public transport is to be organised .
The second point I want to address is as follows . I believe that a slip of the tongue has crept in here .
Services of general interest and competition are not mutually exclusive , but are , in my view , mutually complementary , something that we see particularly clearly in local public transport .
If , in the exercise of its responsibilities for public services , the city or the region makes the right decision and defines what is required of local public transport - its accessibility to disabled people , the timetables , the intervals between services and the fares ; you can add all the social factors you want - then , Mr President , it must be put out to tender , and then the best offer must be accepted , whether it be from the public or private sector .
It is competition that decides , and the public that benefits .
Mr President , I am deeply disappointed by the Commission 's statement here today .
We have had more lip service to the principle of services of general interest .
We were told that the Commission was going to produce a framework for services of general interest before the end of this year , now we get a promise of a Green Paper .
We urgently need the framework directive , not a Green Paper .
We urgently need a change in competition law which enables services of general interest , public services , to survive and to prosper , and we need a clause in our new constitution which guarantees public services right across Europe .
Solidarity and citizenship are at the heart of the whole notion of the European Union .
I would argue that , having taken a major step this week towards the political and geographical unity of Europe , if we are to create European citizens , we must have services of general interest universally available , accessible , affordable and of high quality .
Properly understood , services of general interest are for all citizens , not just for those who are excluded , or poor or indeed disadvantaged - though obviously they are of key importance to people in that situation .
Services of general interest support and sustain growth .
They sustain environmental sustainability .
They are a key component of any serious spatial strategy which will enable us to have sustainable rural communities and indeed liveable cities .
They will provide us with healthy citizens who do not fear illness .
They will enable citizens to commute and to communicate .
They will enable citizens to be well-informed , to be well-educated , not only in terms of technological education , but also politically literate .
All of these things are necessary if we are to create a Europe of which we can be proud and which citizens will feel they own .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , far too late though it is , I of course welcome the Commission 's statement of its intention to submit a Green Paper on services of general interest in the first quarter of 2003 .
It does , however , strike me as incomprehensible that the final conclusions and specific initiatives associated with it are to appear as long as six months later .
Analyses and the demands for action resulting from them belong together .
Having been called upon to do so by the Barcelona Council in March 2002 , the Commission , in June of that year , adopted a new methodology for evaluating the quality of public services .
You will be well aware that opinions on this are sharply divided , and I am telling you now that , in terms of its quality , this new evaluation methodology is an unmitigated disaster .
In view of the invariable tendency of the debate on public services to bring forth ritual repetitions about deregulation and privatisation , it would at least be proper to conduct , in parallel with the Green Paper , a scientifically sound analysis of the situation in those markets and enterprises that have already been deregulated and privatised .
There are marked distinctions to be drawn between the successes and failures in the various lines of business involved .
The questions that demand answers are , firstly , whether equal rights of access are guaranteed to all citizens of the European Union , irrespective of where they live or of their levels of income .
Secondly : has the cost of the service increased or fallen ?
Thirdly : has its quality improved or got worse ?
And fourthly : have the service 's employees experienced an improvement or a deterioration in their social conditions ?
This also involves putting the service providers on an equal footing irrespective of their ownership structures .
There is nothing fair about the competition if the regulations on aid put enterprises with a larger than 25 % public stake in them at a disadvantage over against their private-sector counterparts .
So ' yes ' to competition on the basis of the best services , and ' no ' to competition on the basis of ownership !
Mr President , Commissioner , I expect your morning could have been more pleasant .
What is more , you have the task of representing the Commission and your colleagues who are directly responsible for the matter , who have delegated this task to you .
However , that is part of the job !
I am not going to talk about the content , for my fellow Members have already amply expressed what are my views too .
I have familiarised myself with the most recent Commission document , a concise text which was produced a few days ago .
It points out , in particular , that the first general document on the subject produced by the Commission dates back to 1996 .
Six years on , the Commission has announced a Green Paper .
I do not feel that this is a responsible way to behave .
You have timetabling problems which have already been pointed out by many people : you have problems scheduling your work to fit in with the Convention , you have scheduling problems with regard to the implementation of sectoral directives and you certainly have scheduling problems - as Mrs Ainardi mentioned - where enlargement is concerned .
In any case , I believe that there is no point , ladies and gentlemen , in continuing to ask the Commission to produce documents .
I am being mildly provocative in saying this : the Commission is divided .
There is clearly no political leadership , which is disturbing considering that the Commission has sole right of initiative .
I feel that we Members of Parliament must now shoulder our responsibilities within the Convention .
A number of contributions have already been submitted on the subject of services of general interest and the reconciliation thereof with competition law .
In its first contribution to the Convention , in May , the Commission itself pointed out how important it is that we have legal bases for services of general interest .
Page 6 of the document even states that , without this , any changes will actually be to the detriment of the European model of society and the values recognised by the European democracies .
The Commission is therefore both aware of the problem and incapable of taking political decisions .
We who are members of the Convention or Members of the European Parliament must turn to our national governments and , within the Convention , we must fight to ensure that the future European Constitution genuinely contains legal provisions providing a framework for competition law .
Mr President , in December 2000 , the Nice Council called upon the Commission to consider , and I quote : ' in close cooperation with the Member States , ways of ensuring greater predictability and increased legal certainty in the application of competition rules relating to services of general interest ' .
In simpler terms , that meant that there had to be an end to the inconsistencies arising from unclear case law and the Commission 's never-ending attempts to use its competences in the field of competition to meddle with the definition and functioning of services of general interest .
Two years on , after a report from the Laeken Council and a call from the Barcelona Council for work to begin on a framework directive , we are still at more or less the same point , and the Commission 's only proposal is to put off resolution of the issue once again and draw up a Green Paper which will lead to a huge consultation process .
This is extremely disappointing .
Although the solution is simple , clearly , the Member States still have to impose it .
The Treaty must state clearly that , firstly , the Union recognises the freedom of administration of the States and their authorities , which includes their right to define and organise their public services , and , secondly , that the funding offsetting the additional costs of successfully providing services of general interest is not to be deemed state aid .
Similarly , there must be an end to the inconsistent behaviour of the Commission at international level .
The negotiations taking place in the WTO on a future General Agreement on Trade in Services - GATS - are currently in serious danger of going off course , drifting away from the liberalisation of private services and becoming an indirect debate on the shortcomings of public services .
These discussions are being led by the Commission with a complete lack of transparency and without a clear democratic mandate for the parties to agree on after a broad public debate .
Moreover , this situation is strangely reminiscent of what is happening in the field of agriculture as regards the application of the so-called Doha decisions , which have not been democratically ratified by anyone .
As regards all these points , Mr President , the Member States meeting at the Council must take things in hand without delay .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission communication bears the words ' status of work on the examination of a proposal for a framework directive on services of general interest ' , a phrase which I feel is something of a provocation .
We do not need an examination of the need for a framework directive ; rather , what we need is for the Commission to present a framework directive , in accordance with Parliament 's long-standing request that it should do so .
If examination is what you want , you should read the Langen Report , the thirty-five pages of which will give you a detailed explanation of why we need a framework directive of this sort .
We therefore demand that the procedure be speeded up and that Parliament 's resolutions be acted upon .
Commissioner , there is such a thing as the Lisbon process , which speaks unambiguously in terms of the European Union having social cohesion as its objective .
In my view , services of general interest serve that social cohesion .
A large proportion of services of general interest are provided on a voluntary basis and not only as a main job .
They contribute to a higher degree of humanitarianism , and , as a rule , they are at home in the area between the state and the private sector .
The support they receive from the state is not to be regarded as state aid , and they are private , although not wholly subject to competition law .
It is for this precise reason that we need a legal framework that provides legal certainty .
Christmas being only a few days away , I would like to extend the warmest thanks to those who work , whether professionally or voluntarily , for the common good .
Without them , our society would be a colder place , and the European social model would be unworkable .
Mr President , Commissioner , it is true that there was still talk of a framework directive at Barcelona but that , at Seville , it was no longer on the agenda .
Now , the subject is a Green Paper , but there has already - in the year 2000 - been a Commission communication on services of general interest , a Commission report to the Laeken Council and , indeed , many documents and positions adopted by the institutions , particularly the European Parliament .
Well then , at this rate , by the time the framework directive is adopted , all the sectoral directives on energy , postal services and transport will already have been adopted , the timetables will have been established for liberalisation and there will thus not be much left needing a framework .
The Commission is , indeed , very behind and we can only wonder what this means .
Where liberalisation is concerned , we legislate and we set dates without even planning proper mid-term reviews .
When it comes to public services , we organise debates on debating documents .
Like many of my fellow Members , I , for my part , feel that a precise legal framework is essential to protect and facilitate the development of public services in Europe as an essential part of citizenship .
Now , public services cannot be subject principally to internal market rules because their objectives are long-term objectives , not immediate profitability , whether they relate to social and territorial cohesion , equal treatment or , as is sometimes the case , even equal pricing .
Thus , these are not objectives which will bring an immediate return on investments , and they therefore cannot be governed by purely commercial reasoning , including where their compatibility and financing are concerned .
I believe that , in the field of public services , we must be able to continue to finance what is not profitable with what is , and , therefore , that it is necessary to balance out prices .
Since there is going to be a Green Paper , it would be appropriate , together with the social partners , users and local government representatives , to assess the long-term impact of liberalisation in a number of sectors in terms of quality and safety .
I am thinking , by way of example , of the British railways , of employment and territorial cohesion .
I am thinking of the postal services and the risk that oligopolies will form , and another example is telecommunications .
I believe , in conclusion , that we need to give the Member States the possibility of having exclusive operating rights in certain geographical areas and of having reserved sectors which are not open to competition , for the expectations of the Union 's citizens are very high when it comes to public services .
Mr President , the representatives of the Lutte ouvrière object to the term ' service of general interest ' , for using it to replace the term ' public service ' means abandoning public services and leaving services which are useful to the people to be governed solely by market forces .
You , yourselves are forced in some cases to provide for some compensatory funding , otherwise known as state aid , for you know that market forces are stupid and inegalitarian and that they only meet financial needs .
You cannot but be aware that the race for profit in public transport leads to disasters .
By handing public services over to private interests , you are removing or restricting the access of those in the lowest income bands to education , healthcare , postal services and proper transport .
We therefore object to both the form and the content of your communication , and we demand that public services be preserved and , where necessary , reestablished in all sectors which are useful to the majority of the people .
We reject any privatisation of public services and any introduction of the concept of profit or profitability .
Mr President , Commissioner , all of us - or the overwhelming majority of us in this House - view the single internal market and competition in a very favourable light .
There are , though , many people who are affected by this issue of general interest , and we are indeed seeing a burgeoning commercialisation of what are called services of general interest .
To a large degree , such commercialisation is justified , but thought ought also to be given to whether or not we should go down this road .
Much has already been said about the Green Paper and the Convention , and also about the question of whether we have left things too late .
There is one thing that we can say with certainty , and that is that Parliament believes that the dialogue between the Commission and the European Court of Justice must come to an end .
Parliament is being ignored to an extent that , in this area in particular , could scarcely be surpassed ; hence the urgent call for the Commission to make some progress on laying down specific criteria for this .
There are two points that are of great importance to me , and that I would like to see resolved once and for all . One feature of the discussion on services of general interest is that the Commission is willing to get involved only where economic activity is concerned .
I am sure that this is perfectly understandable in principle , but it always ends up being about questions of detail .
Is an ambulance service an economic activity ?
Yes or no ?
We do not need decisions in individual cases , but we do need the Commission to at long last specify the criteria to which it will refer when it takes decisions in future .
It is not acceptable for decisions - like those on savings banks - to be at short notice and always , immediately beforehand , forwarded only for information .
My second point relates to subsidiarity , which does , indeed , loom large in the Convention 's deliberations .
This is where the Commission 's delay in making its presentation to the Convention has been crucial , but the regions and the Member States must continue to be given the option of determining these matters themselves on a local basis .
What must not be allowed to happen is standards being imposed by the Commission through the back door .
Subsidiarity is about having scope to take your own decisions on a local basis , so that things may perhaps be different in Bavaria - where I come from - from what they are in , say , Luxembourg , where the Commissioner comes from , or in Spain , Portugal , Greece or , in future perhaps , in Lithuania .
That is why definitions must not be imposed through the back door .
At the end of the day , though , I have to say that what we and the public need is legal certainty , and that is not promoted by what one of your fellow-Commissioners occasionally gets up to , then going as far as to advocate the deregulation of water .
That , at the moment , is not on the agenda , and has to be dealt with in a sector-specific way ; it is for that reason that the Commission needs to get around to taking action on this .
Mr President , I hope that the Commissioner will not hold it against me for saying this - it is not intended personally - but what you gave us today as a statement from the Commission was vacuous , every bit as vacuous as the documents you have sent to us - and I emphasise ' us ' , as I am referring to Parliament - over the past few weeks .
I will shortly be saying something about the existence of other documents that are worth talking about and discussing , but first I will turn to the documents and the statement that you have given us .
You started by mentioning in your introduction that we are engaged in a discussion , and one that is being conducted in a very open way .
At any rate , that is how it came across when interpreted into German .
What do you mean by ' open ' ?
Open as regards the possible outcome or open in the way the discussion is conducted ?
Both interpretations make me uneasy .
With an open outcome ? We have already moved on too far for that .
Now you issue a Green Paper , which I see as nothing more than a means of creating a smokescreen while there are other decisions that urgently need to be taken .
This is yet another exercise in avoiding doing anything , whilst , at the same time , very practical preparations are going ahead in other areas .
Nor is the discussion being conducted in an open manner , for , as I have just told you , we have been given your statement on behalf of the Commission , along with documents of four or five pages each , not that the number of pages is of great importance .
Yet , while we are given these documents , others are getting what are described as ' non-papers ' - substantial documents that are really worth discussing , and in which we could find that there is legal certainty on specific points .
Take the so-called non-paper dated 12 November , with its margin numbers - all 102 of them !
You discuss these things with others , but not with us .
I just want to pick up one point and be told what the Commission really thinks about it .
Item 100 says : ' An enterprise may provide more than one service to the public , some of them realising a profit and others showing a loss .
Even if the enterprise does not provide public services , its services may cross-subsidise each other ' .
What that means is that , if we get an answer , we would be resolving an important financial issue , one that would help bring legal certainty .
What we need right now is an answer and not this or that Green Paper , which serve only to delay the discussion process for ever and a day .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , although the role of services of general interest has been acknowledged , forcing these to comply with the rules of competition devalues their social role as public services of vital importance to the population at large .
This is the major problem we are facing today , caused by successive decisions by the Commission and the Council , specifically at the Lisbon and Barcelona Summits , which have speeded up the liberalisation and deregulation of several sectors , such as telecommunications , postal services , energy and transport to name but a few .
We are already beginning to see the consequences of these decisions , not only in the redundancies and in the greater instability of employment in some of these sectors , but also , in some cases , in the higher charges and prices and the poorer quality of the services provided . These developments have won the firm opposition of workers and of society as a whole , as demonstrated recently by the general strike in Portugal .
We must , therefore , acknowledge the importance of high-quality public services in guaranteeing all citizens the right of access , which also requires a firm stance to be taken in WTO negotiations against the liberalisation of public services .
So , Commissioner , what commitments can you give in this context of the WTO ?
As the last speaker , Commissioner , I can either repeat the comments of those who have already spoken or oppose them .
I will try to make one or two additional points .
In my view , if the European Constitution does not include a substantial chapter or article on public services , its authors will be in danger of playing into the hands of those who want it to be rejected .
They must take heed , for the Constitution is to be ratified by referendum ! My second point is as follows .
If the concept of public services is not present , our citizens will stop believing in a European social model and see it as devoid of sense .
This concept must therefore be introduced .
Lastly , Commissioner , beware of ideologies !
Just because the communist system of ' all state ' did not work in the twentieth century , that does not mean that the capitalist system has necessarily got it right .
Do not fall into the trap of jumping from ideology of ' all state ' to the ideology of ' all market ' .
The god of competition does not need a monument .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place at 11.30 a.m.
The next item is the vote .
Report ( A5-0445 / 2002 ) by Joan Colom i Naval , on behalf of the Committee on Budgets , on the proposal for a European Parliament and Council decision on the mobilisation of the flexibility instrument according to point 24 of the Interinstitutional Agreement of 6 May 1999 ( COM ( 2002 ) 399 - C5-0599 / 2002 - 2002 / 0157 ( ACI ) )
( Parliament adopted the text )
Draft amendments to the draft general budget 2003 as modified by the Council
Before the vote :
Mr President , I have some technical changes to announce before the vote .
Earlier this week I gave many well-deserved thanks to the Commission and Mrs Schreyer , my fellow rapporteur ; my colleagues in the Committee on Budgets and our dear Chairman , Mr Wynn et al .
However , as the Danish Finance Minister was not present at the time , let me repeat my sincere thanks to the very constructive and efficient Danish presidency and in particular the Finance Minister , Mr Pedersen .
He has managed to unite all the Member States and find solutions with us to very difficult issues .
He has paved the way for the very broadly accepted solutions that form the basis for this , hopefully , short and uncomplicated vote today .
I thank the Danish presidency very much .
Let me also thank the extremely efficient and competent secretariat of the Committee on Budgets , who worked extremely well under extreme pressure , but also in a very nice and friendly atmosphere .
Finally , I warmly thank the sittings services who have always handled complicated issues on voting lists etc. in a very correct and efficient manner .
( Applause )
Now I turn to the formalities .
Before the vote on the budgetary amendments starts , I must make a statement about some technical adjustments , some of which need to be put to the vote .
First , a purely technical adjustment : Amendment 1 on budget lines B1-406 and B1-4081 - Improving the processing and marketing of agricultural products - has been withdrawn , because it is covered by Letter of Amendment No 3 to the draft budget , which we have already voted on .
A vote is necessary to confirm the following corrections . First , Amendment 25 on budget line B2-5120 - Farm accountancy data network ( FADN ) - the figures should be modified as follows : an addition of EUR 1 391 000 in commitments and of EUR 1 383 000 in payments , giving the final figures of EUR 11 337 000 in commitments and EUR 11 329 000 in payments .
Secondly , Amendment 238 on budget line B2-517 on plant and animal genetic resources .
This should be withdrawn because it has also been covered by Letter of Amendment No 3 .
Thirdly , Amendment 246 on budget line B3-3062 on Prince .
The following five words should be deleted in the remark : ' ... of the national public sectors ' .
Lastly , in Amendment 168 on budget line A-200 - Rent and ground rent - the figures should be modified as follows : add EUR 3 409 073 , giving a final amount of EUR 132 590 904 .
I suggest that we vote on these corrections en bloc before we start voting on the amendments .
Mr President , it is the right of any Member of this House to raise a point of order properly under the Rules , not just some Members of this House .
If you are to refuse an electronic check on the third part of Amendment 139 , which was properly called for immediately after that vote was announced , I would be grateful if you could explain to the House on what basis you are refusing that check .
Unless this House accepts that explanation , which I do not , I ask you to make that check .
It was evident from where I sit that it was the same majority .
Secondly , the result has been announced .
After a result has been announced , we will not go back on it .
Mr President , Mr Färm , the rapporteur , has said all that I was going to say .
I simply wanted to thank the presidency but also the sessional services for all the work they do to ensure that this process goes through so smoothly .
I should just like to briefly interrupt the vote to invite the chairman of the committee , the rapporteurs , the Council and the Commission to join me for the signing of the budget .
We have voted a budget with commitments of just under EUR 100 billion .
We have done it in record time .
I too wish to add my thanks to everyone involved - political colleagues and the administration - for the extraordinary work , efficiency and dispatch with which this was carried out .
Mr President , you still have to ask the President-in-Office of the Council whether the Council agrees with this budget .
I am quite happy to follow your advice .
Mr President , Parliament has now undertaken the second reading of the 2003 budget , and I note that the agreement reached between Parliament and the Council at the consultancy meeting on 25 November of this year has now been ratified in the 2003 budget .
There are , however , still certain differences of opinion regarding the classification of the expenditure in the budget , on which the Council reserves its rights .
The Council is , however , able to accept the budget as it emerges from Parliament 's second reading .
Now that the Danish Presidency has come to an end , I should like to say that I have always had a lot of respect for the European Parliament , and I can assure you that this respect has not diminished as a result of the positive cooperation I have been fortunate enough to be able to experience during the last six months .
I should also like to extend special thanks to the Chairman of the Committee on Budgets , Mr Wynn , and to the budget rapporteurs , Mr Färm and Mr Stenmarck .
Right from our first meeting as part of this budgetary procedure , which originated in a meeting in Copenhagen , I have encountered considerable ability and a very positive desire that we should each individually accept our responsibility and find those solutions that I think entitle me to congratulate Parliament on the budget that has now been adopted .
Thank you for your constructive cooperation and your attention .
Mr President , given the tragic nature of the disaster off the coast of Galicia and the other Member States which have since been affected by the oil tragedy , there is great solidarity and support in this House for our colleagues in Galicia .
Therefore , I would urge the House to support the switching of EUR 30 million .
This money would otherwise have been used to compensate those who lost their livelihoods when we failed to renegotiate the Morocco Agreement .
Since those funds are no longer required for compensation , they will be earmarked for helping the victims of the Prestige tragedy .
I would urge the House to support this and show solidarity with the beleaguered fishermen and families in Galicia .
Mr President , in normal circumstances this procedure , as it is being proposed by the Commission , would be totally unacceptable .
The Prestige accident occurred on 19 November .
Six days later Parliament 's delegation was in a conciliation meeting where we agreed on the mobilisation of the flexibility instrument for the remaining EUR 27 million for the restructuring of the Spanish and Portuguese fleets .
All this could have been dealt with differently and in a different time frame .
The proposal as it is violates certain principles .
Firstly , it violates a procedure that is transparent .
Secondly , it violates the principles of specificity of the budget established by the financial regulation .
It violates last year 's decision to mobilise the flexibility instrument for the restructuring of the Spanish and Portuguese fleets , and it also violates the principle of sound management since there is no margin left under heading 2 , which implies that decommitments and then recommitments have to be made to make the necessary funding available .
Having made all that clear , let us look at the political and the pragmatic approach .
We , in the Committee on Budgets , are political and pragmatic people - not just budgetary people as people seem to think we are !
( Mixed reactions )
As Mr Gerhard Schmid said to me a short while ago , not everyone believes in God but they all believe in the Committee on Budgets !
The Commission proposal at least gives us the chance to use this year 's budget - the 2002 budget - and that would be a better solution for taxpayers , to make sure that we are using money from this year , rather than getting supplementary own resources for next year .
Whilst condemning the procedure and making it abundantly clear that this calendar of the Commission should not in any circumstances represent a precedent , I can recommend , on behalf of the coordinator of the Committee on Budgets , approval of the urgency .
( Applause )
Mr Wynn , I believe the applause indicates that the House deeply appreciates your exceptional outburst of pragmatism on this occasion .
( Parliament approved the proposal for a regulation )
Recommendation for second reading ( A5-0419 / 2002 ) by the Committee on Culture , Youth , Education , the Media and Sport , on the Council common position for adopting a European Parliament and Council decision establishing the European Year of Education through Sport 2004 ( 9605 / 2 / 2002 - C5-0498 / 2002 - 2001 / 0244 ( COD ) ) ( Rapporteur : Doris Pack )
( The President declared the common position approved )
Report ( A5-0381 / 2002 ) by Graham R. Watson , on behalf of the Committee on Citizens ' Freedoms and Rights , Justice and Home Affairs , on the proposal for a Council decision on the signing of the Agreement between the European Community and the Government of the Special Administrative Region of the People 's Republic of China on the readmission of persons residing without authorisation ( SEC ( 2002 ) 412 - C5-0263 / 2002 - 2002 / 0092 ( CNS ) )
( Parliament adopted the legislative resolution )
Joint motion for a resolution
Mr President , my voting buttons have malfunctioned .
I wanted to vote against !
We take note of your intention but the result stands .
( Parliament adopted the joint resolution )
President .
That concludes the vote .
I would like to make a point of order before you go .
Mr Howitt , I hope you do not feel that you received the rough end of my treatment in this season of goodwill .
I wish you all a very happy Christmas .
I hope you have the relaxation and rest that we all deserve .
I look forward to resuming with vim and vigour in the New Year .
Happy Christmas !
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
. ( PT ) We have voted in favour of this report because as a result , the funding of EUR 27 million for the conversion of the Spanish and Portuguese fishing fleets which operated in Moroccan waters will be ensured .
We would also emphasise the fact that the proposal to which I put my name , as draftsman of the budget for 2003 in the Committee on Fisheries , has , at least in part , been adopted . This proposal aims to ensure that the flexibility instrument is used .
We must ensure that the commitment given last year by the budgetary authority , to include EUR 27 million in the 2003 budget , is met .
Nevertheless , I must express my unhappiness at the serious precedent being set by anticipating transferring structural funds that have not been used in 2002 , totalling almost EUR 15 million , affecting their future reprogramming and redistribution , since we know that this is a highly sensitive area for all Member States .
The 2003 draft budget is , in itself , sound .
For the first time , the European Parliament is achieving genuinely rigorous work , mindful of the economic situation and the constraints upon the Member States , and is treating European finances with an austerity which we can only welcome .

It does , however , contain a number of measures which we dispute , the most unacceptable of which concerns aid to peoples and healthcare in the area of reproduction , for which an increase of 200 % is proposed , an increase which was rejected by the Council .
Indeed , if we place this budget line alongside the objectives of the Sandbaek report , which it finances , we see that there is no guarantee that the practice and promotion of abortion will be excluded from this funding .
Parliament does not permit such practices and ' solemnly ' reaffirmed , when voting on the report on ' life sciences and biotechnology ' , ' that the life and dignity of all human beings , whatever their stage of development and state of health , must be respected ' .
In the light of this doubt and in the absence of any clarification from Commissioner Nielson , we cannot vote for this budget line .
The EU 's Budget procedure is becoming a set ritual every year .
Parliament wants to spend more money than the European Commission is proposing , but the Council guards the Member States ' purses by wanting to spend less .
The result is an ever-increasing disparity between the expenditure ceiling agreed in 1998 and actual spending .
As a representative of the Socialist Party in the Netherlands , I am faced with two choices each time .
My party defends the maintaining or increasing of government expenditure intended for better public services , a better living environment and more solidarity with people in the poor parts of the world .
It goes without saying that this will entail higher taxation levels than the governing neo-liberal politicians want .
These taxes have to be collected from the top earners and from companies .
However , accepting higher spending and higher taxes does not mean that we are happy to spend a great deal more money on an unnecessarily centralised EU .
We regard part of the EU 's expenditure as a waste that only goes to support bureaucracy and megalomania .
Even the structural funds and the common agricultural policy , which could deliver benefits for poor regions and small farmers , are sometimes spent on the wrong things .
The only points on which I can support the increase in the budget proposed by the GUE / NGL Group are those relating to social funds , the Northern Ireland peace fund and cohesion funds .
. ( PT ) We support the idea of designating 2004 as the European Year of Education through Sport , which matches the need to value the most positive aspects of sport in society and especially its contribution to the educational process .
We should remember that one potential contribution to this year that must be included is Euro 2004 , which will be held in Portugal
There must be a closer relationship between the educational and the sports systems , in other words , between school and club , associations , organisations , and also local authorities .
This is the best way to promote the organisational component at grassroots level , of sports for everyone , which also requires more communication and transparency in explaining measures and in preparing projects that will be funded .
Nevertheless , the appropriations that have been earmarked are limited and do not match the concerns that have been expressed - this is something we regret .
We are also voting in favour of the report because we hope that this aspect will still be given further consideration .
. ( PT ) I wish to congratulate Mrs Pack on her excellent report , which I fully support .
By adopting the Council common position , it aims to conclude an issue that I feel is of considerable importance : designating 2004 as the European Year of Education through Sport .
Sport is acknowledged to be a major social phenomenon in Europe , and constitutes an extremely important educational tool .
Like the rapporteur , I feel that the importance of the effect that the Olympic ideals can have on education should be emphasised .
Sport contributes , in particular , to increasing the social skills of young people , such as team spirit , solidarity and fair play .
I therefore welcome the decision to hold the European Year of Education through Sport 2004 , which will make a positive contribution to reversing what has almost been the norm to date , and by this I mean Community action on sport which is restricted to pilot schemes and preparatory measures .
I also agree with the rapporteur with regard to the need to adopt the Council common position as it stands , since it takes on board most of the amendments tabled by the European Parliament .
. ( PT ) The Commission has proposed that 2004 should be designated ' the European Year of Education through Sport ' .
It should be remembered that in that year , the European Football Championships will be held in Portugal and the Olympic and Paralympic Games will take place in Athens .
Mrs Pack 's approach aims , as does that of the Commission , to allow better use to be made of the educational values of sport in improving curricula , and particularly parallel education , by establishing a broader partnership between education organisations and sports organisations .
In terms of the objectives , in terms of what has been said about the activities that will contribute to achieving these objectives and the financial envelope that has been proposed , which should focus on supporting practical initiatives that strengthen links between sport and education , this initiative definitely warrants our support , and so I have voted for it .
.
( PT ) I have supported this report and I fully agree with the recommendation made by the Committee on Culture , Youth , the Media and Sport to amend the Commission proposal in order , firstly , to eliminate the budget lines for surveys and studies and then to add these savings - totalling around EUR 420 000 - to the sums available for local , national and transnational actions and for initiatives by sports and educational bodies whose task is to disseminate information about this Year .
As you all know , I have always supported these initiatives , ever since 2004 was designated as ' European Year of Education through Sport ' - and I stated this in the earliest debates on the matter in this House .
I wish to reaffirm that this will give an important boost to better use being made of the educational values of sport in order to improve curricula and especially , parallel education , by establishing broader partnerships between educational and sports bodies .
Furthermore , I would say that , in this context , it is worth emphasising the connections between sport and education and thereby increase the visibility of the ' European Year of Education through Sport ' , by holding and funding , for example , athletics meetings at school level in each participating country .
Schools sports must , in fact , be a priority within sports policy and must , at the same time , occupy a prime position in schools and educational policy .
.
( FR ) I voted against the Watson report , which endorses the agreement signed between the European Community and Hong Kong on the readmission of persons residing without authorisation , because it is accompanied by a very dangerous parallel provision : the exemption of Hong Kong citizens from the visa requirement .
The Commission has tried to give me explanations during the debate , but they are not convincing .
Firstly , it claims that the two decisions are not connected because they are not simultaneous .
It is true that they are separated by a year but , in terms of reasoning , they are very closely related . Moreover , they are presented as such at the start of the explanatory statement of the agreement .
Secondly , it states that the number of illegal immigrants coming from Hong Kong is very small .
Even if this were true ( and I do not believe it is ) , this decision to exempt Hong Kong citizens would still be irresponsible , given the special situation of Hong Kong , currently a Special Administrative Region of China .
To cap it all , we learn that the final approval was given at the beginning of December by an Agriculture Council meeting .
This is where we will end up if we continue to abandon our national powers of negotiation and ratification in favour of a system which is far-removed from the people and over which we have no control .
This agreement comes in the wake of other , equally scandalous agreements concluded by the European Community with various poor countries across the world and which fall directly in line with the repressive policies decided on by the governments and authorities of the European Union , concerning those who are attempting to escape poverty or oppression in the hope of finding work and a future here .
What they can expect from this agreement is questioning , imprisonment and finally expulsion .
This will be the fate at least of those who have not perished in the attempt to surmount the new obstacles put in their way by our leaders , who would like to turn Europe into a fortress surrounded by barbed wire .
This agreement , which is particularly harsh on the poor , whom it considers to be undesirables , but reduces formalities required for businessmen , shows the true face behind the hypocritical mask - if we had not already seen it - of official speeches about Human Rights that this European Union claims it wishes to protect in Hong Kong or other countries .
Because Hong Kong was once stolen from China and subsequently leased , China was entitled to have it returned .
However , this is causing a problem for the many people who now live there .
They have a higher standard of living than those around them and make greater demands on their government .
They want to contribute critically to government policy , and yet they have simply been transferred from one colonial power to another .
The ' one country , two systems ' arrangement may guarantee the continued existence of capitalism , but it does not guarantee the introduction and development of democracy .
It is therefore to be expected that many people will feel unsafe there and will want to leave . They want to go to Europe , the USA or Japan , where they are more likely to find the kind of society they have become used to .
On the other hand , the Chinese Government wants to make Hong Kong more like the rest of the country .
It may be being allowed to become a rich show-piece , but movements that are banned in China and normal democratic elections in which an opposition can come into power are not permitted .
I therefore doubt whether an agreement on the readmission of refugees would really work .
The intention that this agreement should become a model for other states in which critical people feel unsafe is even more controversial .
That is why I am voting against this .
As the amendment concerning the special partnership with Turkey has been rejected , I do not have to explain it in specific terms now .
For some of our group , this was a pragmatic step ; for others it actually meant another step in the direction of Turkey 's membership , something about which they are still quite pessimistic .
As the text has been rejected , however , there is no point in discussing it any further .
Mr President , like some other Members , I have abstained for several reasons .
Firstly for those expressed by Mr Goebbels on several occasions , concerning the inadequacy of the funding earmarked for the Union 's enlargement .
Next , because we remain convinced that the thickest fog still covers the budgetary margins of an enlarged Union and we note that the same fog is now creeping over the timetable for legal operations , which are crucial if enlargement is to be completed successfully .
Lastly , I wish to express my hope , Mr President , that , especially when you take part in summits , you strive to defend the prerogatives of our Parliament and the requests we make .
. ( FR ) We have voted against the resolution on the outcome of the Copenhagen European Council because it uses the fact that most Members clearly approve of the entry into the Union of ten candidate countries from the East to slip in some paragraphs which also approve the accession process for Turkey .
These paragraphs welcome in particular the doubling of financial assistance to that country under a strategy which , according to the Copenhagen conclusions , is no longer even called ' pre-accession ' but ' accession ' proper .
In fact , Article 49 of the Treaty on European Union does not apply in this case : it provides for the accession procedure for ' European ' States .
It does not cover other countries .
What we believe was needed was to first open a joint discussion on the purposes and boundaries of the European Union , which could have been held within the Convention .
Lastly , the resolution welcomes the ' comprehensive agreement reached with NATO ' , omitting to state that the European Union is at the same time committed to including Turkey in European security and defence policy as soon as possible .
. ( FR ) You welcome the outcome of the Copenhagen European Council and , in particular , the integration of ten new countries into the European Union .
We do not .
We are in favour of the EU 's enlargement , considerably beyond , furthermore , the ten countries that you have just accepted .
Enlargement in the form that you are undertaking it , however , simply enshrines the hegemony of the major capitals of Western Europe over the poorest and least developed countries .
It enshrines and even prescribes attacks against the working classes of these countries , through company closures , increased unemployment and the elimination of many small family-run farms , in other words , turning rural workers into jobseekers .
Furthermore , the inhabitants of the newly-integrated countries are considered to be second class citizens who , for a long transitional period , will not have the same rights as other members , in particular that of settling or working wherever they wish .
We have , therefore , voted against your self-congratulation .
Seen from a historical perspective , achieving enlargement is an issue that lies at the very heart of the European Union .
This is the sharing of a common set of values in the field of liberal democracy , respect for human rights , social protection of the weakest , the protection of minorities , a market economy and peaceful coexistence under the rule of law .
Enlargement is enabling us to revive the geographical , political and cultural identity of Europe .
The prospect of a Union of 25 is now a reality .
This enlargement , on an unparalleled scale , corresponds to an historic duty to reunite our continent .
It also requires us thoroughly to reconsider the European project , the way in which an enlarged Europe will function .
It also represents an opportunity .
Extending the Union to more than 100 million new citizens , from this first stage formalised in Copenhagen onwards , will encourage exchanges and economic activity and will breathe new life into the development and integration of Europe 's economy as a whole .
The accession of new Member States will increase the Union 's power and influence on the international stage .
. ( PT ) The conclusions of the Copenhagen Summit demonstrate that the European Council has opted to put off resolving serious problems , and has instead taken a radical step forwards , having decided on an enlargement involving more than ten countries , on a basis of discrimination , not only towards these countries , but also towards the current Member States with the weakest economies and greatest social problems , such as Portugal .
It has also discriminated against Cyprus , creating further doubts about what will actually happen there .
Nevertheless , the reference in the Summit conclusions to the specific situation of Portuguese farming was made in such vague terms that it provides no guarantees at all .
The consequences could be extremely damaging unless Portuguese interests are properly considered in the negotiations still to take place , even after the political decision on accession .
It is unacceptable that a thoroughgoing revision of the CAP and the financial perspectives has not been advocated , in the joint motion for a resolution , for example , which we rejected .
There is a real risk of inequalities and differences being accentuated , with the aim of economic and social cohesion becoming increasingly distant .
We also reject the conclusions ' support for closer links between the EU and NATO , under the comprehensive agreement that has been concluded .
. ( FR ) Whilst I am delighted at the political unification of Europe decided on in principle in Copenhagen , I regret the fact that this is to be undertaken with excessively limited financial resources .
The European Council has not even exhausted the envelope set in Berlin for the period 2003-2006 .
At the time , this was supposed to fund the accession of six new States .
With less money , we are now supposed to cater for ten new members .
Of the less than EUR 41 billion earmarked over three years , almost EUR 14 billion actually come from contributions from the new States themselves , which reduces the ' joint ' effort of the 15 to some EUR 27 billion over three years , in other words , an annual transfer of less than 0.1 % of current Community GDP to the acceding countries .
This is shamefully little , given the structural problems of almost all these countries .
Under the Marshall plan , for five years after World War II , the USA transferred 1 % of its GDP at the time to Europe .
The FRG has for more than ten years transferred between three and four per cent of its GDP to the new ' Länder ' , totalling some EUR 75 billion per year .
Since commitment appropriations are not the same as payments , it is to be feared that some of the earmarked funds will not reach the countries for which they are intended .
As the Court of Auditors has just observed , of the EUR 520 million earmarked in 2001 under the Sapard programme , only EUR one million has actually reached the candidate countries .
( Explanation of vote abbreviated in accordance with Rule ( 137 ( 1 ) of the Rules of Procedure )
The Copenhagen Summit and its decision to enlarge the ? U was a very important act of imperialist expansionism .
The victims of this enlargement , who will swell the ranks of the exploited , will be the workers and small and medium-sized farmers in the enlarged ? U , especially those in the new Member States , which are joining on even worse terms .
The main purpose of making such derisory resources available is to strengthen the power of capital and tear down any social achievements left over from the socialist era .
The fact that communist parties , support for communist ideas and the use of communist symbols are banned and senior communist party members and veterans of the anti-fascist movement have been gaoled in countries which supposedly meet democratic criteria is quite in keeping with the pseudo-democratic sensibilities of the leaders of the ? U.
The shotgun imposition of the - basically partition-based - Annan plan in Cyprus is also unacceptable and signals an end to the UN resolutions and any hope of a fair and viable solution .
Not only did the summit provocatively ignore the question of war with Iraq , and later with other countries , it pushed ahead with the militarisation of the ? U and reinforced the new ' anti-terrorist ' ? ? ? ? .
A final decision was taken on operations by the European army in the FYROM , with similar operations planned in Bosnia-Herzegovina .
Today 's resolution about the Copenhagen Summit congratulated the Government of Denmark for sustaining an excellent Council presidency , and for enabling us to celebrate today the largest enlargement in the history of the Union .
This brings in ten new states , most of them relatively small , including six which have recently achieved independence by democratic means .
We in Scotland are frequently told that as a small country we would have no great standing in Europe if we were likewise to achieve independence in Europe through democratic departure from a larger union .
During the current fisheries negotiations , on the other hand , we have been warned not to expect too much since the UK lacks solid allies in Europe .
There are five million Danes and five million Scots .
I salute the huge achievement of one of the ancient small nations of Europe .
I look forward to the day when my own ancient nation can play a similar role .
The idea that small states count for nothing while large ones can cut the mustard has been shown up for the nonsense it is .
My vote was motivated by these thoughts , as well as by a great satisfaction at seeing this greater Union safely achieved .
It seems that for some Member States , enlargement of the EU boils down to an opportunity to buy as big a market as possible for their own domestic companies as cheaply as possible .
This will result in the contributions to the structural funds that have already been established being redistributed amongst a larger number of Member States than initially planned by 2006 .
There will be much less money available to the farmers in the new Member States than to their counterparts in the present Member States .
Things could have turned out worse , but thanks to the compromise proposed by Denmark and to Poland 's tenacity , the Copenhagen Summit goes some way to bridging the gap between rich and poor .
The Netherlands ' calculated efforts in particular have failed . That is not likely to prevent Central Europe from being the poor cousin of the West for a long time to come .
If the majority of voters vote in favour of accession to the EU , hopefully of their own free will and not as the result of a propaganda bombardment , enlargement will happen in 2004 , probably including half of the island of Cyprus .
The EU must make sure that it does not become involved in a war for this island or succumb to pressure to allow Turkey to join quickly without applying standards for democracy and human rights .
. ( PT ) I have voted in favour of the joint motion for a resolution on the Copenhagen European Council , despite disagreeing with some of its paragraphs , because the historic step of enlargement achieved at that European Council represents a firm commitment to the peace , democracy and development of the European nations , as well as a fully justified tribute to the efforts made by the candidate countries in the process of adapting to the Copenhagen political and economic criteria and to the Community acquis .
Nevertheless , amongst other aspects I disagree with , I must mention my unhappiness with the second part of paragraph 5 of the motion , which stresses the need to reform the common agricultural policy before 2006 , on the basis of the Commission 's proposals .
In fact , this proposal goes against the decision taken by the Fifteen Member States only to amend the CAP after 2006 and demonstrates its presumptive approval of fundamental choices that have not yet been subject to the necessary parliamentary debate .
With regard to Portugal in particular , this debate will certainly take account of the specific characteristics of Portuguese farming and the abnormally low income of Portuguese farmers as a consequence of our only joining the European Community in 1986 , when the other Member States had been benefiting from it since 1962 .
I have voted in favour of the resolution .
We Swedish Christian Democrats sincerely welcome the fact that the division of Europe can now be a thing of the past .
The Second World War has thus been brought to a definitive end .
The EU is no longer just a form of West European cooperation , but not far from being pan-European .
The EU would nonetheless be seriously threatened as a peace project if , in the future , the Council were to give Turkey a date for entering into membership negotiations while that country continues with the military occupation , begun in 1974 , of 37 % of the territory of the Republic of Cyprus , that is to say of a future Member State .
I therefore find it deeply regrettable that Amendment No 13 , which calls attention to this fact , was not adopted .
Amendment No 10 by the Christian Democratic Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats provided scope for a revised aid strategy for Turkey on the basis of a special partnership .
It was unfortunate that this alternative and complement to Turkey 's membership ambitions was voted down , with 201 ' yes ' votes , 238 ' no ' votes and 16 abstentions .
. ( FR ) The Copenhagen Summit will go down in history as a summit of total incoherence .
Hardly had it prepared the ground for the reunification of Europe when it put in place a process that would completely change its nature , by improperly extending its boundaries to encompass a country that is in Asia .
Flying in the face of the geographical and historical evidence , Copenhagen has not only failed to make up for the mistakes of Helsinki , but has even compounded its 1999 mistake of misleading Turkey and has embarked on a course of action that will ultimately make Ankara the dominant power in the European Union .
Instead of offering Turkey its rightful place within a close Euro-Mediterranean partnership , which respects the specific characteristics of each country , in short , which is adapted to geopolitical realities , the European Council has preferred the ideology of making no distinction between countries , flavoured with a hint of anti-Christianity .
The day following the Copenhagen Summit , a major Parisian daily ran the headline ' Bush opens Europe 's door to Turkey ' .
The European Council has indeed given in to pressure from the US and the joint NATO / EU letter issued after the summit attests to this .
It suggests that Turkey should henceforth be fully involved in the Union 's foreign security and defence policy .
Copenhagen has therefore put in place all the necessary elements to ensure that the European Union will never see the light of day .
. ( FR ) The outcome of the Copenhagen Summit has left a bitter taste in everyone 's mouth .
The Europe that the Heads of State are building fluctuates between powerlessness and contempt .
Powerlessness first , when we see that the European Union is incapable of achieving a fair and lasting peace in the Middle East or even of demanding the withdrawal of Russian troops from Chechnya or of French troops from Côte d 'Ivoire .
It is also powerless because the EU has shown itself to be incapable of preventing the predictable shipwreck of the oil tanker Prestige , which was 25 years old and flying a flag of convenience off the coast of Galicia .
We then see contempt when the Eurocrats meeting in the Convention take decisions concerning 450 million citizens on basic constitutional texts without involving or consulting these citizens .
Contempt has been shown towards the ten new countries which will have to undergo further waves of liberalisation and privatisation .
Contempt for the populations of Turkey who , according to Giscard d 'Estaing , do not share ' the Christian values of European civilisation ' .
The emphatic speeches of our leaders on the historic nature of this summit did not drown out those who , in their thousands , brought the values of another Europe onto the streets of Copenhagen - the values of democracy , peace and social justice .
With them , here as I did there , I have rejected the outcome of this summit .
Mr President , I really wanted to talk about the budget in relation to the fact that the reprogramming of funds to meet the needs resulting from the Prestige accident had my support and I am grateful , if you will allow me , for the unanimity achieved in this Parliament .
I must point out that reprogramming is not the right route , and that the Council has still not approved the compensation fund in the Erika packages , it has still not been approved in the Council of Ministers , the European Council , and there is a genuine division between the European institutions which is jeopardising the fight against the international maritime traffic in dangerous goods in our waters .
I must also point out that the European Council has only given EUR 5 million for the Prestige , a sum which I described yesterday as miserable and this must be said , bearing in mind that the United States have applied specific legislation through the Oil Pollution Act and are going to claim , and will achieve , EUR 4 000 million from Exxon Mobil for the Exxon Valdés accident .
I believe these things should be pointed out so that the European Union may really become a political union which shows solidarity , especially in the case of an accident such as the one that has taken place in Galicia , which is a truly European problem .
It is being suffered by Galicia because that is where the majority of traffic passes , but it is genuinely a European problem .
. ( PT ) It is greatly to be welcomed that , once again , in a matter that can be addressed most appropriately at the common European level , it has been possible to draft a compromise which expresses the broad consensus of all political groups .
I fully agree with this basic text , of which we were the main proponents and which follows on from the useful content of the debates in plenary , now and as long ago as 21 November , and from that of the previous resolution in this field .
I wish to reaffirm our two main approaches : the Commission and the Council must act immediately on what has been learned from this appalling disaster , in terms of rigorous new measures for the future , anticipating the full applicability of others that have already been adopted and a thorough examination of the entire legal and technical framework .
The Commission must also , however , undertake and provide us with a detailed and rigorous study of the entire Prestige crisis , including the way in which it was managed in practical terms .
We would all gain from learning , point by point , from this terrible lesson .
This lesson must , therefore , be technically rigorous , scientifically precise and politically unbiased and dispassionate .
Bringing any partisan national pettifogging to bear on this crucial evaluation , as those on this House 's left have attempted to do , destroying the spontaneous consensus of 21 November and seeking to mislead the European Parliament because of a political spat in the Spanish parliament , can only harm the seriousness and objectivity of the debate - by all sides , I must emphasise - and , consequently , once again , endanger our common future , as a result of overlooking the main aspect : our coasts , the coastal communities , the greatest interest of the European citizens , a greater ability to prevent and to respond in the right way in future .
What is important here is the sea - not Mr Aznar !
. ( FR ) The chairman of the French shipowners ' association has said that 20 % of the world 's fleet should not be allowed to sail because of poor upkeep and because it has not been inspected .
These floating dumps , however , are treated with a reprehensible tolerance by some shipping companies and some flag States , not least Turkey , which heads the blacklist .
I spoke yesterday of the need to clearly establish the liability of chartering companies , in order to encourage them to tighten up their practices .
What oil slicks also demonstrate , however , is the complete surrender of their sovereign role by flag States who do not ensure that their ships comply with maritime law .
This is why the States that are affected by oil slicks should systematically pursue the international liability of the flag State concerned at the International Court of Maritime Law .
Spain , therefore , should today - and France tomorrow , probably - take the Bahamas to the Court in Hamburg .
Establishing the liability of the charterer and determining that of the flag State are probably the two most promising ways of preserving the marine environment .
The most badly affected States should defend these means and pursue them jointly .
Mr President , I have , of course , voted in favour of this resolution , but I cannot agree with the way you treated Mr Schnellhardt when he told you that his machine was not working .
He would have voted against the resolution and the majority was achieved by only one vote : 223 to 224 .
If Mr Schnellhardt 's machine had worked - he has told you that this is not the case - the amendment would have been rejected .
I believe that you should take account of the fact that a machine does not work , especially if the Member informs you straightaway .
It is actually extremely important for us when an amendment is adopted or rejected by a single vote .
I believe I am within my rights , Mr President to tell you that I do not agree with the way you have handled this matter .
Mrs Lulling , as a Member of long standing - even longer than myself - you know perfectly well that what you have just said lies entirely outside the precedent of the House .
You are completely misinterpreting the Rules .
They are clear on this point : when we have a roll call vote and when we call the result , the result stands .
That has been the constant practice of all my predecessors and is consistent with the Rules .
I sometimes regret that , owing to technical problems , Members ' votes are not properly registered .
However , I have followed to the letter a precedent on which I exercise zero discretion .
In those terms , although colleagues can be upset that their vote has not been recorded , it is a fact and a practice of this House that only those votes recorded and duly announced carry the result .
Close at it was , c 'est la vie , Madame !
Mr President , on a point of order , if that is how the Rules are , then they are stupid and should be changed .
Mrs Lulling , this is then in your hands .
I wish you a happy Christmas in redrafting the Rules .

I wish a happy Christmas to Mr Fatuzzo , who today omitted to speak on behalf of the pensioners , but I am sure he would wish me to record that had he spoken , he would have done so .
Mr President , this is my customary Christmas present to the Presidency , to the officials who assist the Presidency , to the interpreters , to all those who work in this Chamber and devote so much time during the year to listening to Mr Fatuzzo 's explanations of vote .
It is now a custom that , at Christmas , Mr Fatuzzo delivers no explanations of vote during the last voting time of the year , precisely as a Christmas present to you all .
That concludes the explanations of vote .
( The sitting was suspended at 12.30 p.m. and resumed at 3.05 p.m. )

The next item is the report ( A5-0403 / 2002 ) by Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou , on behalf of the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities , on the Sixth Annual Report from the Commission on equal opportunities for women and men in the European Union ( 2001 ) ( COM ( 2002 ) 258 - C5-0336 / 2002 - 2002 / 2180 ( COS ) ) .
Mr President , may I start by saying how delighted I am to see the new generation of Europe in the visitors ' gallery following this debate , which directly affects their future .
No one will be surprised if I say that this European Commission report gave us yet another opportunity to confirm that the equal opportunities situation is totally unsatisfactory .
Unfortunately , however , the European Commission report is also unsatisfactory .
It is still a descriptive annual report .
Of course the 2001 report contains more facts and figures than previous reports but it is still the product of a routine exercise .
It fails to illustrate properly either where we have failed to achieve our targets or commitments or the real difficulties in applying our policies at European and national level .
Although it refers to future developments , it fails to set specific commitments or timetables .
Turning now to individual issues , the European Commission is clearly finding it hard to apply equal opportunities and is failing to do so adequately .
Some Directorates-General are not making commitments in this area .
At the same time , action to encourage more women to apply to participate in applications has been unsuccessful .
Our motion for a resolution calls on the European Commission to examine new ways of disseminating information and simplifying bureaucratic and other commitments which will allow women and women 's organisations to find out about and take part in European programmes .
The same applies to the Member States , which are having trouble understanding gender equality and implementing it in practice .
Where there are no central or regional political support mechanisms , equal opportunities programmes are not being applied .
Member States generally have no quantitative targets in their programmes , do not evaluate the repercussions of equal opportunities on their economic policy and have no indicators or statistics broken down by gender either for programming or for evaluating national policies .
So it would be very useful for the purpose of raising awareness of the situation and drawing up future policies if the European Commission were to conduct a serious study with indicators and comparative data on the situation in each Member State , especially on the application of Community legislation , so that we can compare problems and achievements and exchange best practices .
During the forthcoming year , 2003 , the European institutions and Member States will need to act boldly and decisively .
During the mid-term review of the Structural Funds which , as we know , will take place in 2003 , the Member States will need to decide where there is room to promote equal opportunities , so as to prevent appropriations for measures to benefit women from being transferred to other objectives .
We shall be preparing for the first European elections to include the candidate countries in 2003 , and for national elections in various Member States .
The Council recommendations on the equal participation of men and women have not brought about the expected results .
Nor does the Council have a competent agency to help improve the coordination of equality-related issues .
As for the European Commission , we are anxiously waiting for it to present a proposal for a gender equality directive based on Article 13 as quickly as possible , so that we can follow up the equal opportunities programme decided in Beijing and achieve our self-imposed targets throughout the fabric of economic and public life .
All of this , you will say , has been said many times before , and you would be right .
Numerous people have commented , both inside and outside Parliament , that we women and some of the men working on these issues are becoming tiresome and repeating ourselves . We need to ask ourselves why they make these comments .
Why does this issue not affect our society or at least not with the degree of importance we attach to it as regards both the human and economic factor ? Why are our policies and principles not being applied directly and properly ?
I think that now more than ever we need to conduct a broad , ground-breaking dialogue with society and with those responsible for exercising European policy .
What we want from the European Commission , Commissioner , are good ideas and efficient ways of applying them .
Where the European Commission cannot force the Member States , it should encourage them to realise that equality brings benefits , not losses and difficulties .
Let them understand how important promoting equality is to the strategic objectives set by the European Union , and I refer here both to the Lisbon objectives , which have been complicated by enlargement , and the objectives of defending human rights throughout the world and contributing to the economic and social advancement of mankind , especially in our own neck of the woods , by which I mean the Balkans and the Mediterranean .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , I would like to start by congratulating the members of the committee , and particularly the rapporteur , on the extremely careful and valuable work they have done , as well as thanking them for both their excellent suggestions and critical comments .
Very progressive and inspiring ideas have been explored , and these encourage the Commission to continue its efforts towards this objective .
Every year , we observe how effective , efficient and innovative our dual strategy is , involving as it does on the one hand , the inclusion of gender mainstreaming in all the Commission 's areas of activity , and , on the other , the implementation of specific measures of positive action in favour of women .
As we did in the last annual report , we have taken care , in the report on 2001 , to take your comments and proposals into account .
Your proposals , suggestions and concerns will , of course , also be taken into account in preparing and elaborating the report on 2002 , work on which has already started .
I would like , at this point to enlarge on one point in particular , the evaluation issue .
I am already in a position to inform you that , in 2003 , evaluation will be carried out by means of two methods which , although different , complement each other .
As happens every year , what we call a gender scoreboard will be set up , whilst it is planned that a second evaluation will be carried out by external experts .
These efforts have to do both with the assessment of the 2001-2005 framework strategy and also with the financial plan .
It is envisaged that a provisional report on these activities will appear at the end of 2003 .
Turning to lawmaking , we will support the revision of the directive on the equal treatment of women and men , planned for 2003 , by , among other things , drawing up a report evaluating the implementing measures taken at national level .
It is precisely this to which you have just drawn attention , and we will make it our common concern to carry out an assessment in this area .
The object of the revision of the equal treatment directives is to simplify them , help to make them more coherent , and bring them into line with the acquis communautaire .
Another reason why the coming year will be significant is that we will be focussing on how to balance the participation of women and men in the decision-making processes .
In this respect , too , we are endeavouring to achieve tangible results in all areas , with women becoming better represented in all sectors , including in the social partners .
Your report will be a very valuable help to us in doing this .
In 2004 , we will be concentrating on the crucial area of combating negative stereotyped images of women .
Misogynistic clichés , being a substantial obstacle to equal treatment for both genders , can and must be combated .
This will be a comprehensive action , aimed at all the actors , with the objective of robbing obsolete ways of thinking of their power and , in the medium term - who knows ? - perhaps even completely eradicating them .
In any case , misogynistic clichés should soon be seen as ridiculous relics of times that are no more .
Parliament has insisted on the best possible utilisation of funds for this purpose .
Let me , in this context , remind you of the assessment to be carried out by outside experts , and , furthermore , bring to your attention the imminent adoption of a Commission communication on the introduction of the gender question in the Structural Fund .
This communication will be a valuable instrument in the programme 's mid-term assessment .
Although the candidate countries have made evident efforts to transpose the acquis communautaire on equal treatment , substantial advances remain to be made , and so the Commission will continue to give the utmost attention to this topic .
The success of European enlargement policy is dependent on the common rules being correctly applied .
In this respect , the role of the programme of action , with which eight candidate countries have associated themselves this year , is that of giving impetus , and a valuable one .
I would like to conclude by returning to the issue of violence against women , in relation to which the Commission welcomes the Council 's framework resolution of 19 July 2002 on the fight against trafficking in human beings .
This resolution is of great importance in terms of the conclusions to be drawn at criminal level as regards the trafficking in human beings .
The Commission will follow closely the way in which this resolution is transposed into the laws of individual states , and will work very closely with the committee in closely monitoring this as well .
Commissioner , we are dealing with the annual report for 2001 on the progress and difficulties observed in the achievement of equal opportunities .
The political measures implemented are being analysed but their consequences are not being assessed .
The objective of this framework strategy is to guarantee that all the Commission 's policies take account of gender issues and analyse the repercussions of its activities on men and women .
Once again we have to insist on the need to create more and better jobs between now and 2010 , in accordance with the objectives set at the Lisbon Summit .
We must insist on the need to guarantee equality between men and women in all political fields , in accordance with Article 3 ( 2 ) of the Treaty .
We must once again demand that indicators be produced on the structures for childcare , dependent persons and family assistance , as well as the differences in salary between men and women .
The Barcelona European Council called on the Member States to eliminate the obstacles preventing women from fully participating in the labour market , in particular by creating crèches .
Respect for and promotion of equality between men and women are part of the Community acquis and are therefore an essential condition for the new countries of the European Union .
It is true that the Commission has made efforts to promote equality between men and women , but so far they have been insufficient .
With regard to programmes funded with Structural Funds , it has been noted that the objective of equality has not been met , including in the Regulation referring to them .
Even when certain programmes present it amongst their objectives , the results are not analysed and we know that this objective of equality is not really being met .
The absence of women through balanced representation in decision-making bodies is significant , particularly social partners and other bodies .
Additional efforts must be made so that the presence of women in decision-making bodies becomes a reality .
It is cause for satisfaction that this issue has been included as a priority for 2003 and we hope that it yields positive results .
It is very important that the Commission has included the integration of the principle of equality between men and women in external relations , and it must be present in all agreements with third countries .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , we have an almost balanced representation of Members here today for this debate on women 's rights .
On behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists , I would like to thank the Commission and Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou for their reports .
The Commission has succeeded particularly well in giving clear pointers for the way forward in equal opportunities , by means of the framework strategy on gender mainstreaming and the associated fifth action programme on gender equality .
More rapid progress is being made in some areas .
Last year , we adopted the directive on equal treatment in employment .
That is a milestone , and we keenly await the first evaluation report .
In other areas , things are taking a little longer .
However , there are already clear pointers in the case of the Structural Funds and as regards combating violence .
I would like to point out that we in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities have already on several occasions proposed what was agreed here this morning : to make 2004 the European Year of Education through Sport .
This House and I myself have for many years been calling for a European year of action against violence .
I hope that will be picked up again .
We are also very anxious to see the proposal for a directive under Article 13 banning discrimination .
There is also some delay on that .
This needs to be pursued with great vigour .
We also need to maintain the political will to make progress in involving women at all levels of decision making , both legally speaking and in practice .
The outcome of the Convention in that respect has been very disappointing , so we need to act now .
There is also still a great deal to be done in the European Parliament , and my criticisms are accordingly also aimed at this House .
Let us not beat about the bush - Parliament is lagging somewhat behind the Commission when it comes to implementing gender mainstreaming internally .
We need to make progress both in terms of political decision-making and as regards the administration .
Balanced participation of women and men can only be achieved if a genuine political will exists , and it requires a top-down approach .
We are particularly looking to the political group chairs , to the President of Parliament and to the committee chairs to set a clear example .
We are at present working in the Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities on an initiative to achieve gender mainstreaming in the European Parliament , a kind of gender equality health programme if you like .
It will be ready in time for the 2003 International Women 's Day .
I believe that we can set an example here to make it crystal clear that the European Parliament - even when enlargement is in the offing - is serious about equal opportunities for women and men .
Particularly when elections are on the horizon , it is not enough for the parties just to include equal opportunities in their manifestos ; we also have to make sure it is implemented in practice .
We expect that here in the European Parliament , where 30 % of the Members are women , which means that we are somewhat better than average , things will be even better after the elections , so that we will move significantly closer to the goal of equal representation of men and women in this House .
There are many other points appearing in both reports that I could comment on .
I believe that ultimately the crucial factor will be the political will that needs to be demonstrated if the position of women is really to be improved .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , no sensible person would dare to reject the principle of equality between men and women , or in other words between human beings .
In recent days , in my region , Galicia , this equality is being clearly demonstrated , through solidarity and also through pain .
Yesterday , television stations broadcast the human and heart-breaking image of the minute 's silence expressing condemnation and rejection of the latest terrorist attack by people , men and women , who were working to recover Galicia 's environment , the marine environment , in the fight to deal with the consequences of the Prestige disaster .
Yesterday as well , the media reflected the figures relating to domestic violence inflicted on women by their husbands , boyfriends or ex-partners .
In some sections of the media it was also pointed out that the great majority of victims did not recognise their situation .
This is what seems to me to be the most serious violation of sex equality .
On the other hand , it is of some comfort that the result of the survey suggests an improvement in the situation in comparison with the survey of 1999 , but it is worrying that this situation is continuing 15 years after a constitutional text , in its marvellous Article 14 , declared that all Spaniards , in this case , are equal before the law , and that there could be no discrimination on the grounds of race , sex etc .
Our Charter of Fundamental Rights , in Article 20 , declares that all persons - it does not say men and women , which is not necessary - are equal before the law . And Article 21 states that all discrimination is prohibited and , in particular , discrimination on the grounds of sex , race etc .
Last Tuesday , the plenum of the Spanish Congress of Deputies approved the idea that all legislative provisions produced by the government should include a report analysing their impact on gender equality .
I believe that practical conclusions should be drawn from Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou 's report , which is excellent , given the balance she has achieved on an issue on which it is very easy to fall into demagoguery and not do enough , and we must move on from theory to reality and insist on the objective of equality through the horizontalisation of policies promoting equality , so that principles may become reality and so that reality may reflect the principles which the great majority of us advocate and which we want to see alive and enshrined in the Europe we are building .
Mr President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , there are in all nine directives on equal treatment , but no measures to improve their implementation .
That is why we need data and statistics to facilitate comparative assessments based on which solutions can be identified .
A simple statement that men and women are equal before the law is not enough .
The Commission 's priority theme for 2001 was equal pay .
However , the report once again reminds us that women 's pay for the same or equivalent work continues to average only 76 % of men 's pay .
The Joint Report on Employment for 2001 states that the Member States have taken only limited measures to reduce this pay differential , and the Commission needs to play an active role here , especially with the prospect of enlargement .
The committee is actively working on the priority themes for 2002 and 2003 - the reconciliation of work and family life and the participation of women in decision-making processes .
The provisions in force at present will have to be better adapted to current requirements .
If women , and men too , opt for family life and to have children , that should not prevent them from participating in working life .
Women need to be involved in decision-making processes at all levels .
The only way to make credible progress with a policy for both sexes is by means of mutual cooperation based on equal opportunities .
Commissioner , some good projects have been worked out by women 's organisations , but those organisations need more information on access to the Commission 's system of financing and aid .
The objective should be to ensure that as many stakeholders as possible can participate in the relevant programmes .
After all , appropriations are made available every year to support projects relating to women , for example in the Structural Funds and in particular in the 2000-2006 action programme .
However , the procedures involved need to be rationalised and simplified , because they are too complicated , both at Community and at national level .
I would like to conclude by very sincerely thanking Mrs Rodi Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou for her balanced report .
Unfortunately , the limited time we have available means that I can only touch on a few points .
Mr President , I would firstly like to congratulate Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou on her work , this Parliament 's Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities for the excellent work it has been doing and the European Commission , in relation to equal opportunities policy .
It is very important that we take equality seriously . Not only through declarations , but also through intentions , policies and actions .
We therefore need to take the pulse of the equality policy , measure it and assess it .
We therefore call for quantitative objectives for policies on employment and access for women to information , training and politics .
Amongst all of us , men and women , we must make it possible for both governments of the current countries of the Union and the governments of the candidate countries to take equality seriously , to transpose the directives when necessary and ensure that they do not fail to comply with Community legislation .
A new stage is beginning in which we will have to be very vigilant .
Equality - as many of us here know - needs to be fought for every day and every day no progress is made is in reality a step backwards .
Many women are looking to the European institutions .
Many of them live far from our prosperous Europe .
For them , the progress we can make here is absolutely essential .
It is possible that for many of them their only hope is that the European institutions will take equality seriously , both for the women within the Union and for all of those who , because they are outside the Union , encounter many more difficulties fulfilling their expectations of life .
We often say that there is no discrimination worse than that which comes from happening to be a woman .
One does not choose to be born a woman .
One is born one and , from that moment , one faces a huge number of obstacles which would not be there if one were a man .
Therefore , given that we women make up half of the citizenship of the European Union , it is essential to attend to their needs and expectations , because they are the needs and expectations of the majority of the European citizenship .
We are also talking about the expectations , the rights and the defence of equality for the majority of women in the world .
This Parliament 's Committee on Women 's Rights and Equal Opportunities has been working very intensively on all these issues .
This committee has achieved , I believe , significant progress , but it is not sufficient . We are interested to see the work the European Commission is doing as well and I believe that this report reflects perfectly both what we have assessed and also everything we are asking for for the more immediate future .
I believe that this excellent cooperation in our committee has borne fruit .
Now that the time has come to evaluate the work of the year , we can all be pleased .
Mr President , several Members have asked when the Commission will be bringing forward a proposal for a directive on discrimination based on gender under Article 13 .
The Commission will be presenting a proposal at the beginning of next year .
Thank you very much , Commissioner , for this clarification .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place this afternoon at 5.30 p.m.
WRITTEN STATEMENTS ( RULE 120 )
Mrs Kratsa-Tsagarapoulou 's report clearly lays out the sticking points : the persistent pay differential and the explosion in trafficking in human beings and prostitution .
I welcome the dynamism of our rapporteur , although I would like to make two observations .
Firstly , we must remember the scale of poverty amongst women .
Most of the 60 million people living beneath the poverty line in the EU are women .
Secondly , we must remain vigilant over Europe 's desire to protect the equality of the sexes .
In fact , the first preliminary draft of the constitutional treaty presented by the Convention in October 2002 causes me some concern .
The absence of any reference to equality between men and women in Europe is notable : it appears neither as a value nor as an aim , despite its inclusion in the Treaties .
The Convention 's work programme , which is now dedicated to social issues , will enable this oversight to be corrected . We cannot conceive of it failing to do so .
Equal opportunities , addressed in Article 23 of the Charter , are a fundamental right and a value that we hold dear .
Since 1975 , the date of the first directive on equal pay and treatment , progress has certainly been made , but a great deal remains to be done .
Statistics broken down by gender and the gender dimension that is included in all our policies are essential prerequisites .
Practical actions to ensure that parents , both men and women , can benefit from infrastructures such as nurseries , for example , which enable them to reconcile family life and working life , would constitute a considerable step forwards .
Our actions must increase the population 's awareness of changes in mentality so that finally more women gain access to positions of responsibility and to supposedly typically ' masculine ' careers .
This also requires a common effort to be made with the social partners to ensure that this fundamental principle is applied in every company and in all collective bargaining .
Equal pay is only one issue within equality between men and women ; let us not forget domestic violence , sexual exploitation , etc .
Europe has a duty to set an example .
I thank Mrs Kratsa for having pursued this approach .
The next item is the Commission statement on sustainable development in mountain regions .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the European Parliament is right to be taking an interest in mountain regions .
As you know , the Commission is also paying great attention to these issues , as demonstrated by the conference organised in October at the initiative of my colleagues Michel Barnier and Franz Fischler on the subject of ' Community policies and the mountains ' .
My colleagues Mrs Wallström and Mr Barnier - the latter of whom is in Brussels at a meeting of the Presidium of the Convention - have asked me to update you on some of the work being undertaken and on some issues still outstanding as regards the Commission 's work on the European Union 's mountain regions .
The EC Treaty does not refer to the concept of mountain regions as such .
Article 158 , which provides the legal basis here , states , in connection with the policy of economic and social cohesion , that the Community shall aim in particular to reduce disparities between the levels of development of the various regions and the backwardness of the least favoured regions or islands , including rural areas .
It could be argued that specifically incorporating the concept of mountain regions into the Treaty would better reflect stakeholders ' concerns .
For example , 95 % of mountain regions come under Objective 1 or Objective 2 of Europe 's structural policy .
Compensatory payments for less favoured regions made under the common agricultural policy also benefit mountain regions in many cases .
The Commission has commissioned a study in order to assess the strengths and weaknesses of mountain regions more effectively .
This study has three objectives : to define the mountain regions of the enlarged EU , to create a database of these regions and to carry out an objective analysis of the situation in mountain regions and of existing Community and national policies , and to evaluate those policies .
In line with the first of these objectives , a definition of mountain regions is to be created for the 27 current Member States or candidate countries covered by the study .
This definition is being drawn up on the basis of topographical criteria , and in some cases climatic criteria are also taken into consideration .
At the beginning of December 2002 , the contractor carrying out the study presented the Commission with 16 possible definitions , and these are at present being examined in detail .
A decision will be taken at the end of December as to which definition can be used .
On the basis of this process of defining regions , a start can now be made on collecting statistical data .
We expect that the process of collecting and analysing data and the presentation of the final report will be completed by September 2003 .
As regards regional policy and the common agricultural policy taking account of mountain regions in future , I have already explained that regional policy and agricultural and rural development policy are indeed two policies that directly take account of mountain regions .
In the case of regional policy this is done through regional programmes for Objective 1 and Objective 2 areas , and also under the Community initiative known as Interreg , particularly through the Alpine region programme .
Under the CAP , mountain regions are chiefly supported by means of compensatory payments for less favoured regions .
Consideration is at present being given to the future of these policies .
The Commission 's proposals on the future of the regional policy are to be presented at the end of 2003 as part of the Third Cohesion Report .
It would therefore be premature to prescribe at this early stage how mountain regions are to be taken into account in the forthcoming 2007-2013 planning period for regional policy .
Under the current mid-term review of the common agricultural policy , the Commission 's proposal places particular emphasis on strengthening agri-environmental measures , which often benefit mountain regions .
As regards measures in favour of mountain regions under other Community policies , I would like to say a little more about competition policy and about general interest services .
As you know , EU policy on grants of state aid is based on Article 87 ( 1 ) of the Treaty , which stipulates that grants of aid by the state are fundamentally incompatible with the common market .
However , this article also specifies cases in which grants of state aid may be approved .
These exceptions include aid of a regional nature , or to be precise aid ' to promote the economic development of areas where the standard of living is abnormally low or where there is serious underemployment ' , in other words areas whose per capita gross national product is less than 75 % of the Community average .
Certain other areas may also be covered by this exemption .
Furthermore , the Commission attaches great importance to services of general interest , as demonstrated by its communication of January 2001 .
However , as you know , maintaining and developing services of general interest is solely a matter for the individual Member States .
The Commission can only offer encouragement in this field .
In its communication , the Commission states that the aim of services of general interest is to ensure universal basic provision , that is to say access to essential services , including those in remote or inaccessible areas .
In addition , the new Article 16 of this Treaty specifically recognises the important role played by services of general economic interest in promoting economic , social and territorial cohesion .
The importance of these provisions was also emphasised by the Heads of State and Government at the Lisbon Summit in March 2000 .
The final point that I would like to mention is the Alpine Convention .
Although this convention only directly affects four Member States , the Commission was involved in launching this initiative .
It was not until summer 2002 that a sufficient number of signatories to the convention had ratified the various protocols so that it could come into operation .
For its part , the Commission is investigating the various options available to it for more active involvement in the context of the Convention .
The Commission has already presented its proposal for signing the transport protocol to the Council .
However , I have to report that this proposal has so far not made much further progress within the Council .
Furthermore , it needs to be made very clear that these protocols also have to be supported by the Member States at Council level , as the Council is responsible for signing and ratifying them on behalf of the Community .
As you know , several states participating in the Alpine Convention have not yet ratified the protocols .
However , we hope that things will move forward positively in the coming months , reflecting the effort made by some Member States at the end of the summer to breath new life into the Alpine Convention .
Mr President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission will continue to pay close attention to issues concerning mountain regions .
Present and planned work , in particular the Directorate-General for Regional Policy 's study , the results of the mid-term review of existing programmes and the conclusions of the Third Report on Economic and Social Cohesion will give us a more accurate picture of the situation and options for further action .
Mr President , Commissioner , thank you for your statement , which suggests that mountain regions will perhaps no longer be entirely overlooked in European policy .
Until now , unfortunately , mountain regions have rarely been a subject on which we have made observations or recommendations .
And yet these regions warrant particular attention .
Mountain areas offer a huge variety of riches .
They are usually exceptional areas , which must therefore be managed in a very specific way , within a global policy of sustainable development of the mountains .
These are complex areas due to their geography and their climate .
They are areas in which farming plays a crucial role , but not any old farming ; it must be a form of farming which is extensive , that takes care to preserve species of fauna and flora and the abundant supply of water , and to protect forests and natural habitats as defined by the European Union .
This type of farming cannot exist , however , without people , hence the need to preserve these mountain areas from desertification and to do everything possible to maintain a human presence there .
We must therefore strengthen and update provisions to benefit young farmers .
The Commission has set up a number of programmes with which we are quite familiar : Leader and Interreg , inter alia , as you mentioned , Commissioner .
This aid probably needs to be simplified , precisely because these are areas with specific characteristics , in order to make them more flexible to ensure that they are better suited to the terrain and that they take account of the specific characteristics of the region , the necessary protection of the environment and the existence of numerous specific methods for the management of these areas , such as pastoralism , for example .
The same applies to tourism .
We must encourage sustainable tourism , promoting the natural wealth of these areas but refusing to allow mountains to be turned into leisure parks built of concrete - which has , unfortunately , happened all too frequently in the Alps , amongst other areas .
In order to achieve this , we must encourage private initiative , we must help local SMEs , which often suffer as a result of their isolation and communication difficulties and we must maintain services .
Commissioner , I was very pleased to hear what you had to say on this matter , particularly your reminder that it is important for services to be available everywhere , including the most remote areas .
We must therefore give priority to structural projects aimed at promoting forms of transport that respect the environment and probably at giving a greater role to the railways .
In mountain areas , this is , of course , more difficult , but , in the Alps , we have first-hand knowledge of these problems .
We must also give priority to renewable energies such as water and wood and increase research into the prevention of both natural and material risks .
You also emphasised , however , the need to define mountain areas and not to forget hilly areas , because these play a crucial buffer role between mountains and lowland areas .
We must also bear in mind , when talking about mountains , that the Alps are not the only ones ; there are also the ancient massifs , which have their own specific characteristics and which must also be taken into account .
In conclusion , the sustainable development of mountain areas can only be achieved if all partners are fully involved .
Mr President , Commissioner , I am delighted to have the floor after Mrs Grossetête , because all Members representing mountain regions face the same problems and share the same ideas about their respective areas .
I am very grateful to you for your words , Mrs Schreyer , which show how interested the Commission is today in the range of problems facing mountain regions ; we are quite aware of this .
I would also like you to know that we firmly intend to work together to ensure that our areas , which have very well-defined handicaps , can be effectively protected .
I shall therefore dwell on a few points that complement what has just been said .
If we want our territories to enjoy a form of economic development that comprehensively brings together preserving the countryside , preserving the type of farming that is characteristic of a mountain region and developing tourism , perhaps the Commission should listen more carefully to two or three points that are absolutely crucial .
I should like to recall that competition policy , as it is currently legislated for and regulated by the European Union , can by no means meet the needs of these regions , which do not have as many opportunities as others .
I think it is crucial that Community competition legislation is adapted to take account of the specific characteristics of our regions , in order to reduce these economic and structural disadvantages .
We must also put in place economic and financial support and tax concessions of a structural and sustainable nature .
Such measures are essential if we wish to combat the desertification and the ageing of these regions because , at the moment , these developments appear to be inevitable .
I also wish to reiterate the importance of the EU 's environmental policy .
This might be a taboo subject , but I hope that , whenever work is done in this field , thought is given to the applicability of these provisions , which were designed for an urban context , a context of lowlands that do not experience the same type of problem .
Very often , when regions with a geographical handicap are forced to apply this regulatory approach , they find themselves totally disempowered .
I would even say that they suffer genuine deprivation .
We therefore fervently hope that , together , armed with a coherent vision , we will be able to make progress , because enlargement will give mountain regions an extremely important role to play .
Furthermore , in its work , the Convention must address our set of problems quite specifically .
This concerns the territorial coherence and the cohesion of the European Union .
Mr President , I would first like to say that we are at the end of the International Year of Mountains , which was organised by the United Nations .
I think it is very positive that Parliament is able to discuss Europe 's role in this matter , particularly at the end of the Year of Mountains .
I would also like to welcome , along with the Commissioner who is present and those who are absent , the fact that we are witnessing a change in perspective .
Over the years , my colleagues here and I have criticised the Union 's lack of interest in the problems of mountain regions .
Today you have shown a different attitude , which was already evident in the October meeting organised on the Commission 's initiative around the theme of ' EU policies and the mountain ' , which included , among others , a speech by President Prodi .
I appreciated your speech , Commissioner , because you succeeded in summarising the various issues .
I would like to briefly go back over a few matters .
First of all , as Mrs Guy-Quint said at the end of her speech , there is the major problem of introducing the issue of mountain regions into the treaties , which is absolutely essential .
I think that we should take into account the important role of the Convention in this .
We also need to make use of the two presidencies of the Council : the Greek Presidency and the Italian Presidency , two countries that are obviously affected by the problems of mountain regions .
Introducing the issue into the treaties will provide an essential legal basis for obtaining a directive on mountain regions , in which we must of course solve the problem of competition .
I therefore think that progress should be made in this respect .
Having said that , we should also look at the prospects for regional policy for 2007-2013 .
Why not consider a specific structural fund for mountain regions ?
Or , better perhaps , for areas that are geographically or naturally handicapped ?
I will not add anything regarding agriculture .
Agriculture remains essential for safeguarding mountain regions .
The same can be said about tourism , which Mrs Grossetête discussed in detail .
I would like to add a few words on the International Convention on the Protection of the Alps .
Unfortunately , I do not think that the Commission has sufficiently monitored the work of this Convention .
In this respect , we need to promote the transport protocol , in order to have a legal basis for taking specific measures to regulate the flow of heavy goods vehicles in mountainous areas .
We obviously also need to look more closely at the issue of the funding of the major rail links such as Turin-Lyon , the Pyrenees and the Brenner pass , because in my view it is one of the keys to sustainable development in mountain regions .
Mr President , this is the International Year of Mountains , and I am glad that Mrs Frassoni , our co-Chairman , managed to have this put on the agenda , as it is an essential issue .
Mountains are areas that contain some of the few remaining wildlife sanctuaries left in Europe .
They need special status as sensitive areas .
There is a clause in the Treaty for ultra-peripheral regions that provides for flexibility in adopting EU policies for special needs .
This is what the Commission should be doing .
It should declare mountains to be sensitive regions and then adopt legislation accordingly .
It is disappointing that the Commission had no initiatives this year concerning mountains - not even a communication or a White Paper .
That would have been very welcome .
The Commission , whilst pushing for the International Convention on the Protection of the Alps , states that the protocols have been ratified , but not everyone has ratified the transport protocol .
It is essential , in relation to the threat that highways and the trans-European networks are having on mountain regions , that these protocols are properly implemented , not just in relation to the Alpine regions but also in other regions such as the Pyrenees which are in danger .
We also need conventions for those areas to protect them .
In relation to priorities , there is a conflict between the trans-European networks and the needs and concerns of people .
It is quite clear that the people who have opposed trans-European networks have voiced real and true concerns .
Their concerns have been ignored to prioritise the trans-European networks .
This is a conflict .
Finally , I cannot understand why the Commissioner is not putting pressure on Member States to ensure that they comply with Natura 2000 in the Alpine regions or why we do not have officially adopted lists of sites of Community interest .
That is disgraceful .
I urge the Commissioner to put pressure on the Member States .
Mr President , mountain regions are proclaiming themselves as areas of economic , social and cultural life , but they are seeking recognition . Firstly , they are seeking recognition of their handicaps .
Regions can only be classified as mountainous on the basis of their altitude .
Difficulty of access , harsh climate and declivity should also be taken into account .
Mountain regions are also seeking recognition for the quality of their products .
They do have a reputation for high quality , but that can only be valued if consumers can identify the products .
Steps are being taken on this and we should support them .
In promoting the mountain economy we need to take into account the fact that it is developing in a fragile environment that needs to be both preserved and developed .
It is therefore difficult to find the balance , which needs to be supported by coherent legislation , which is not currently in place .
I am thinking in particular of legislation on bringing livestock rearing and shepherds ' huts up to standard , which is difficult to implement in some mountain ranges .
Conservation programmes , such as the LIFE and NATURA 2000 programmes , for example , also have damaging consequences for economic activity .
Mountainous regions will only remain open if everything possible is done to offer those who have chosen to live there prospects for the future , particularly young people .
We therefore need effective policies for mountainous regions that are adapted to each mountain range and based on management that is devised jointly by elected representatives , public services and professionals .
These policies must work towards compensating for the excess cost of production , the opening up of regions , the diversification of activities , maintaining public services and developing specialised training and access to new technologies .
Agriculture , pastoralism and forestry play an essential role in mountain regions .
Not only do they generate quality products , but they are also the only means of maintaining sites and keeping them secure .
In certain mountain ranges , however , pastoralism is being put at risk by the reintroduction of predatory species , and the poor management of their populations .
Diverse landscapes , high-quality products , ' green lungs ' , rare species : mountain regions are and must remain diverse .
We should not make them into sanctuaries , or into deserts .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , mountain regions account for 30 % of the surface area of the Community of Fifteen , and 10 % of the population lives in mountain regions .
Up to now , the European Union has viewed its policy on mountain regions as part of agricultural policy .
I believe that this issue needs to be seen as a whole and not just sector by sector .
Mountain regions account for over 50 % of the total surface area of Member States such as Austria , Italy , Spain and Greece .
For this reason it is absolutely essential , in addition to the issue of defining mountain regions , to consider the impact on various aspects of life , and for mountain regions to be seen as an area in which people live and not just as a business area for particular sectors of the economy .
I am delighted that the Commissioner has been able to inform us that a positive solution to the problem of creating a definition has now emerged .
I think that in the final report to be presented in September 2003 this will provide us with a foundation on which we can build .
The suggestions that it is too soon to be specific about financial issues may reflect an unavoidable degree of caution , but it is certainly not very satisfactory , Commissioner .
I myself come from a mountain region which is in a relatively good position by virtue of its autonomous status .
We have had some degree of migration , but only a low percentage in recent years .
However , mountain regions in Piedmont , Lombardy or the Veneto , for example , have been totally depopulated and have ultimately become back gardens for affluent areas in the big cities - and I am sure that are many similar examples in other EU Member States . If you consider those , it becomes clear how absolutely necessary it is to give those who have stayed on positive signals that changes are being made and that they will not have to wait for almost another decade .
One possible measure would be for short-term changes to be introduced in competition policy .
Classifying mountain regions as sensitive zones in the treaties would also give a strong signal with this in mind .
In my view , both Parliament and the Commission have treated policy on mountain regions rather shabbily .
Up to now , we have only had three debates on this topic in this House , something that I regret , even though the Commission rounded off the International Year of Mountains by organising the conference you have already mentioned in an effort to form a picture of the situation and invite or listen to everyone involved in that Year .
This conference was held in Brussels in October thanks to the efforts of Commissioners Fischler and Barnier .
However , it would also certainly be advantageous if you could make a strong case to the Commission for it to take due account of the report on this subject adopted by the European Parliament on 9 September last year and to act accordingly .
By way of conclusion , let me briefly mention the Alpine Convention .
The Commission has been completely inactive in this area .
The picture you painted was not quite accurate .
It is not so much the signatory states to the Alpine Convention that have not done their homework , as the Commission , which has signed only three protocols and for cost reasons has even stopped turning up to meetings .
I think there is an urgent need for action here .
Madam President , our hearts leap up as we talk about mountains today , although , as always , the numbers in the Chamber are on the low side .
The very fact that this debate is being held is an achievement and I would say that , this year , in honour of the International Year of Mountains , the European Parliament too has endeavoured to make its contribution .
The Commission and I remember that memorable seminar of 17-18 October , we discussed this matter in the context of the mid-term review of the common agricultural policy and Agenda 2000 too , and we are discussing it today .
It is a shame that , as always , this is an intimate conversation between a few friends , but that has always been the fate of the mountains in the history of the Community .
Madam President , if you were to do a little research on the Internet and search in our databases for the word ' mountain ' , you would find three references to past resolutions .
The first was tabled by a certain Mr Colleselli in 1983 , the second tabled by myself in 1998 and the third tabled in 2001 by Mr Ebner , who spoke just now .
If you add these names to the few Members present today in this Chamber , you have the mountain people , the champions of the mountains , if I may be so bold as to use that phrase .
However , mountains , as we know , cover 30 % of the Community 's territory . In countries such as my own , Italy , and in Greece , Portugal and Spain too , over 50 % of the land is defined as mountainous .
Why , then , has there been so little attention paid to mountains throughout history ?
Because the inhabitants of the mountain regions are few .
Between 5 and 7 % of the European citizens live in mountain regions , on average .
There are few inhabitants who are therefore unable to form a strong lobby in terms of either numbers or wealth .
That is a shame , for this may well be a historic time for the mountains in terms of their future and prospects .
First and foremost , they have to convert their diversity from the weakness it has been hitherto into added value in order to start to exploit the genuine potential they offer .
Europe is not a depressed region : it is a complex , complete economic and social system .
I would say that , strangely , Europe does not need economic assistance so much as credibility and specific legislation which will allow it to launch its initiatives for the future .
That , Madam President , is why , if you search for a directive in the database , you will find that the most recent directive dates back to 1975 .
Twenty-seven , almost thirty years have passed : the mountains have changed dramatically in that time but we are still working with a very outdated directive .
What , then , can we suggest ?
Some of the Members have already made proposals and I too would like to make some demands . We must cling to the proposals of Article 158 , which the Commissioner mentioned just now .
This article calls upon the European Union to reduce and avoid development divides between the regions of Europe .
Then the same article recognises the specific situation of the Community 's islands .
We are not demanding another article or a different legal basis : we are asking for the specific situation of the mountains , at least , to be recognised alongside the specific situation of the islands .
It is clear for all to see that the mountains are different from the rest of the territory : they are different environmentally , biologically and in terms of natural history and social conditions .
In this regard , I would mention a suggestion made by Mr Mantovani - who is unable to be here because he was unable to get a flight at an appropriate time - who laments the fact that , in addition to the environmental and economic problems , life is difficult in the mountain regions when it comes to healthcare too .
When a hospital closes in a mountain region a serious problem is created . When , in particular , healthcare networks are insufficient , genuine difficulties ensue .
That is why the mountains need overall , general measures .
All we have to do is give them a hand : they are not asking for aid , they are just asking for a little attention and , as I said just now , for the specific nature of their situation to be recognised .
I would like to take the opportunity presented by this extremely interesting debate on the mountain regions to congratulate Mr Ebner and Mr Radwan on the very impressive and agreeable way in which they have taught us something about the mountain regions this week by arranging this splendid exhibition and celebration here .
It has been a great success and I would like to thank them for having presented these wonderful regions in the South Tyrol and Upper Bavaria to us in such an excellent way !
Allow me to add that Swedish mountain regions too have been presented in Parliament in recent times .
The debate is closed .
The next item is debates on cases of breaches of human rights , democracy and the rule of law ( Rule 50 of the Rules of Procedure ) .
The next item is the joint debate on the following seven proposals for resolutions on Hong Kong :
B5-0643 / 2002 by Mr Andreasen , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel , Mr Van den Bos and Mr Watson on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party on Hong Kong ,
B5-0645 / 2002 by Mr Sjöstedt , Mrs Eriksson , Mrs Frahm and Mr Di Lello Finuoli on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left on Hong Kong 's constitution ,
B5-0649 / 2002 by Mr Gahrton and Mr Wuori on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance on Article 23 of Hong Kong 's constitution ,
B5-0650 / 2002 by Mr van den Berg on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists on Article 23 of Hong Kong 's constitution ,
B5-0653 / 2002 by Mr Belder on behalf of the Group for a Europe of Democracies and Diversities on Article 23 of Hong Kong 's constitution ,
B5-0655 / 2002 by Mr Cushnahan , Mr Posselt and Mr Sacrédeus on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats on Article 23 of Hong Kong 's constitution ,
B5-0657 / 2002 by Mrs Muscardini , Mr Ribeiro e Castro and Mr Queiró on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group on Article 23 of Hong Kong 's constitution .
Madam President , Commissioner , the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party is extremely concerned about the planned change to Article 23 of Hong Kong 's constitution .
In conversation , journalists , politicians , various religious groups , representatives of human rights organisations and organisations such as Falun Gong all express great anxiety faced with this planned change .
The strength of Hong Kong lies in its success in retaining the principle of one country , two systems .
I , together with many others , fear that this change will seriously undermine that principle , something which would naturally be completely unacceptable .
The fact that China is pressing for this change to take place is not reassuring .
We know that China often puts pressure on Hong Kong to get it to accept legislation there that exists in China .
I am afraid that the way in which Article 23 is being interpreted may lead to the disappearance of fundamental freedoms such as academic freedom , freedom of expression , freedom of organisation and religious freedom .
If a group such as Falun Gong , which is banned in China , were also to be banned in Hong Kong , it would be a serious offence against the principle of one country , two systems .
It is not only I who am concerned .
The major demonstration at the weekend , in which thousands of Hong Kong citizens protested about the change , shows that the Hong Kong authorities have not succeeded in reassuring their own citizens , and they are not therefore reassuring ourselves , either .
If the change is only a technical one , as Hong Kong maintains , the point needs to be made extremely clearly .
I am afraid that that is not the way it is .
I hope that the Commission will look into this issue very carefully .
I also wish to appeal to the Hong Kong authorities to extend the period of referral for consideration and to be extremely vigilant where these changes are concerned .
We hope that Hong Kong will not adopt the Chinese system of general rules that permit the completely arbitrary persecution of political opponents .
Like Mrs Malmström , we particularly fear for Falun Gong supporters , whose peaceful protest does not justify persecution in any form .
Hong Kong must be allowed to remain what it is , in the expectation that China will also go down the road to democracy and human rights .
Only on this basis can we maintain the dialogue and the cooperation .
When I visited China along with some members of our Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance , I noticed the extent to which the Hong Kong economic model was held up as an example to the big cities on the Chinese mainland .
Yet the concept of ' one country , two systems ' still applies in the areas of human rights , democracy and freedom of speech .
In that regard , Hong Kong still to this day remains a unique phenomenon in the Chinese sphere of influence .
Many people in China told us that developments towards greater democratisation and human rights could be expected in the future .
We therefore view with the greatest concern the creation of the law to combat subversive activities in Hong Kong .
We fear that this will be at the expense of freedom of speech , the objective administration of justice , religious and artistic freedom , scientific freedom and so on .
This would be precisely the opposite of what we have always hoped for , which is that one large area of democracy and human rights will be allowed to come into existence .
Madam President , one country , two systems .
It sounds almost too good to be true for Hong Kong .
Article 23 of the Basic Law , however , is a potential time bomb under all of this .
This article requests the drafting of laws against a whole range of serious crimes against the government of the People 's Republic of China .
The Hong Kong authorities have embarked upon the implementation of this highly controversial article at a most inopportune moment , and in a manner that lacks transparency .
That is why the residents of Hong Kong came out on the streets en masse at the beginning of this week .
Does Hong Kong really give Peking reason to fear treason , secession , unrest , subversive activities , theft of state secrets or dangerous foreign political activities or connections ?
No !
Yet the Chinese authorities are insisting on the implementation of Article 23 .
Mark you , this is an article that was given its current form only after the bloodbath in Peking 's Tienanmen Square .
Article 23 therefore reflects Chinese Communist paranoia , both past and present .
The same can be said of Hong Kong 's citizens ' fears then and now .
While Hong Kong is going through a difficult economic period , Peking is making matters worse with its crippling political uncertainty .
Even the business sector in Hong Kong is reacting negatively , and that speaks volumes .
It reflects the broad dissatisfaction amongst the populace with a desultory consultation process on the legal implementation of Article 23 .
What is lacking is the publication of the exact draft laws .
The Council and Commission must therefore address the powers that be in Hong Kong and Peking on this matter quickly , as the European Union is serious about maintaining the principle of ' one country , two systems ' for Hong Kong .
Madam President , since July 1997 , the European Parliament has been a staunch defender of the autonomy of Hong Kong under the ' one-country two-systems ' policy .
In pursuit of this policy , we have worked constructively with the Hong Kong administration , reflected by the attendance of the former Chief Secretary Anson Chan and her successor , Donald Tsang , at meetings of the Committee on Foreign Affairs , Human Rights , Common Security and Defence Policy .
It is therefore appropriate that we should continue to monitor developments which could in any way undermine the autonomy of Hong Kong and threaten fundamental freedoms .
Enactment of legislation under Article 23 has raised such concerns .
While I welcome the personal guarantee given by Chief Secretary Donald Tsang that he will not allow the freedoms enjoyed by Hong Kong citizens to be undermined , this must be reflected in the proposed legislation .
Last weekend , a large demonstration in Hong Kong illustrated the genuine concerns that Article 23 laws could undermine existing human rights and civil and religious liberties .
I share these concerns and I urge the Hong Kong SAR Government to address them in the final proposals that they bring forward .
In particular , the new laws must not violate the provisions of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , nor must they in any way undermine the independence of the Hong Kong courts and their right to exercise the power of final jurisdiction .
The reinterpretation of the Basic Law by the Standing Committee of the National People 's Congress during the right-of-abode case is still fresh in many people 's minds .
There must not be a repeat of this with regard to Article 23 issues .
I would ask the Hong Kong authorities to take note of this debate , to take note of this resolution , especially our request for the publication of a draft bill which should be subject to further consultation .
Madam President , I begin by declaring an interest as the joint president of the Hong Kong Friendship Group , joint , that is , as with my good friend and colleague , Mr De Clercq , from the ELDR Group .
The first point I would like to make - and this has been alluded to by my friend and colleague , Mr Cushnahan - is that Hong Kong cannot pass law under its constitution if it contravenes the international standards of human rights .
My second point is that all countries need security legislation .
I would argue that even what is proposed is milder than the recent Homelands Security Act passed in the United States , without much obvious protest from this House .
We asked the Hong Kong authorities to ensure that the Article 23 proposal would not be used to silence opposition .
I shall give a couple of quotes .
A few days ago on 27 November , Mr Antony Leung , the Financial Secretary , was in the European Parliament .
From the minutes of the meeting he attended - and I quote : ' He gave a very personal reassurance of the government 's commitment to upholding the rule of law and the guarantees of human rights and freedoms set out in the Basic Law and enshrined in the Hong Kong legal system ' .
That was in front of our Members very recently .
A few days ago , on 10 December , the former financial secretary , now acting Chief Executive , Donald Tsang , said in a speech in Hong Kong : ' The free flow of information , the freedom to say and do what we want are the very fabric of Hong Kong society ' .
I put it to you that there is concern .
I also look forward to having a clear and detailed provision and would like to see a draft bill for us to debate .
But let us concentrate on getting good legislation , and not fall victim to those who want to campaign against the PRC by proxy .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission has been closely following the public debate surrounding the proposal adopted by the Hong Kong regional government on the implementation of Article 23 of Hong Kong 's Basic Law .
The Commission is conscious of the enormous significance and political sensitivity of this initiative , especially as regards the development of Hong Kong and China as a whole .
As this proposal by the regional government has been framed in very general terms , it will not be possible to judge this draft law properly until it is presented to Hong Kong 's Legislative Council .
That will probably happen in February 2003 .
The Commission 's approach is based on the assumption that a wide-ranging consultation process will now take place , and that this will subsequently be extended to the detailed legislative provisions as soon as they are presented to the Legislative Council .
The Commission believes that it is very important for the views expressed by various groups during this consultation process to be taken fully into account when drafting the future legislative provisions .
Furthermore , the proposed legislative provisions and their application should not undermine the preservation of a constitutional system or respect for human rights and basic freedoms in Hong Kong , in accordance with its ' one country , two systems ' principle .
Lastly , in accordance with Hong Kong 's Basic Law , the legislation proposed must be compatible with UN agreements on civil and political rights and on economic , social and cultural rights .
The European Union is carefully monitoring developments in this area through its ambassadors .
On the basis of their recommendations it intends to transmit a declaration to the Hong Kong regional government at the highest possible level and as soon as possible , and in any case before the end of the consultation process on 24 December ; this declaration will emphasise the European Union 's commitment to the principles I have just mentioned .
Thank you , Commissioner Schreyer .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following four resolutions on the destruction of cultural heritage in Hebron :
B5-0644 / 2002 by Mrs Morgantini , Mrs Boudjenah , Mr Herman Schmid , Mr Seppänen , Mr Cossuta and Mr Miranda da Silva on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left on the destruction of cultural heritage in Hebron ,
B5-0647 / 2002 by Mr Lagendijk , Mrs Boumediene-Thiery , Mr Dhaene , Mr Gahrton and Mrs Isler-Béguin on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance on the destruction of cultural heritage in Hebron ,
B5-0652 / 2002 by Mr Trentin and Mr van den Berg on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists on the destruction of cultural heritage in Hebron ,
B5-0654 / 2002 by Mr Perry and Mr Morillon on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats on the destruction of cultural heritage in Hebron .
Madam President , the destruction of their cultural heritage is an open wound which bleeds constantly for the Palestinians .
Between 1948 and 1952 , the Israeli Government destroyed 420 Palestinian villages , as documented by Israeli historians .
Some of the Arab districts of Jaffa were destroyed .
In 1967 , after the occupation of East Jerusalem , the Moroccan quarter of the Old City was destroyed to make room for a large square in front of the Wailing Wall .
Throughout these years of military occupation , permission was never granted for restoration of the historic parts of the various cities .
After the Oslo agreement and the creation of the Palestinian Authority , a very enthusiastic start was made on restoring the Old Cities of Nablus , Bethlehem and Hebron .
In the past two years , with the reoccupation of the autonomous territories , the destruction caused by the Israeli tanks and bombings has been huge .
Sixty-six palaces built between the thirteenth and eighteenth centuries have been destroyed , including the caravanserai , the Turkish bath and the old soap factories .
Today , it is the turn of the Old City of Hebron , where the houses are next to the Tomb of the Patriarchs : Mameluk and Ottoman houses and houses from the British Mandate .
This is more than just a question of preserving old buildings however : the Old Cities are inhabited by women , men and children , like those in the refugee camps in Jenin and Rafah who have no roof over their heads .
Moreover , their numbers have risen to over 15 000 in the past two years .
The official justification given by the Israeli authorities in the military decree providing for the demolition of the houses in Hebron talks of security and military grounds .
Nothing could be further from the truth . Ariel Sharon has clearly said that there is a need to build a link between the settlement of Qiriat Arba and the Tomb of the Patriarchs .
This is annexing of territory , for the Qiriat Arba settlements are illegal .
It is true that the decision was taken to destroy the Old City , the subject of our resolution today , after an armed attack by a Palestinian group killed nine people , army soldiers and armed guards from the settlements . It is true that , in some cases , the houses destroyed in the West Bank belong to families in which a son , brother or cousin has taken the tragic , horrific decision to kill himself and Israeli civilians , but over 2000 houses have been destroyed in the past two years !
This does not give the Israelis a licence to violate international law and the Geneva Convention , which clearly bans collective punishment , the destruction of property and the killing of civilians .
Over 2000 houses have been demolished in these past 2 years and 20 000 people have been wounded .
I am sad to say that there have been many Israeli deaths too - over 600 now .
Israel is an occupying country which is violating the obligation laid down by the fourth Geneva Convention to move its people out of the occupied territories - there are over 400 000 settlers now - and should be ensuring the well-being and providing for the needs of the Palestinian people , whereas 72 % of Palestinians are unemployed and confined in the villages .
The first illegal fact is the military occupation of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip , which has now been in effect since 1967 .
Israel can no longer be allowed to continue to violate all international legislation , inflicting pain and suffering not just on the Palestinians but on its own people too .
We must send out a signal to the Palestinians to give them hope of justice and to enable them to prevent the growth of fundamentalism . We must send out a signal to the Israeli Government so that it knows that it cannot always act outside the law , playing on the threat of anti-Semitism and terrorism .
Our only concern is for there not to be two sets of checks and balances : human rights and the right to life are equal for all people .
Today 's resolution sets a limit : the demolition must stop .
We must act alongside those Israelis who , together with the Palestinians , have appealed against the demolition of the homes in Hebron and are going to demonstrate tomorrow in Hebron , for the cultural heritage of Hebron and Palestine is part of the cultural heritage of mankind and must be preserved , not destroyed .
Ladies and gentlemen , the Middle East has a unique heritage , rich in symbols and history .
But that heritage , which for too long has undergone the colonial conflict ravaging Palestine , is in danger of disappearing .
Many age-old historical centres have been devastated , destroyed by the Israeli occupying forces .
In Hebron , the army is preparing to destroy around one hundred houses bordering the prayer route .
It is a real corridor , riddled with watchtowers and only accessible to the settlers , which will be developed to link the settlement to the tomb of the patriarchs , the symbol of the three religions , which Israel wishes to appropriate .
Hebron is a blatant example of apartheid .
The town is separated in two by a large road used only by Israelis , and some streets are entirely forbidden to Palestinians .
This is a symbol of a downward spiral that can only lead to an escalation of violence .
During the conflict , Palestinian heritage has become a major political issue .
The foundations of cultural sites are giving way under the attacks from Israeli tanks and helicopters , which are also battering public and professional buildings , schools , houses and refugee camps , causing thousands of civilian casualties .
Is that not true terrorism , military terrorism , state terrorism ?
Israel is thus clearly showing that a Palestinian identity has no place in its plans to extend the settlements .
This idea of eradicating the history and memory of the Palestinian people is a result of the Israeli State 's quest for legitimacy .
I would also like to commend the courage of civilian and international missions , which with no power to intervene but the right to report and observe , are playing a moderating and protective role .
Through their action on the ground , they are carrying out citizen 's diplomacy where our international diplomacy is unable to intervene .
We must urgently condemn what are genuine crimes against humanity 's shared cultural heritage , demand that the Hague conventions and Geneva conventions on the protection of goods and persons be respected and ask the Commission to call on the UN Security Council to send an intervention force to protect the Palestinian people , their cultural and historical heritage and their environment .
Let us remember that fair and sustainable peace for these two populations can only be based on respect for international law , the withdrawal of settlements and occupation forces and the creation of a Palestinian State within the 1967 borders .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , in a few days ' time it will be Christmas and we are calling in our resolution for worshippers to be allowed to visit the Church of the Nativity at Christmas .
Things really have come to a pretty pass , all as the result of indifference or negligence or fanaticism .
A few part-sessions ago we were passing resolutions to protect infrastructures in Palestine , because they were infrastructures built with European Union money .
Now we are passing resolutions to protect the cultural heritage because nowhere on earth does the cultural heritage belong to the Sharons or Arafats of this world ; it belongs to history and to the people .
In this sense , we now need to realise that the resolution system is too limited to bring in results .
In Copenhagen a few days ago , the European Union showed that it can act decisively and intervene when it has to .
This being so , it makes no sense to stand and watch the machinations going on in the Middle East , the clashes , the destruction , the loss of human life on all sides .
We now need to apply a different policy , a different sort of decisiveness , in order to stop this endless , stalemate of a crisis .
Settlement policies , terrorist policies - not that terrorism qualifies as a policy - offer no prospects or framework for a solution of any kind .
Ladies and gentlemen , when a few months or rather a couple of years ago , we watched the destruction of the Buddha statues by the Taliban on our televisions , we said , who do they think they are , destroying the history of mankind ?
Today the same is happening on our very doorstep .
And we just stand and watch .
It is not our job in these circumstances to stand and watch .
It is not our job to complain .
Our job is to intervene .
An end to settlements !
They get us nowhere .
An end to destruction !
It gets us nowhere .
And an end to terrorist action !
It gets us nowhere .
We need to keep to the policy decided years ago by Arafat and Prime Minister Rabin , God rest his soul .
Therein lies the way forward , therein lies the solution .
No other policy makes sense .
Having said which , a European Union of the twenty-five which wants to play a political role and intervene in international affairs needs to change its tactics on this issue .
It is no good being in the audience .
It needs to play the lead role and now it has the chance to play the role which it should have been playing for years .
Thank you for listening and Merry Christmas .
Madam President , it is with the utmost care that I take the floor once again on the painful issue of the Middle East .
It may seem derisory or even distressing at first sight for Parliament to issue another resolution on this subject , this time to protect stones , however loaded with history they may be , while human lives continue to be sacrificed every day in the infernal spiral of violence and fear , blood and vengeance that has been unleashed in this land that is so dear to so many of us .
Although the PPE-DE Group is nevertheless taking part in this debate today , it does so aware and with the conviction that the action announced by the Israeli authorities to safeguard access to the Kiriat Arba settlement can only have disastrous consequences for the development of the continuing conflict , without genuinely guaranteeing the security of its , the settlement 's , inhabitants .
My experience of the previous conflicts that I was involved in , both in Algeria , nearly fifty years ago , and more recently in the Balkans , taught me that no wall , even it is surrounded by mines and watched over by the most sophisticated methods , is insurmountable .
However , like our colleague Mr Souladakis , even more recently , I have not forgotten the horrified reaction from the public worldwide following the destruction of the Bamyan Buddhas , which triggered the unanimous condemnation of the Taliban regime .
This is why , while not wishing to be the judge , and even less the prosecutor , of a situation in which the European Union , as Mr Souladakis rightly said , has not yet succeeded in establishing a role , we can only draw the attention of the Israeli authorities to the significance of the consequences of any decision leading to the destruction , or even partial destruction , of the ancient city of Hebron .
Madam President , the destruction of cultural heritage in Hebron is very symbolic .
The power of oppression originating from it is not only destroying houses and stone ; it is destroying people and their existence .
It is killing them .
The State of Israel is oppressing the Palestinian people , with the clearly displayed or hypocritical collusion of all the major powers .
Why should the extreme right-wing powers in Israel be worried by the friendly admonishments from the major powers every now and again when the Israeli army goes beyond certain limits ?
Mr Sharon is aware that what he is doing in Israel is simply a copy of what the United States ' leaders did in Afghanistan and are preparing to do in Iraq .
Why should Mr Sharon be bothered by the empty protestations from countries who pretend to distance themselves somewhat from his policies , such as France , when that very country is in the process of engaging in a dirty war itself ?
The French army is not protecting the population against ethnic and xenophobic killings ; it is protecting the clique in power that is carrying them out .
The rebels are undoubtedly no better , but it is not for the French army to act as arbiter or policeman .
By protecting the government in power , it is mainly protecting the French corporations that have major interests there .
So yes , the Israeli army should withdraw from Palestine and the French army should leave Côte d 'Ivoire and Africa .
Madam President , this is not , unfortunately , the first time that Israel has vandalised religious and cultural monuments and contravened the Venice Charter and all the UNESCO and ICOMOS conventions , without the world 's protesting .
This time , the world 's protests should be as vociferous as they were following the barbaric destruction of the Buddha statues in Afghanistan .
We are concerned here with an irreplaceable heritage of buildings of religious and cultural value , from the Mameluk period in the fifteenth century to the Ottoman period in the nineteenth century - cultural treasures that belong not merely to the Palestinians but to the whole world .
The destruction of these cultural treasures has nothing to do with security and self-defence .
It is pure vengeance , and vengeance that will increase the spiral of violence in which , far removed from the public eye , Israeli soldiers and settlers kill Palestinian civilians with tanks and rifles , while young Palestinians , in the full media spotlight , blow themselves up .
More than three hundred homes face destruction .
The historic town of Hebron , with its unique architecture and religious importance , will never be the same again .
It is a disgrace , and the EU must call upon the world community to accept responsibility for stopping the destruction .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission is deeply concerned about the planned destruction of Palestinian families ' homes in the old town of Hebron .
Not only are these buildings of cultural and historical significance , but the planned action will also add further to the suffering of innocent Palestinian civilians .
The European Union has condemned the attack by Palestinian militants on 15 November in which 12 Israeli soldiers were killed .
The Commission cannot , however , see how the measures planned would increase security in Hebron ; if anything , these measures will serve to exacerbate the situation , which is already extremely tense .
The Commission considers that the destruction of historic Palestinian dwellings is in breach of the Hebron Protocol agreed by Israel and the Palestinian Autonomy Authority in 1997 .
That protocol commits both parties to preserving and protecting the historic character of the town , so that no part of its heritage is damaged or changed .
The Commission also wishes to draw Parliament 's attention to the recent conclusions of the European Council held in Copenhagen , when the Council expressed its alarm at the expansion of settlements and related construction work .
It called upon Israel as a matter of urgency to reverse its settlement policy , to freeze settlement construction and halt the confiscation of any further land .
Thank you , Commissioner Schreyer .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place today at 5.30 p.m.
The next item is the joint debate on the following six proposals for resolutions on Tibet :
B5-0642 / 2002 by Mr Andreasen , Mrs Plooij-van Gorsel and Mr Van den Bos on behalf of the Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party on Tibet ,
B5-0646 / 2002 by Mr Sjöstedt , Mrs Eriksson , Mrs Frahm and Mr Di Lello Finuoli on behalf of the Confederal Group of the European United Left / Nordic Green Left on the human rights situation in Tibet ,
B5-0648 / 2002 by Mr Messner , Mr Gahrton , Mrs Maes and Mr Wuori on behalf of the Group of the Greens / European Free Alliance on the human rights situation in Tibet ,
B5-0651 / 2002 by Mr van den Berg on behalf of the Group of the Party of European Socialists on the human rights situation for Tibetans in Szechuan Province ,
B5-0656 / 2002 by Mr Mann and Mr Posselt on behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and European Democrats on the human rights situation in Tibet ,
B5-0658 / 2002 by Mrs Angelilli on behalf of the Union for Europe of the Nations Group on the human rights situation in Tibet .
Madam President , Commissioner , we have discussed Tibet many times here in this Chamber .
This will certainly not be the last time , either .
There is a very great deal of solidarity with the Tibetan people here in the European Parliament .
The Tibetan people have for many years been exposed to appalling treatment by Beijing , and this is continuing .
Perhaps there is , however , a very small light at the end of the tunnel inasmuch as a cautious dialogue has been instituted between Beijing and representatives of the Dalaï Lama .
The fact that two people like Ngawang Sangdrol and Jigme Sangpo - two very well-known prisoners of conscience to whom attention has been drawn on several occasions in this Chamber - have now been released from their long-term imprisonment is also very positive .
There are , however , many more prisoners .
I do not believe that this development indicates any fundamental policy change on the part of China .
I only wish that it did .
I do not , however , believe that that is the case .
It is , at any rate , a step on the way .
It is all the more worrying , therefore , that the two Buddhist Tibetans , Tenzin Delek and Lobsang Dhondup have now been sentenced to death .
They were in the wrong place at the wrong time and have now been branded as terrorists .
They have not been given anything in the way of a fair trial ; no evidence has been presented ; they have been kept in total isolation for eight months ; and now they are to be executed .
The Group of the European Liberal , Democrat and Reform Party demands a fair legal process in accordance with the rule of law and treatment in accordance with international conventions .
As always , we condemn the death penalty wherever it is practised .
China 's contribution to the international fight against terrorism appears so far , unfortunately , to have been confined to Beijing 's branding opposition dissidents and various minorities as terrorists and in that way obtaining an excuse for oppressing them .
That is not how matters should proceed .
The fight against terrorism must always be combined with the rule of law .
We shall continue to fight for the rights of Tibet , continue to condemn all human rights violations in China and hope that the Commission will step up the human rights dialogue with China .
Tibet is an area with its own culture , its own religion and its own political traditions .
It is also a so-called autonomous region in China , however meaningless this autonomy is in practice .
Every attempt to achieve real autonomy is , after all , regarded as a crime , giving rise to legal proceedings , and the concept of political offences is unknown in China .
Political opponents are simply treated as common criminals .
The struggle against terrorism provides yet another excuse for this .
The death sentences against Tenzin Delek , an influential Buddhist lama , and his assistant , Lobsang Dhondup , pronounced on 3 December , are a sad illustration of this .
We regard the accusations as unproven , but the way in which the two people were held in solitary confinement and ultimately sentenced to death after months of incarceration and after a mockery of a trial , confounds us .
These death sentences must not be allowed to be carried out ; the verdicts must be reviewed on the basis of a fair trial .
The dialogue between China and the representatives of the Dalai Lama , who inspires so much hope in this hemisphere , must be resumed , but we must not be naïve in our relationships with this big country .
They pay a great deal of attention to what we think of them , but we must not allow ourselves to be blinded by diversionary tactics .
We must see what is actually happening and bring about change judicially and in practice .
. ( DE ) Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , as a member of the Delegation for relations with the People 's Republic of China I have recently been able to hold many fascinating discussions with my Chinese counterparts .
I had gained the impression that a real opening up , a genuine dialogue on human rights was actually going to take place .
So I too very much welcomed the release of both Ngawang Sangdrol and Jigme Sangpo .
We regarded that as a sign that pledges were being honoured and promises were being kept .
We very much welcomed the fact that Li Peng honoured his commitment finally to enter into contact with the Dalai Lama and that initial discussions were actually being held with representatives of the Dalai Lama .
We regarded these as two very positive signs .
So we are all the more dismayed now that at exactly the same time two people , Tenzin Delek and Lobsang Dhondup - a lama and one of his followers - were arrested and kept in solitary confinement for six or even eight months , although to this day it has not been established beyond doubt that they really committed the act of which they were accused .
This is totally contrary to the constitutionality that we naturally expect and demand from a people or from a government .
We understand very well that the fight against terrorism is important , but that means combating genuine terrorism , not dissidents .
The fight against terrorism must of course also respect constitutional criteria , otherwise it cannot be justified .
I only hope that this was a blunder that will be very quickly rectified by the Chinese Government , and that these two people will be released or will at least receive a fair trial .
I also hope that China will make sure that the door to human rights , which has been very slightly opened , will not be slammed shut again but will be opened further , so that genuine constitutionality may also prevail in China .
Madam President , things did indeed get off to a promising start . In September an official delegation from the Dalai Lama visited China 's leaders .
In October , the nun Ngawang Sangdrol was released after decades of imprisonment , following massive international protests , including those from the European Parliament itself .
A considerable number of Members of this House had repeatedly nominated her for the Sakharov Prize .
Did these welcome steps on the part of the Chinese amount merely to political manoeuvring in the run-up to their President 's visit to the USA ?
Will the path to constructive dialogue now peter out again in the aftermath of the Communist party conference and the far-reaching changes in personnel brought about by it ?
Are the hardliners getting the upper hand ?
We have heard some alarming reports recently .
At the beginning of December , as other Members have mentioned , two Tibetans were sentenced to death by the Kardze People 's Court after a trial so rushed that doubt must be cast on its legality .
They were accused of owning illegal weapons , of separatism and of taking part in an attack using explosives carried out in Chengdu in April .
One of those involved is the Tibetan Tulku Tenzin Delek , who has a death sentence hanging over him with a two-year reprieve .
He has been committed to preserving Tibetan culture , language and religion for decades .
He founded new monasteries and championed the social well-being of the public .
His colleague Lobsang Dhondup also faces a death penalty , without reprieve .
It is evident that neither of the two defendants received a fair trial .
International standards were breached .
For example , Tenzin Delek spent eight months in solitary confinement without any contact with his family or with lawyers , which is clearly in violation of the UN 's minimum standards for the treatment of prisoners .
The authorities demanded the payment of bail equivalent to EUR 120 000 before a proper trial could be initiated .
His students were arrested when they tried to raise the money .
This is a flagrant violation of international human rights .
It is imperative for the Chinese authorities to maintain legal standards .
However necessary the war on terrorism may be , and however much we may all support it , it cannot be waged without respect for the law and for human rights .
It is totally unacceptable for the peaceful struggle to practice Tibetan religion and culture to be treated as an act of terrorism .
On behalf of the Group of the European People 's Party ( Christian Democrats ) and the European Democrats , I call on the Commission immediately to raise these unfair verdicts under the dialogue on human rights with the Chinese .
We must prevent unlawful sentences from being executed and the grant of financial aid must be made dependent on improvements in the area of human rights .
Ladies and gentlemen , I urge you to stir your Member States ' embassies in Beijing into action without delay , so that these defendants can be given a fair trial .
The first step must be to lift the death sentence .
Lastly , as Chairman of Parliament 's Tibet Intergroup , I would like to express my hope that the forces of reason will prevail in China and that our worldwide campaign for human rights and the rule of law will succeed .
Madam President , as others have already said , these death sentences have absolutely nothing to do with the war on terrorism .
However , that also demonstrates that we have a responsibility to wage that war .
The United States also bears that responsibility within the international institutions , the United Nations and under international law .
If you only fight terrorism - and that is unfortunately a danger that also exists in Washington - strictly by means of a coalition of the major powers , there is a risk that those powers will misuse that war on terror for their own ends : Moscow will use it against the Chechens and Beijing will use it against Tibet .
We need to be fully aware that the sort of repression that has been practised in Tibet or in Chechnya is no way to fight terrorism , it will simply engender it .
We were talking earlier on about mountain regions .
A few decades back there were even bomb attacks here in the Community , in the South Tyrol , which is nowadays a peaceful model region of Europe of which we can be proud .
There were even extremist movements in our European democracies .
That sounds unlikely today , because by granting autonomy we have ensured that no one takes separatist or terrorist action . We now feel comfortable in the greater community of Europeans and regard ourselves as being at the heart of Europe .
My message to the Chinese is therefore this : ' Give the Tibetans autonomy , give them democracy , and give them human rights ! '
That is the way to fight terrorism and separatism .
That is a successful approach that will not lead to terrorism but will genuinely bring peace and ensure that peace will prevail in the world 's most important and most historically precious mountain region , peace that can be a model for the entire world .
The motion for a resolution before us has much to recommend it , but the wording is rather infelicitous , by which I mean the phrase ' the Tibetan minority in China ' .
Of course , in comparison with China 's massive population , we are all minorities .
However , what we are talking about here is the great Tibetan people with its ancient world culture , which is a valuable heritage for mankind .
We appeal to the Chinese to respect this people and its culture as full partners , just as we treat the Tibetans and Chinese as equals .
Madam President , Commissioner , ladies and gentlemen , Mr Posselt is quite right , this is about a Tibetan majority within Tibet .
Also , Mrs Maes , the problem raised today by these two death sentences reveals changes in the borders made by the Chinese .
The Tibet of the autonomous region is one third of Tibet .
There is also the province of Sichuan , a large proportion of which is part of the historic Tibet .
Those who spoke before me discussed this .
Three months ago , there was a sign of hope for some on the return of Kelsang Gyaltsen and Lodi Gyari , the Dalai Lama 's envoys who went on an official visit to Peking for the first time in a long while .
Meanwhile , a small change has taken place in the People 's Republic of China . Hu Jintao has become the new President , the Secretary General of the Chinese Communist Party .
The result of the so-called dialogue that was undertaken is these two death sentences : those of Tenzin Delek and Lobsang Dhondup .
Obviously , Mrs Gebhardt , there could be better signs emerging from this dialogue .
Having said that , I think that above all we should question ourselves , as members of the European Parliament and as Europeans , on how we are supporting the Tibetan people .
I think that we should seriously ask that question .
There is a risk of exoticism , and a risk that the peaceful struggle of our Tibetan friends will not be capable of achieving the objective of freeing Tibet .
This is an objective for the Tibetans , but also for all free men and women across the world .
Nearly three years ago now , in June 2000 , Parliament adopted a resolution inviting the governments of the Member States to recognise the exiled government of Tibet , the Dalai Lama 's government .
I believe that is how we can genuinely give power to our Tibetan friends and show our Chinese friends that the rule of law is based on solid foundations of dialogue , and not just on semblances of dialogue , on the crumbs of dialogue that they throw to the Tibetans and to us , the Europeans , to make us believe , as they have been doing for 40 years , that they want dialogue while each time they reject real dialogue and any political solution .
The President of the exiled Tibetan Parliament , Professor Samdhong Rinpoche , has asked for restraint until June .
I will restrain myself until June , but I think that from then on we should reconsider our entire approach to supporting the battle to free Tibet .
Madam President , ladies and gentlemen , the Commission welcomes Parliament 's initiative in presenting a resolution on the human rights situation in Tibet .
We are deeply concerned about the death sentence passed on Lobsang Dhondup and Tenzin Delek on 2 December .
You may recall that Mr Delek was on the list of individual cases that we handed to the Chinese authorities under the human rights dialogue between the EU and China .
The Commission is also concerned because these death sentences are the first to be passed against Tibetans because of alleged political crimes for some years .
The Commission wishes to take this opportunity to inform Parliament that the EU troika raised this matter through diplomatic channels with the Chinese authorities on 13 December , at embassy level . The EU requested information on both these cases and in particular on what evidence had been presented , and called for the trials to be reopened in accordance with international standards for fair trials .
Furthermore , the troika reaffirmed that the EU rejects the death penalty and its use in China in general , referring to the ongoing campaign of ' drastic action ' .
By virtue of this prompt intervention on the part of the European Union and because of pressure from the United States and Australia , the executions have so far not been carried out , and the two convicted men have entered appeals .
The executions can therefore not be carried out until the People 's Court has re-examined the case .
Although we believe that the immediate danger of execution has been averted for the time being , the Commission will continue to follow this case very closely , particularly as regards the provision of solid evidence and guarantees of a fair trial .
The European Union is also continuing to put pressure on China to guarantee the cultural , linguistic and religious identity of the Tibetan people .
It has repeatedly called for the initiation of a direct dialogue between Beijing and the Dalai Lama , as this is likely to be the only way to secure a peaceful and lasting solution to the Tibetan question .
Against this background , the Commission is encouraged by the positive news conveyed by the two envoys of the Dalai Lama who visited China in September 2002 .
We hope that this will be a first step towards the establishment of a more regular dialogue between Beijing and the Dalai Lama .
The Commission intends to continue to take only such cooperative measures in Tibet as will directly benefit the Tibetan population .
Thank you , Commissioner Schreyer .
The debate is closed .
The vote will take place directly following the debate .
Madam President , we suggest that because of the way the debate developed , the title here should be changed .
I am sure that many speakers will be in favour of this proposal , which is to change the title to ' Situation des droits de l 'homme des Tibétains ' or ' Human rights situation of Tibetans ' .
.
( DE ) Madam President , I would simply like to say that , in the interests of consistency , the same wording should also be used in Paragraph 7 .
I therefore request that this should be used throughout the resolution , in the title and in Paragraph 7 .
Madam President , I think that we also forgot to ask in item 8 for the resolution to be sent to the Dalai Lama and the exiled Tibetan Government , as is always done with our resolutions .
That is a good point .
We shall make sure that happens .
( The President observed that no one had opposed the proposed oral amendments , as a result of which they were taken into account ) .1
Madam President , I am wondering whether you have just held a vote by roll call .
My voting card was somewhere else , so I voted too late .
Please will you note that I voted in favour ?
We have noted the fact .
The vote is concluded .
EXPLANATIONS OF VOTE
on the report by Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou ( A5-0403 / 2002 )
The Swedish Moderate Party 's delegation to the European Parliament has voted against Mrs Kratsa-Tsagaropoulou 's report on the Commission 's sixth annual report on Equal Opportunities in the European Union , 2001 .
We believ